
For Reference 


Iniversitv of Alberta Librar 


) 1620 3069206 3 




) 


l 























































©X UBBIS 
aBBranjus 








Tf ' FSYCr’DLOOY OF 


•ROWffiTIC TNS'IRATION 

A dissertation 

submit ted to tho B. !>• Co&ftittee of tfce 
te o i this I rivci aity of Aloarta 

In o&ndidaoy for the dagras of 


oaohelor ox ..lviL.it> 


by 


'-ev. ‘ „ <1* Collett, \*a« 


UftIvoralt? of Alberta 
April 1944 









coN'Miia 


Oh«*pt«.r Pop;® 

TKT80DU0TI0N 1 

X T?OJ*BWJT AKC tOSTAST 1 

II DHSAKS 33 

in mmwi TWi->;at«Q 30 

iv aomasa or :-m;®ssie 40 

IK»-. IR&i’IOK 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/psychologyofpropOOcoll 


maom/crioR 







INTRODUCTION 


Christianity is frankly and unashamedly a Bible 
Religion, The beliefs of the Christian about ^od, the 
destiny of man, the means of salvation and the purpose of 
life are bared up n the written word of his religion# It 
is, then, of great importance that the Christian should 
understand his Bible and should be able to extract from it 
a sane and reasoned meaning# 

Not everything in the Bible is relevant to Christ¬ 
ianity, nor are many attitudes contained therein healthy 
for the modern Christian to adopt. 'uch of the Bible may be 
set aside as an inadequate human attempt to understand the 
divine mind and thus unnecessary for human consumption# 

Most of the Bible is eternal and fraught with meaning for 
any age or generation# In order to know what is relevant 
and what is irrelevant the Christian must set up for himself 
a standard of criticism and a basis of Judgment# This can 
be done only as the individual thoroughly understands and 
appreciates the various parts of the Bible interpreted 
according to a modern approach based on a sane literary and 
historical criticism. 

Terhaps the most sinned against sections of the 
scriptures are those in the Ola Testament that h^ve to do 







- 








-ii- 


with prophets and prophecy. Tapias wrote of the Gospel of 
Matthew, "So then Matthew wrote the oreolea In the Hebrew 
Language and everyone Interpreted them as he was able," 

(H.*:. 3:39), and so attempted to explain the wide variety of 
interpretations prevalent in his day. The statement i3 
indeed true when applied to the various interpretations of 
the prophets and prophecy that are current today. It seems 
that "everyone interprets as he is able", but it is very 
regrettable that the most vociferous interpreters are not 
able to read the oracles in the Hebrew Language. The 
result is that many unreasonable, unscientific, unoritioal 
and unscrupulous theories regarding prophets and prophecy 
gain the ear of the public and all is confusion. 

There is a crying need for a scientific, rational and 
critical view of Old Testament Prophets and rophecy. This 
need may be met in a variety of ways. One tool which may 
be used to do this is modern psychology wherein a conception 
of prophecy is moulded according to enerally accepted 
psychological principles. 7h<^ prophet was primarily a 
human being, and as such his mind and personality were 
subjected to the sa&e influences that guide the workings 
and the lapses of the ordinary man’s mind. The conclusion 
is that if psychological truths are ap lied to the 
recorded facts prophetic action and speech, the result 








-iii- 


ahould be some rational explanation of this old Testament 
phenomenon. It is the purpose of this essay to attempt an 
understanding of old Testament rophets and Prophecy in the 
light of modern psychological knowledge. 

The first essential in such a study is to free one^s 
mind of any preconceived notion as to what the prophets 
were and as to what prophecy was. From there the subject is 
approached through an honest view of the Mble rooted in the 
established facts of historical and literary criticism. Any 
doctrine of the verbal inspiration of Scripture or the 
infallibility of the cible has no place In a rational and 
scientific study. 

It must be remembered that the writings of the Bible 
were for a certain period and for a definite group of 
people. The prophets spoke to specific situations in 
definite generations. They did not necessarily speak to 
generations yet unborn. In gaeklel (Chap. £8) there Is a 
prediction relating to the vast armies that were to be 
arrayed against Israel under the command of Gog and Magog. 

It Is very clear (vs. 8) that the prophet expects this to 
happen "after many days", which means "very shortly" and not 
some twenty-odd centuries afterwards. The purpose of the 
pro hecy was to prove to the people of that day the power 
































. 






































-lv- 

of Yahweh and not to demonstrate his power to modsm nation© 
Again the destruction of Tyre Is foretold (Fzekiel 26 to 26) 
and the return of the remnant of Israel Is predicted 
(Isaiah 40-66). The unprejudiced reader will easily 
discern that these events were regarded as imminent and not 
as hapnenlnge centuries distant. ?hu6 the whole range of 
Hebrew Prophecy, with one or two possible exceptions, has to 
do with the events of the day in which the prophecies were 
uttered-, It is a violation of literary criticise to attempt 
to make them refer to times that hsive not yet corue into 
human history. 

mother point to be noted is that the prophets were 
not Infallible. All their prophecies were not fulfilled. 
Jeremiah (Jer. 36:30) uttered a curse on Jehoiakin and 
asserted that he would dio a violent death and that his body 
would not have u decent burial. The historical Book of King 
(II Kings 24:6) indicates that Jehoiakin "slept with his 
fathers" which is the Hebrew formula for a peaceful demise 
and a respectable burial. ven the prophets themselves 
lived to seo their prophecies fail as when E&eklel realised 
that his prodiction concerning the destruction of Tyre by 
Nebuchadrezzar was In error (Ezekiel 29:17-20). Other 
examples of the failure of pro beta to be entirely accurate 
could be gleaned from the records. These exa :ples are 






. 


































-V- 

sufficient Indication that the propheta were not infallible. 

The utterances of the prophets wore not c-lven in an 
absolute sense. any of the predictions were conditional 
and were not c nsldered to be letter perfect. The most 
famous of such Is the story of the prophet Jonah. He wanted 
to delay the announcement of the destruction of Mnevuh 
beoause he felt that too many of the inhabitants would 
escape their punishment if they had a period of forty days 
in which to repent. hat Jonah feared actually did happen 
and the conditional prophecy served as « warning. Yahweh 
very definitely instructs Jeremiah (Jer. 18:7-10) about 
conditional prophecies when he asserts that there is always 
a chance for repentance. The obvious conclusion is that the 
prophets spoke with great conviction yot they aid not 
anticipate that every prophecy would be fulfilled to the 
finest detail. 

All prophecies have not the same moral value and so 
cannot be regarded as equal in the sight of Yahweh. dome of 
the prophecies are cruel desires for revenge and invoke 
great disaster upon the enemies of Israel and upon the 
personal enemies of the prophets (cf. the curses of Jeremiah 
and d^ekiel). These cu.^not be compared in moral value to 
the conception of the buffering Servant as proclaimed by the 




























. 

















. 
























-vl- 


Second Isaiah (Isaiah 40-55). The cruelties in the time of 
Elijah when he exterminated the prophets of Baal (I Kln*s 18 
are on a low plane of morality when compared with the 
prophetic conception of redemptive lov;* us portrayed by 
Hosea. The student of the prophets must have a fine sense 
of discrimination and an independent power of judgment befor 
he is able to assert that any given prophecy establishes 
either a norm for personal morals or a standard for social 
action. In addition ho must possess a spirit of deep under¬ 
standing and kindly oritioism before he is able to assert 
that certain prophecies apply to the present day or to 
future times. 

Realising, then, that the Prophets and their 
J’rophecies must be approached in a scientific spirit and 
with open :;ihds, the student is ready to proceed with a stud 
of Prophetic Inspiration. uch extraneous material must be 
cleared away end the very heart of the prophetic message 
must be approached. This will be attempted from a psych¬ 
ological viewpoint. First of all some of the abuses that 
were present in the personalities of some of the prophets 
wili be discussed. Finally an estimate will be made of the 
source of inspiration of the greatest of the prophets. 











' 








. 













J 




































PROPHECY AND ECSTASY 






















Chapter I 


PROPHECY AND ECSTASY 

Our word "ecstasy” comes from the Greek word 

>/ 

» et&T* °1«S • v^hich, when translated literally, means ”to 
rlaoe outside'* or "to stand outside". tn a religious sense 
it is used to describe a person whoso spirit "stands outside” 
of his body and allows some other spirit to take possession 
of the body. Overcome by religious emotion an individual 
sometimes fails Into a trance or a cataleptic fit and thus 
his spirit has left his body for the time being. (This 
meaning of ecstasy is illustrated in tne hew Testament in 
Acts 10:10; 11:15; 22:17). 

* ueh of the history of emotional religion has been 
written in terms of ecstasy and trances. The modern man, 
with his critical faculties awake and with hie scientific 
viewpo nt, looks askance at such phenomena and wonders about 
the ethical value of such a religion and asks whether a 
religion can renialn honest, sincere and ethical when such 
tnings are iaade u part of religion* .hen a man loses control 
of his own body does he riot lose control of his cental 
balance too? 

Sinclair Lewis in his heart-sea robins n^vel "Elmer 









































- 2 - 


Gantry" has exposed such religion ua seen by the modern mind. 
He records the hypocrioy ~nd deceit ^nd immorality that ~ight 
easily -row up when the emotions ure placed above the 
Intellect, 

Immediately the question arises as to how much 
ecstasy there was In Old Testament ropnecy. Was It of the 
"Elmer Gantry" type 0 If so has it any appeal to or any 
message for the modern world? 

jjq the first place let it be said that many of the 
Early Christian Apologists assumed that there was ecstasy 
present In Old Testament Prophecy and were not troubled by 
the fact. Indeed they considered that some manifestation of 
the ecstatic state was essential in order that the presence 
of Ood might be assumed. It is doubtful whether this idea 
had a really Christian or Hebrew origin. ore than likely 
the notion of the necessity of an ecstatic state came from a 
Qon-Chrlstian source and was assimilated Into Christian 
thinking. Thus Plato, writing in Timaeus (71), says, "GOd 
has s^iven the art of divination not to the wisdom but to the 
foolishness of man. Ko man, v>/hen in his wits, attains 
prophetic truth and Inspiration; but «hen he receives the 
inspired word, either his intelligence is enthralled in 
sleep, or he is demented by some distemper or possession." 




































































- 3 - 


This Idea of prophetic Inspiration gained currency In 
Christian Thought for thenaroras (on. ,.D. 177) wrote about 
the prophets, "while entrained and deprived of their natural 
powers of reason by the influence of the hlvind Jplrit, they 
uttered that which was wrought in them, the Jpirit using 
them as its instrument as a flute-player might blow a flute", 
(Apol• IX)* Others have spoken of Cod as being the 
"plectrum striking a lyre". The early Christian writers 
assumed that ecstasy wgc a normal phenomenon and that it was 
essential to an aspired message. The prophet was merely a 
medium through which the Spirit of Cod spoke. The Individ- 
ual had nothing to do with the message for his spirit "stood 
outside" of his body, a theory of verbal infallibility may 
easily be constructed from such a preraise. 

Such a point of view has had its proponents all 
through the centuries and is chite com on today. Tor some 
people the mark of a true religious experience is a violent 
emotional upheaval. It has been and still is the studied 
purpose of some religionists to induce a state where one 
spirit "stands outside" of the body and ax.other spirit takes 
possession. Thi other spirit is often dignified with the 
title "Holy spirit". It is u well established fact that 
revival services can induce ecstatic states, that these 
states become infectious ~nd that ep demies of ecstasy have 








































■ 

















- 4 - 


been known. Outstanding are the records of the dancing 
epidemics of the iddle ges in Germany and Italy; the 
Convulsion*ires of Jt. J'edard In the 18th Century. 

In recent times evangelists In the southern States 
have been boastful of the "manlfestations of th presence of 
the ierd", hole communities have been infected by such 
things as "Jerks” brought on by the stress of emotional 
preaching and by the so-called "power of the Holy .pirlt. 

rofessor Coe in his "Psychology of aeliglon" (p. 194} 
records as follows, "A minister who participated in the great 
revival in Kentucky in 1801 gives the following classificatio 
Df cases that fell under his observation:- the falling 
exercise; the Jerks; the dancing exercise; the laughing 
exercise; the running exercise; and the singing exercise. 
•Getting the power* seems to have been a popular designation 
in some parts of the country for extreme loss of muscular 
control, manifested by falling and lying prone for a period," 

Coe roes on to say that the phenomenon of "speaking 
with tonrues" comes into the class of ecstatic experiences, 
rhe ordinary person cannot understand the gibberish uttered 
?n such occasions and so there Is th necessity of an inter¬ 
preter. This fact alone is sufficient proof, to some, that 
It is the Lord who sreaks. The entecostal Assembly demands, 












as a proof of salvation, that a person should "speak with 
tongue*"• 

The underlying resumption is that such ecstatic 
states were indulged in by the Prophets and Sarly Christians 
and, hence, there is an established precedent for present 
day action. 

The phenomena of religious experience in the Sarly 
Christian Church is outside q* the scope of this essay even 
us are the so-called religious experiences of the present 
day. hat is of interest here is the fact that sone jaodarn 
scholars insist that the type of emotionalIsm described 
above was a part of the life of the Prophets of Israel und 
that their inspiration hud its basis in such performances. 

The general thesis of scholars of this oonviction is that the 
prophets received their messages in varying states of 
emotion and then proceeded to interpret these messages into 
the language of the people, ftven the *reat ethical 
pronouncements of the prophets, such as Tsaiah, Amos and 
Jeremiah, are said to be not without an ecstatic element. 

H. w. hoblnson in, "The Heligious Ideas of the Old Testament" 
writes, 

"The prophets who so profoundly transformed the 
religion of Israel und of the world were assuredly 
not men of unbalanced "i’nd. But certain features 
of the prophetic writings do seem to ooint to an 










■ 












- 6 - 


lntenslty of psychical experience, ..rid therefore, 
of temperament, which distinguishes the pro het 
generally from other men** 9 

A little later he suya, ’’Abnormal psychosis i© surely 
present." 


Oesterley and Boblnson in their work, "A History of 

Israel", discuss the ecstatic experiences of the early 

pro hets and then write thus of the canonical prophets, 

"To their own veneration these men were In¬ 
distinguishable from the popular Nebi 1 im f 
save, perhaps, that e ,ch of them siuod alone, 
and that they were not eormeeted with companies 
into which the professional ecstatlcs tended to 
rou themselves.” (of. Yol# 1, page 370) 

Similar views to these may be found In the works of 
such a scholar as Irof. J* M. P* S ith in his two books, 

"The Irorhets and their Times”, and "The rrophets and their 
rotleras”. 

The point Is immediately conceded that, in the early 
days of prophecy, the ecstatic state played an Important 
role. fhu Canaanite religion was a religion of ecstasy and 
excess. ven if the Children of Israel were innocent of 
such t in?3 before the occupation of Canaan they most 
certainly adopted them in the syncretism of religions and 
culture during the occupation. The list of ecstatic mani¬ 
festations :-ivan by Dr. Joe and notea above were quite 
common In those earl;, days. Bands of .lid-eyed dervishes 


































































- 7 - 


gathered together and toured the countryside uoin^ all 
manner of means to brin on ewoti ual debauches, vide riles 
of emotional states were often induced by moans of usic. 

he Hebrews had seers ( 77 3*^) who were men of God 
and who were leaders of the people, wuck iu©n us Hoses and 
Joshua coxae Into that outegory. Very naturally they have 
miracles ascribed to them but there are no stories of 
ecstas:^. It Is quite possible that the experience with the 
Volten Calf (Exodus 32) has a hint of ecstasy and emotional 
epidemic. hen the history comes up to Satiuel and o<aul there 
seems to have been a union between the seer f])-?")) und the 
prophet (vj^ Z1J) • I StMli 9:9 says, "Beforetime in Israel, 
when a man went to enquire of God, thus he spake, Come let 
us go to the sear: for he that is now called a r rophet was 
before time called a This is obviously n late edit¬ 

orial addition in order to make clear the relationship of the 
two classes but, despite that fact, Is quits definitely 
CaO rect. The relationship of Samuel, David and Saul seems tc 
have had ecstatic experiences mixed into It in roras way or 
other (cf, I Samuel 19:20-24), It is very probable that in 
t is story the emotional Ism kc*d gained e ide^lc proportions. 
There are so roany varying strands of tradition #oven around 
Samuel that it makes his own position in the mutter difficult 
to clarify although one does prefer to think of him as the 


















































-8 


last oi‘ the; /'rout seers and Judges cf Israel* It la quite 
apparent that Saul wtia overcome by the ecstasy of the 
prophets, probably by contagion, for peolo wondered how he 
car^e to be involved In the manifestations, (cf. I Samuel 
10:1-16 and 11:1-11). 

rophotic guild* (fl\ ? IJfl'JJ), which were in reality 

rovinr bands of ecstatics, were quite common In the time of 

Elijah, (I Kings 20:55). Elijah and Elisha had some 

connection with these bands but there is no evidence to show 

that they took part la tin. ecstatic performances, The fact 

that they worked alone and not with the roup (XI Kings 2: 

1-15), would Indicate that they had no taste for the mass 

demonstrations. It is true that llsha {II Kings 3:15) 

used music to Induce a prophetic mood but there is no record 

of any trance or ecstasy. It Is very probable that In 

Elijah and : 11aha there lo the definite at o .pt to break 

away from the excesses of ecstasy for it is true that 

prophecy ocame u . uch aora practical and floral affair under 

their leadership. Ihey may have used thfei prophetic guild 

and some of their x>re sane methods in order that the efforts 

of these men would not be wasted on sheer emotionalism but 
would be turned to religions and patriotic ends. *ost 

definitely here Is the point when the prop* tic <mild ^oes 

into a permanent decline from which it was never to return. 









































■ 


■ 































- 2 - 


Thc men, under the gulch-ino-. of II Job ..tid lisha, settled 
down to agricultural pursuits and only at Intervals felt the 
need of returnin lo tit#if fettadll and MOtlOAal ur^aits. 
(cf. II Kings 6:1-12). 

The objection to ecstasy, whether In this dey or in 
times past, Is that there Is no transference from e otion to 
ethics. ihe uervlshoe of the Ola Testament were no paragons 
of morality nor were their ethics on a high plane. One does 
not have to search very diligently to find present dav 
examples of rent emotional revivalists who have erred vary 
se i usly in sexual i.orullty and In matter# of common honesty 
Devotees of emotionalism very often develop doubl standards. 
That is seen in the Old Testament (II Kings b:20ff) when the 
prophetic bands preyed upon the deep gratitude of Kama an the 
Syrian. Truth was a matter of little moment when the 
prophetic guild cam# into conflict with icaiah (I Kings 22) 
who claimed only to speak the word of Yahweh tut was neither 
a professional nor an ecstatic. 

Accordingly the question is rightly asked as to 
whether an ecstatic could possibly make the clear et’ieai 
pronouncements and do the ^reat charitable deed® that the 
great prophets did. hero is no evidence in the Old 
TcsWuieut to show that the prophetic guilds ever did out¬ 
standing ethical acts. lijah rebuked Ahab for his 








. 










































- 10 - 


persecution of Maboth (I T 'ings 21) and revealed an outstand¬ 
ing ethical sense. It is doubtful if he would have had the 
moral courage to do t^is if he had depended on an emotional 
state for his inspiration. The same statement applies to the 
fearless attitude of Mioaiah referred to above, ftlisha 
confronted Jehoshaphat (II Kings 3:llff) very fearlessly and 
disclaimed any connection with the prophetic guild. T is 
attitude, of psychological necessity, must have been based 
on something a lot more stable than a shifting emotionalism. 

The issue seems to be as to whether a man can tie 
himself up to a thoroughgoing ethical and moral standard and 
still retain the need for an ecstatic experience. The 
conclusion seems to be that for the former attitude an in¬ 
dividual needs all the resources and energy at his disposal 
without frittering them away in the excess of emotion, A 
religion of pure e otion has always been dangerous riot only 
to personality but also to oral and ethical convictions. 

George ^daru 3 ith writes thus, (expositor* s Bible, 

Book of the Twelve Prophets, Vol. 1), 

"Religious ecstasy is always dangerous to the 
joral nd intellectual interests of religion. 

The largest prophetic figures of the period, 
though they feel ecstasy, attain their great¬ 
ness by rising superior to it. lijah 1 s 
raptures are impressive; but nobler are his 
defence of : aboth and his denunciation of 
Ahab. .And so "lisha’s inducement of the 

























' 






■ 

























- 11 - 


pro phatlo "joo< 1 v>y uslc i the l*^st attractive 

element In hie career: his greatness lies In a 

combination o* the car^ of souls with political 

Insight and vigilance for national interests. 

.. 

Intimated that muoh of it cannot be enuine.. 
..... at first t.ho feeling might be sincere 
but then it so soon cun become morbid and 
easily fall into sympathy with drunkenness and 
sexual passion which was part of the Canaanite 
practices." 


H. . Robinson (op. cit. ) defends the ecstasy of 
prophets thus f "Ouch phenomena as these no nor© discredit 
the inner worth of prophetic ideas than the eccentricities 
of genius in other realms discredit its own high achieve¬ 
ments." 

7he f et is, of course, that the prorhets de It in 
the realm of et; ics and morals which are affected by 
emotionalism more than is the invention of the electric light 
by an eccentric genius. sychologically the two types cannot 

be compared. The morality , nd the social adjusl of a 

enius may be on a low plane and that do-s not affect his 
work to any extent. hen one deals with morals and ethics 
his own morals and ethics must be Just as igh, if not higher 
than those of the people he would lead, otherwise the result 
is cant and hypocrisy. A urely &. oii n&l religion stands 
in constant danger of losing its .oral conviction. 


This paper does not &rgue that the great prophets 



































I V I 

























































were utterly devoid of 9 lotion, but it doos argue that, at 
its height, prophecy had no need of an artificial induce¬ 
ment of an eostatic state. In a bare half century after 
Elijah came the prophet Amos with the prelude to the golden 
age of great prophecy in which, us yet, unrivalled social 
and ethical teachings were propounded. Such could not have 
occurred without a complete break with ecstasy and its 
vaclllatln moods. Amos makes his position very clear when 
he says, "I hate, I despise your feast days and I will not 
smell in your solemn assemblies. Though ye offer me burnt 
offerings and your meat offerings, I will not accept them; 
neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts. 
Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs; for I will not 
hear the melody of thy viols. But let judgment run down as 
waters and righteousness as a mighty stream." (^mos 5:21-24). 
He made a clear break with the ecstatics when Amaziah charged 
him with being a hireling and he replied, "I was no prophet, 
neither was I a prophet’s son; but I was a hordsman and a 
gatherer of sycamore fruits." (amos 7:14) 

>lien Ho sea came, a few years after Amos, he wus even 
more emphatic in disclaiming ill association with the 
ecstatics when he said, "the prophet is a fool, the spirit¬ 
ual man is mad." (Fosea 9:7) 


From Amos onward than* is no indication that the 






































































■ 

' 












- 14 - 


prophets tried to inuuoe ecstatic or prophetic muohu by 
artificial methods, nance there could be no ecstasy. ihere 
is ao further evidence of prophetic bunds making a profess¬ 
ional practice of oronhesying. Th* prophets now are 
individuals of various walks o" life who hnve felt the call 
of God to 8peak to the people hie word. The word of God is 
proclaimed, for the mo^t part, in social and ethical terms. 

fc'eny questions xoay be raised concerning the above 
statenent. . ost of the literary prophets record thel„* calls 
to proclaim the word of God. Does not the call of Iealah 
(Chap, 6} and the call of JTere/riah (Ghap. 1) Indicate an 
ecstatic state 0 hen the prorhat says “Thus saith Yahweh", 
does he not mean that he has heard the voice of Yahweh 
speakin to him? Th* recurrent hrusee, Yahweh showed me", 
and "Yabweh spoke these tilings to me with the strengtn of 
hand*, and others point to some extraordinary sort of 
experience, do they not? Jerenian (80:9) ^peujcs of the 
message belny ”a burning fire*. fht .?Aessa^es .ire &lvec. as a 
result of a vision or as the compulsion of an outer voice 
that spoke very clearly, which surely denotes an emotional 
state, ;hat about the time when Isaiah rent about -’naked 
and barefoot for three yc3ur3", (Is. SO:2' and *shen -Ter© »iafc 
put a yoke around his neck (Jor. 2?:2,3)° /hat does the 
prophet mean when he talks about a messa 9 beln ( - withheld, 










. 
















■ 










14 - 


{' ab. 2:1 ana Jar* 42:7)? oan that not Indicate an 

ecstatic state of some kino? Later or: the mesga^d did 
through*** as the power of the trance iOre effective t 
the next attempt? 

To answer these problems thero are a few facts that 
nust be used as a b..sls for juugoent* 

1, Taking Into account the above state enteIt Is 
not psychologically sound nor is It logicel to assume that 
men with such Jofty and clear ethloal approaches to the 
practical problems of athicn and of society* oo the ^re t 
proohets had* would stoop to crudely emotional devices to 
obtain this inspiration. .hsr» men Ifko Jeremiah and Isaiah 
snoke on Issues of national politics they aid so after 
haring rationally thought through the problems and not after 
hiving subjected the;uselv©3 to trances. Thia does not 
preclude emotion nor does It disregard the power of an 
□moti Jiial drive but It does assert that great prophecy is 
primarily a matter of rational reaeonin and aound logic. 

2. 'he psychology or the It! Testament records and 
tije language of those records belon- to an ora that was 
cre-seientifie. Hence the recorder’s approach to M stories 
is i&ade fros± un entirely different angle than that of the 
modern student and the language is of an age where exactness 



















. 




































■ 































































— AC — 


was not consMered essential. It Is not reasonable to 
expect that the wit era would use twentieth century terns 
to express ancient thoughts. VIalone, miracles and voices 
were the thought forms of that age and their meaning was 
understood by the common man. Their thou ht modes were 
quite objective, 

modern parallei can be drawn with the preacher of 
this present time# Tha rxodern preacher, trained in 
literary orltioism and in a scientific approach to the Bible 
usually finds it necessary to apeak to x con rcgation which 
is not the least Informed as to such an approach. To 
speak in terras that the preacher would prefer would mean 
the alienation of a large pai’t of his con rogation# 
^ceordinrly, In the hope of gradually le-dln his con rel¬ 
ation into a deeper view of the scriptures, the minister 
uses terms and vehicles of lan^Uo^e, acceptable to the 
congregation, but filled with a re^v meaning. Ills does 
not mean that the preacher is false to hie convictions or 
that he is currying favour with his congregation. It does 
mean that he is engaging in un educational process that 
may be slow but which will be ultimately effective without 
the excessive injuring of peo les* deep feelings. 

Tho gr e .t prophets were in rauch the spme situation. 




















' 





■ 

























. 







- 16 - 


xiioy sought to lead tne people from the old to the new 
tula, for tid moat part, used the language of the olu. 

5, Despite the above It must also ha recorolzsd 
that the prophets themselves were not entirely emancipated 
from the old beliefs. Yelrweh, for instance, was vory roal 
to them and they felt a personal relational? to him. They 
accepted the fact that Yahweh could apeak to the;.! und show 
them iiviny things. Tn a philosophical sente he did exactly 
that. The reality of Sod was essentially the same in the 
daye of the prophets as it is now. The prophets spoke of 
this in the nraotioal way which was characteristic of tho 
age. e surround the same experience with highly 
philosophical concerts. 

4. The prophets had to get the ear of the people 

for the common person was no more interested In hearing 

what the prophet had to say than Is the common person today 

The modern preacher uses oodern ^eano to attract his 

congregation. He advertizes himself and bis church and 

his serf,on subjects by a var.toty of devices in orde^ that 

peo le will listen to the essential message.' The .relent 
Prophet got the attent' no* the people by using devices 

that would appeal to the crowds of his lay. "Thus saith 

Jahvveh" was a cry that would -ale o&ny people stop and 










■ 







-17 


listen* Isaiah is reported to have walked naked and Lure- 
foot for three years in an effort to c-et people’s attention* 
T he truth behind suoh a story cannot' be discerned. x>me 
scholars see this as an indication of ecstasv but, under 
no circumstances would a state of ecstasy last for that 
length of time. Jore.-iah walked around with yokes about 
his neck which would certainly uttr&ct attention and 
illustrate the truth of his jiesaa e. L'li to phot often 
appeared in some peculiar ^arb. One may question the ethics 
of such ’’publicity stunts” oven t.a ho questions the ethics 
of much that modem preachers do. However, to the prophet 
this was a means to a glorious end. fh« hat t^ bo 

made listen before the word of ^ahweh could epoken. 

5. In an effort t understand the«# aen better it 
might he well to describe, them as men wit a religious 
complex. They were born of an intensely religious nation 
artd were Xiurtured In devout homes. Their schools were t>e 
tabernacles and their teachers were tj e nr la a :.e. rom 
childhood they learned of tho divine mission of the Children 
of Isruel. Tiein uors sensitive and roscesoln^ deeper 
emotions than tost man, the pro heta found their whole 
thoughts centered on their nation interpreted in a 
religious senue. rt coordingly all their rental patterns 










. 










. 





















































• 

■ 

















-le¬ 


ws re a^aoclatad into a definite system. a hit* roduced a 
couplex. Complexes ito built around many things — 
politico, home, aox, hobbles, etc* i,o coaolex Is .nore 
powerful than a rallriou* one. The rophets built the Ire 
around Yahwoh. 

A religious complex does not mean a rational 
gathering together of all id^no of Yahweh nd an Intell¬ 
ectual contemplation o them. It does mean that all thoughts 
ideals, attitudes, asrlratlo'- 3 ;*nu hones, whetiw»r conscious 
or subconscious, find their express!©; in — loyalty to 
Yahweh* -.11 the Impressions oi the external world, all 
the inherited £*6 c nanisms, and all the mental concepts 
flowing through an active miud would be gathered ur> in one 
mighty flow of energy towards the one desire to sec the 
ceuer of Yahweh prosper. ueh a c rolex limits reotly the 
■nodes of expression both physical and vocal and for the 
rei t prophets the node was the life of religion* In other 
v>ords the whole newer of an intensely verlla ^©raonoJity 
was concentrated on one subject with the result that all 
energies are turned in one direction. These ener 1 !ea 
pile up and become more end mor c Tipellin? until they 
must be expressed in romo manner. he. the release comes 

re< t. torrent* 



























-10- 


snargy tiiua huYln beon exhausted, the Individual 
retires until oo.jpelioU once ^ore to find a node of 
expression for lie convictions. 

The call of Isaiah (Chap. 6} tells about him sitting 
In the temple and seeing o vision, ih® sanctuary wea a 
very meaningful nl^ce for the young man ror h® hui been 
closely associated with it. Mo was -^ro A tly ''erplexed a bout 
the plight of Israel. The quietness of tho T ^ouse of 
Yahvrsh gave opportunity ror contemplation -nd ho wished that 
he could find some way to be of service to Yahweb tnd Ms 
follow men yet he felt quite Inedeouete. Under the epol *\ 
of this cuite 'ntenec feeling: there tow up the sense of 
ths rlory end holiness of Y&hweh. A hls glory stood In '-rest 
contrast to his own sense of Inferiority and to the greet 
need of the people. The energy or the relirlous conplex 
surges into consciousness and he knows that Tahweh would 
Ive aim tne power and the eople the opportunity to serve 
hl 3 J„ Isaiah Is thereby convinced that he is chosen of Cod 
to be ,.ia prophet and so dedicates hiciecir to the task. 

Later there arl^s tho neotsait of puttia the experience 
Into words. he only way that isuiah could express this 
experience was in tfcs mv« 

The result I"; the beautiful and aoaniu ful account of Ms 






















, 












■ 

' 
























. 





-20- 


Vl BlO U. 

Amos was a nu»n frosa tho country, dee’-ly pious unit 
with a keen sense of the personal presence of Cod. Pe was 
• man of r | a i want t ’ ilia city, rs 

he would have to do In th.^ course of hie business, he 
was croiit.ly upset by the inequalities and oppression that ho 
saw. The open i'ouorality of the leaders revolted his entire 
religious nature, -thus there started within his personality 
the working* of the religious complex, 'iha ea wsa 
built up to such - degree that the inner compulsion to 
apeak on behalf of Yubwoh wan irresistible, lie, very 
probably, made his pronouncements and then retired to his 
hexe until the pressure o r the reli- ious aotiplax cor. palled 
him to apeak o?yuln. ’because of hie intense nature Lis 
*ord£ w aid be vivie ant forceful, he would speak in terms 
of visions ,*ith ^re&t reality for that vsus the mode of 

'Arver, ;!ust 

because he said that Yahweh showed aim n bosket o r fruit or 
because he said that he saw fahweh standln; upon the altar 
is ro pr of that be was un ecstatic. 

The vivid words of Jere iah (4:19-26) are sometimes 
a stumbling block to scholars, fhe r^ferenoe to a "burning 
fire* (20s J) raises many Questions. If there ..ere definite 
evidences of ecstatic states in the life of Jeremiah 
















. 








■ 


■ 





























































































-21- 


these night bo classed as such. Jinoe there is no 
concrete evidence of ecstasy then these incidents may be 
taken as indications ol the intense emotion of a uan who 
was very vitally concerned about the relationship between 
God and man and between man and man. Jeremiah would never 
have become the prophet he was if there had not been a 
burning fire within his heart and if he did not have the 
compelling conviction that the whole structure of human 
affairs was about to fall Into chaos. The messages from 
"iahweh could very well have been delayed and cause him 
concern without the presence of ecstasy. The modern 
minister, with numerous activities durin ; the week and two 
sermons on Sunday, well kows the feeling of a lack of 
inspiration. He knows, too, that the only way to recover 
his inspiration is to take the time and create the silence 
necessary for a reawakening of the spirit. There is no 
ecstasy there nor */&s there any in the experience of Jere¬ 
miah. .as there any indication at all that Jeremiah 
desired an ecstatic state and attempted to induce one there 
wo JLd be some basis for the argument that tne above 
incidents were examples of ecstasy. Failing the establish¬ 
ment of that point it is reasonable to assume that the 
incidents reflect the vivid language of men noved to reat 

insights by an all-consumin^ religious complex. 





















- 22 - 

Kzeklel has not been aiscubaed here because the 
priest a&s so mixed up with the prothet that it is 
difficult to Jeclde to which group he belongs. Some of 
his great moral pronouncements will be discussed later, but 
these are outweighed by his ixriestly convictions. ven his 
greatest utterances are tied up to cult practices. It must 
be admitted that there are signs of ecstasy i’ Ms life. 

He once remained duc:b for seven days and he lies in one 
position for a lon>^ time. He >s transported from Babylon 
to Jerusalem t! in the spirit * and has other trance-like 
experiences. (i£z. 3, 4, 3). *ui argument can easily oe 
made for ecstasy in the experience of Daekiel. it the same 
time, it must be admitted that when one reads tne oracles 
of £?»ekiel he is conscious of being in other company than 
that of the ^roat Drophets Israel. 
















milk** 















Chapter II 


DPr. AMS 


TUi question us t tbs meat:In./ of dr?n.ma has been 
the concern of man ever since the dawn of the power of 
thought. Xhe one conviction that has run through all 
hlftory Is that dreads 1 .(3 aomr- connection with th-* llfo 
cf man • rd that If dreads could b<? interrr-ted oorreotly 
they’would yield e clue no tc man* a future. Gtc t 
emphnsis h.?.a rlivnys been : laced or the Interpretation of 
drears and In all ages men nnd v*omf.ri hove posed a» being 
dream interpreters. Throughout the tortuous Mstory of 
dream interpretation thsra hr>va been two main methods of 
decipher In the ®oenia;3s 

1. The explanation or a dream is u unit by a 

dreams* 

Interpretations, of course, were urely arbitrary. 

2. Tha explan itIon of the different figures in a 
drea® as a symbol for somethin . Gradually the symbols 
became fixed and the interpretations crystallised, i enoe 
now it la possible to obtain a "dreara book* which will 
enable an individual to decipher his own dreams without 
reference to an expert. 






. 














■ 












. 























' 







- 






























24 - 


GnJLy a minority or ; eo le have been aoertloul about 
dream interi rotation. i he majority oi poo le b. to always 
had a suspicion U.ct dreams hud a:no significance. 

; o really scientific study of areals was done until 
SHrmund fraud wrote his monumental worl' at the becthnliig 
of this century. !■» believe^ ihtt „rouns we* e vejy 
significant end that a dreuc vos the way by vr icn un 
individual fulfilled a wish that Ltd either been repressed 
or frustrated. hie theory wac that when u dre m was 
carefully examined the fundamental wish would be uncoyered 
and the patient could adjust himself to e disturbinr 
situation* Dreams came to ploy a larr;e pert in psycho¬ 
analysis. Freud favoured the symbolic method of inter¬ 
pretation • 

Undoubtedly Freud went to extremes with hie theories 
end most certainly over-e&;hasized the sexual nature of 
dreams, ihe fuct was established, however, that creams 
were the result of the activity of the "ind when the 
individual was asleep. he action is reetly condensed 
hut the pictures in a dream ere essentially true. 
Ultimately area s do show the condition o* the mind which 
thrusts them forth, if n person Is soosessed of a complex, 

as it heis boca su&ge*bea tha prophets ware, .lie areams will 







' 





. 












: ■ 









. 

■ 

.. 

















- 25 - 


very probably be centred on the subject of his oouplex 

even as Ills waging thoughts are grouped arouna It. 

Dreams have cause 3 • The following seems to be a 
good list: 

1. Memory — the droamer’s mind mulls over events 
of the Immediate past or of the distant past and re¬ 
produces them in picture fashion, 

2. External stimulation — a sound, the temperature 
of the room, a movement, the pressure of bed clothes on 
tody organs may start the mind wording around certain 
symbols. 


3. Internal stimulation — the sympathetic nervous 
system often provokes the mind to action. A stomach ache 
easily causes a dream. 

Dreams are often absurd and illogical. vents are 
compressed into such a short space of time that they 
tumble over each other. Q,uite often a dream is of a 
problem-solving nature and at other times it expresses the 
hopes, aspirations, arnDilions and fears of the individual. 
To really Interpret dreams one must Anew the dreamer, his 
personality and his ambitions. Dreams maj reveal many 









-L6* 


things to the dreamer rsguraln his rerrossed or frustrated 

wishes* They uiuy be prophetic in the sense that the 
future *vii ■ l ;t.jr hiu i by tr*e actions of the dreamer# 

The people of the ,ld rents ent tines were concerned 
shout dreams. The stories of thsu. acme down to us in 

vary In.? forme* At the outset of t la utudy ft *ni»t ho 
understood that the record of u droim jb It lc written in 
the Old Testament is not in the original form us the 
dreamer first related it, hut has boon subjected to constant 
revision and editing as they h .to been retold and rewritten* 
Dreouas never do appear la suoh u cioor, logloal and concise 
Banner a 3 the dreams of Joseph are recorded ( ienesis 37)* 

As *itli nil ancient writings those stories have been 
levelled down to a concrete folic talc? form, it is the folk 
tale version und not the original version that wo have In 
the Old Testa:..ent today. 

iebrew word ''or di Is U)«6 Tl whleh ie 
derived froa the root £] 6 D • 'Te;.; . ; h ve been 

encouraged to know that this word originally had a sexual 
content end me*nt "to experience an emission of seminal 
fluid" or "to attain to puberty". The develo riient was 
lories 1 since the most vivid dreams do acco:an«ny such an 

e erience. lirthOJ , Oteftr, It is not possible 




























































■ 

, 

I j m H B 9 

- 









■ 















- 27 - 


to for then* is no evidence to show tint the -ebrevs 
retained the connotation. 


The dracms *n the hexateuch are all In the prophetic 
document nd seen to re place the nether orude th*o- 

^henies ov the "J" document, Tn other wot de Ip Yohweh 

has become re spiritualised one instead of co In# person¬ 
ally o earth in order to ccbgu/* ioete Ms tun 4 «s, he 

now r^v«ais the . through tiiv : *edlu£a oi .. vlrsii... it be - 
comes c;i ito olee (ftua&bora 12 ♦$) tia^t fchwoh Intends only 
to make himself visible to oses, svi.o deserved eueh u 
distinction since he * 3 .ne hero o1 **brew Mstory. 

he ordinary re bet nad t> content hi© so If , itfc creams 
ar.a visions. 


To the r Tehrew wind tho circa© itJUn ) And the 
vision { /7r '7^ ) /ere the saian thin?. The conclusion 
I si n li % t* eleventh Osntur . » rs 

considered as v»Hi mij for Yahwoh to reveal ni self. 


lie areawe fall lot;, thr o rurs: 


3. The supernatural type in which we do not know 
snouy.h «*b<vit. the circuwctcncee to know whot actually took 
place. thus, the dreo© wherein blmeleoh Is -revanted fro*a 
hav^n^ eexuel intercourse with Sarah {OenoBis Z0t6] la a 



























. 

























































. 

a stag* that /•Mmeleoh 1 s guilt;* conaolonoa woulf cause l lm 
to dre »pi* 

robl •lolfl&g Iree 1 1a whlili some question 
foun its solution. Jacob { ;«n. 31:10ff) had u dream w v <ich 
solved his problem as to now ho could gain advantage over 
Laban. 'This decidedly could not L-\Vw been .■» revelation fro/. 
Qod but v-aa rather the result 01 tno iua carnations o'* a ? hre^H 
mind, ihe draaa fits in v«r; v/eli wit a the character of 
Jacob and perhaps tho result of the ctlvlty of his 
m’nd oven while he v.aa asleep. 

The droa 3 of who ; cyptiuna which Joseph interpreted 

'i;. 

i»iiod s o" the Tutler, the i£.or and the haroah were all 
concerned with their own particular problem ani the ureams 
*oro a result •. ti eir orooocupation. famine, for instance, 
t constant threat to the Egyptian governs* nt and the 
r haron?t mist have been deadly concerned. fter TriokinT 
allowances for t’ e inevitable changes In the process of 
transmission, the stories :r^ probably based on fact. 

Joseph ;vg 3 ’.ntelJ.i ent, sarewd and acquainted r#it ' tne 
intrirpiss of the court. ? :o also tna "recurious state 

Of the fooa supply, ^eing oa^i* to t~:.u advantage of every 









































- 






. 









- 
























-££- 


opportunity ne o uid bt vs 030a us u a toll' interpreter very 
ly ua coji.i hunt iiter^ratect th A ar^srr cce^tsbly. 

. 1 .1 * •> LtH ,na 

frustrations revealed. tnt; this class fall the dreams 
of Joseph oo&oemla^ his brothers (centals £7)* .Tose;h 
vies & or^cooion youth and was frustrated bocauae he vms the 
young est. The love of hlr father co pensr.tef to a decree 
•specially when he received the co t -*.f r*ny colcours. This 
satisfaction or.ly urged hlcr: on to desires of doninonoe. FIs 
dreads nnd their coneoquent inter rotation v.ere a natural 
renult Ox i.is al3 •cci . 3XLj ng titlon* 

h® irea s of ^olomox* (I /lings 5:1b) <>re of the sane 
h r • •. ' * 5 ' ■ . • • natural hen 

urie considers the ch'recter of Solomon. Joseph end -olomon 
had a any qualities In oocmon. 

In the Book of Judges (7;ir and 15) dreape are 
regarded as ulte valuable. rin_ faul (1 juxuel 29:6 and 15) 
felt tkut Ycihvreh noglsctlng Ma when he experienced no 
dreans. :.n f .ct he tried other wrt ods to *et a sewage 
frot Y&hv?eh after the drcim method failed. 

..lthougb the document does pl^ce an emphasis on 

dreams the *D n document, which followed within the next 







































\J 





















































-3C- 


century, expressed the hope that a check would be Kept on 
dreams for they ere Lot always profitable to the religion 
of lnhweh (^ut. ‘ihc tituLiiara by which tho 

validity of a ares.'.-. was to be judged was he to whether or 
not it acrocd with the Known instructions of Yabweh. 

TMs cautiour attitude toward dreams rew quite 
rabidly er.d bp t tin:© o: th< rreat llt^r ry vrorheta they 
had h core qu'te locrsdlted. Tereulah (£3:27-32) is very 
oirphatlc in hit* denunciation ot* theu*. La insists! th\t 
f 1 ; t: ). 

I'*v. etaterent n dreamers ore but Jocalvara’’ oo^as as late as 
fcVc -'no cabs an ra (£sch. 10:2) -iiu indicator a rajuaice 
a oiDnt dreams. ifct mfti'eue© in cioei. (2:2b) concerning 
old raea dreamily has no -rtlojlur reference to prophecy 
but rather to tha srocalyrtlc thought or the time. 

the d recta 02 ’ Job hao several references to u reruns 
end visions. It Is very natural that a .nan In the physical 
condition of Job should h^v» his alee disturbed by re>ms 
end visions (7:14). The "Elihu .ection" v/ 1c: is not 
really a part of the drane creaks var ' clecriv of ren^ns 
and visions as boinr a reeens of revelation. Tat thr vTitar 
of "eclesl& 3 tcs (5:3 and 7), which Wcs written about the 
sane t*ne t distrusts dree c. -.fter the -reat prophets 







'■ 









• 


































. 


. 




. 

. 












. 





















21- 


drwa.ua aid f-aun popularity in -ectior.s. 

The Pook of ''anlel which v.rittGi* in the ..>cond 
Century B.C., hut* some uite oxtensiyo reference^ to dream® 
in the lirat clx chapters. The book ia not rophotic but 
anooalyptie. It Is doubtful whether the drea^e tire historic 
The author uses thia device to enhance the effect of his 
atory, Yet it as an indioctior. that sone of the people In 
the 3eoonu Century J.C. believed in dreams even aa do some 
poo;>la today. 

There is no o eoifio and 3in le theory of dreams in 
the li Isotu.Aont iveo v;e find no v.rree >nt today on the 
lect. - out standi; *act i t' ; early 

ve placed reliane breams, tl -3at 

'canonical prophets had nothin**'to do with the-n. 














■ 







. 







■ 





































<I38TOL T X: tUtiO 

' 














■ 



























Chapter til 
*I8tfFVL THINKING 

Unless a mini is ^er: well trained and excellently 
disciplined the deep desires and «ishes of the individual 

ttli« 

Any given Incident jjay b« very easily inter reted ir> terms 
of the 5m.ividuel*e o^n particular complex. Tn ot^sr words 
a person *b thoughts may be very readily based oi nir wishes 
rather than on actual fact. 

hon pushed t Its let le«3 extre e, ioh projection 
Into thought becomes injurious to personality and results 
in rh&nteeiea ana delusions which axe characteristic of the 
neune. fh*. Insane person builds hi a vdiola world out of 
; is own wishes and desires which ure, for him, reality# 
elusions of r~ andeur, vhoreb; the patient cog riders himself 
„ result tbs projeeti of nifibss until 

tbe w.leh becomes more of a reality than actual fact. 

odero education with its scientific viewpoint and 
its Kreat emphasis on hjactive t. inking# has done much 
to lessen the amount of wishful thinking Iodo by men and 
wo:* on. the advent 

realms of though has caused people to beoom vary sensitive 















' 


































■ 




■ 

















- 33 - 


to the difference bet* eu straight thinkiu *nd rlehful 
thinking. hi advent of introspeotlon la the realms of 
syoholo y has caused oo, lo to examine their own wlehes 
and desires av.% t »oo how far they i.u in( e uron tholr 
boughts. 

icoordln^ly the trained m r»d is able today to 
ascertain what corvictlons *n- attitudes re o result of 
wis rejection and what iaes have their basis in dual 
fict. Dee ite the recent advances the world is b no net ns 
rid of wishful thlnkin for the * ucnan .iilnu see s to persist 
in twist in ana turning fact so that the Personality will 
not be un uly v ' ,nde by the Inevitable diaa point ents and 

' X r • . ] ■ I • 

ill deter n- t l^r^o ^usure, the colour t? t Is 

s:Wen to a person v e wishes nd hence ill et«r ne tbs 
t r o t r>!3 ht he has. 

If . Ish x . ro juctlo** -o*a ivisiiiuJ. tnil*hin.. ia ^ roblsai 
to the modem I o it cuat have be-ii a much , re ter problem 
in the past ages when nds were OBtniM4 end uncritical, 
i he world o fact and the ,>orld of wishes * re so ent.vlned 
n the thought o the neople that there was hardly ay 
dlstinetio betwoou tie to. 


to n tion si c' as the 'shrews, hose ishes were 












' 





























































- 34 - 


for national &ui ro iuoy and whose history had taurht the 
that they were the chosen people of Yahweb, the line 
between wlsl »nd fact * very faint. hen men s^oke 1th 
the authority of Yahweh It was very dlff cult to decide 
whether the earn o really /ce fro Yahweb or w\ ther It 
w a: ' m j ctloi mi th art >f the • letor. he 

m of n od ?is also u citizen of Israel. 

japle evidence Is valiable to srow trmt the 
ttessa^e w*»s very often the result of the wishes of the one 
who s oke. In tin section on ecstasy It hue ulrealy teen 

noted that the pro hetlc uilds were not always courts In 

their pro heoles but were swayed to a consider, le extent 
by the public sentiment of the tl^e. Ihue ro-hotlc pulld 
»iii4 t *:eor i: r tt 1 I «•• . #c ret- 

ively easy for the roohets to find that the raesso o of 
Yahweh agreed vstt" e Iree. ’V, x ’n b I 

any ro els in Israel were superficial ortl lets who 
palnttd a glowIn picture of th future of Israel dea-Ite th 
It.1 - . * 1 1 i i ■* t t 

predicted was what Yahweh h o stowed thm« 'n reality 
what they said w.s what th ople ^;.te t hear nnd what 
they themselves wished would ha pen. It ottld not be fair 
to say that all these ren were dishonest for a e were 











. 









- 





































- 


























35- 


iiulte sincere* Tholr mind a wer«* • ot ivcen or arltloal 
enough to make a clear distinction between ..ot j>ru\ desire. 

It la a h.ulthy el u ..hen a person realists that 
there Is a uifforesee otwoeu clear thinking uu *.lnhful 
thlnklnf )r then he be^ln? to turn a critical eye on hie 
o n thoughts* result Is a keen, discernin' and 

io » ' !* : ;■ . la ' 

forward /»! en sc 3 of them saw the difficulty 1th early 
li It, iV TO.t 

prophets w. re mon of this type* J»re lah (Chan. 23) wus 
well awnr© of the ltfalls of v.lahful thlnkln and raises 
Me v:lce -.5rst it. c calls such pro hecy (v. 16) 
*•▼181003 a r the ir own hourt* and asserts that it certainly 
is not tie ord of ihweh. 

.i>re lah >.-.is, it tl*ies, n or 1 1st r :.rdlr» the 
future of Israel, _« h* s, ee r*o ’at as well, .ever cii 
ha nsist that the way to leTad'u ultl^te triumrh j» 
easy* slated that thl slid not be 

5 ■■■•.-. I / J c 

The* pathway of th*? repentant heart mu on> of r*=?ut trial 
end tribulation# 


h reat bio a'-alnet lshful * • Mn*r in prorhecy 












. , . ■■ 














- 


- 










. 







■ 






















- 36 - 


was struok by Jeremiah when usserted (^hap. 20) ti nt the 
true test of iro hooy was to wait and see what ha pened. 

If Yalvreh had really spoken, tlie prophecy wqb only the 
wishful lr.a$Inln~8 of the prophet 1 a own heart there would 
be no fulfillment. 

imrin the scire of Jerusalem Jero loh wee nulto 
ml Istlc In his renounce aents. Undoubtedly he, as did 
others, sincerely wished that Jerusalem would be saved end 
the people left unharmed but he saw that mere wlahee would 
not aocoillsh his desire. ve y realistically : spoke of 
the doom that wus In stors for the nation as - resalt of her 
wickedness (Chaps. 12 nd 13). "ho people were t;ld uot to 
L,ourr» l or the dead Kin f ^hap. 2?tl0f) and the new ins is 
assured tfv.t he will neve- return fro » exile. 1 lT-tion 
will corae, not because the reole wish for It, but o ly 
because the exiled .loaders repsre themselves morally nd 
s irituiilly for tne futu.ro (Chap. 29). Thus did this 
prophet attempt to force tfe people to ft*ce th hard facts 
of life, to realise that their folly and sin h d caused the! 
present state *nd to 'lnoe upon thoir shoulders the resp¬ 
onsibility of redeenln themselves. Ills cold lo lc ond 
straight thinkin was tempered Ith . v^rm optimise for the 
provbet really believed that th reo-le, hovlnr boon avrulcenec 





. 


























■ 











' 









































. 










































- 37 - 


would measure up to the demands of Yuhweh. 

In contrast t the realise of Jeremiah stands the 
superficiality and the wishful thlnl In o r th<> prophets 
such as ! «uniinlfth. ntlrely overlook *n the lo~ie *>r the 
situation the self-evident '’nets, these p^oph^ts 

asserted that Jerusalem could never full. They h^d no 
basis for suoh a statement except their own oslr s .* nd 
wishes, Jerusalem did full and the essu^ of those 
prophets then was that It wo Id only be a si ort time until 
Yuhweh would restore Ms city. The only reason for suoh a 
statement was that they could mceive t la else* 

In the conflict between Jeremleh and the other 
pro hets there is a clear issue between wishful think In • a d 
straight thinking. One could drav other parallels from the 
stories of the pro hets. It la reasonable to assume that 
the rest prophets ware '.ore sensitive to the Mt falls of 
wishful thinking than were the lesser prophets. 

It would not be correct to leave the 1 pressIon that 
the ’^re t prophets never did wander from the narrow pathway 
of straight thinking* Iheir vor,, humanity iwde this 
iautossible. outstanding problem is tie curses of 

Jeremiah* How do they fit in with the logical epacts of 




■ 












' 














■ 



















‘ 























■ 


. ■ ! 












-36 


the prophet f » thought and perBonulity'? There la record that 
Teremiah uttered some of the moat clevestetln * cureea 
aralnet people who orosaed him In any way. *he man of 
nathoth (11:16-23) plotted ~alnnt his life and ha struck 
beck at tho « with ost soutt.ln cure*. The underlying 
cause for auch an outturat urau ursonul resentment und 
an^or• ih* »*isn taut such a tLin, should hap.on prompted 
the cure a. several curaea of this type illustrate the 
aunt© trait in Jere l»h's ohar oter. Tho curse on i ashur 
(Chap. 20) was result o the prophet belli put in the 
stocks eind t> e ono on Abab and edeklah (29:21) was prompted 
by a rasentnent ayalnat any ns who would 6 re to take 
exception to Ms statements. Th curses on .TeJholaklm 
(22:l6ff und 36:30ff) were prophecies of a violent death 
lor tho kin . Dev It© the curaea feholaklm died a normal 
death for in th© Book of Kin. s (II Kings 24:6) is the 
letorleel itat o! e peaeeful death* is laatmncc 

Jeremiah failed in the test of true pro Joey v ioh ho 
himself had wet (cf. ^fcap. 28) for re Y 3 declared that if 
» prophecy were not fulfilled then the rrorhet did not have 
a raessa*^© fro Y.ihweh. The conclualon Is that un or th© 
stress of ©notion even u prophet like 7ere~lah allowed his 
fee liny e to dictate the rorde that he uttered. :‘er;c© Uie 
curses were uot of fahweh but of tue wishes of :is own 







. 




























■ 
























- - 


heart• 

If Jeremiah h d known tmself a little better ho 
d hi h v Tolitd t* la typa of -Itfall. k% the same t 

MM does not depreciate the v lue of tha prophet* 
vork, The o r«MI feelli. sea 

was T>urt or the eraouuJLlty that rvule Mm so i a 

prorhet. 

iht-re are somo curses recorder In the I» k of 
zaklel. A Is prophet d<- votes nearly three chapter® to 
a rost detailed account of the destruction of Tyro (£6:1 - 
£9:16). the statements ;re >oet scat ins: and sarcastic. 

Yet be llvod to realize that his prophecy did not come true 
(29:31-20). ?ypt also falls under the bitterness of 
zekiel's pen (29:17-20) in a very literary curse. e 
wished that such t> fate would bofa.l these place® and the 
wish was tt r iude t ro^hecy. Hi zclciel rails 

into the eam& eTor a did Tore iah. 

difference is easily noted between tb tvo. The 
curses of Zero Inh coroo with the rush of ' ot uni hasty 
words, spoken zn the a ur ot t .e oment. The curses of 
zekiel are cool, calculated -nC well repared. Jora inh 
slight be excused for hi® because they are a result oi is 













■ 

























. 














. 












' 



























- 40 - 


over-enthus!asm. zekiel gare time and thought to the 

ooj* osition of hid ourees and ti.uj full more deeply into 
the error or wishful think lx* • it .^1 ht be »*ore accurate 
to say th. t Jero iah was tb victim of passionate thinking 
whereas i^eklel was tj.e victim of cold dishful thinking* 

.he prophets were human. They were eubjoc- to the 
same rrejudlooe, faults and hasty words that are the lot 
of any human being. At times they Must have given way to 
tfctiir ishes and so ex iresnod them. uch is not surprising. 
Ihs remarkable thing is t! at, belli open to such error, 
there is s: little trace of it in their reatest 
prophecies. 














SOURCES 0? 


raCTHETIC X8SMUATIOI! 






















Chunter IV 


TIT: 30URC83 Op p WH TIC IN/ IKaTI N 

Thus far an attempt lua been made to suggest that, 
in re^t pro Leoy # abnormal psyoholo Icul phenotnenu were 
reduced to a minimum. ostasy, dreams, visions tnd wish* 
ful thlnkin h^fe boon considered and vor- fe traces of 
these t La ve baan found ai ha lit* Pets* 

’ orfeot psyoholo io 1 adjustment a/.d lr to ration has not 
bfi mi claiinod for these .on. It has bean acknowledged that 
they war© huii^n ^nd faulty to the extant hr other 

men* . t the same time it h a o^cn that they 

were rnaii in advance of their time una men ».ho had thou ht 
.ore deeply than the uvar^^a Individual* 

To explain the roat energy and conviction of the 
prophatS tin ter : **r 11 lous complex'* has been proposed. 

It would seers that around th °ocal point of rail iou© 
conviction th abilities and the ener las o the prophets 
revolved. uoh a tiesorlpti n of their personalities 
explains many of the u urently abnormal ti in s about 
them* 

fter ull this has been said there is still left 
an indafinitaneas about t; n description o: their personality 













■ 


























' 



























■ 
























At¬ 


one la Inclined to <.» *k the question as to whether somethin# 
OTf' Positive could be said, hat »re tl sources of their 
lnsr1ration* 

Somethin of the s ne problem presented Itsolf to 
rofeeiior Overstreet in hie book, "About -urBelves" and he 

added a ootcript wherein he undertook to Mat away from the 
uo, atlvu elcuioXits in personality and to t<-lk a'^oui. the 
oaitlve elements. To approach this protista he looked at 
th> : reat eoulu of history to attempt to understand *vhat 
mode th8ff. i.reut. is oonoluaion in that Aien like Jesus 

and ocratss were rest becaue they were expansive 
personalities and b Chuee they rushed the borders o r th^lr 
liviii be yon th^nselves to touch tl lives of other people 
In the case o J .sue h sur ests that his t xpansi ver.osa 
i tic ii . soul t help b 

one, even it the diverse, for the outward sweep of his 
feelin carried hir', into union with thevt vital oneness ho 
galled o Thus Jesus had two sources of inert ration, 

one was s his life touched hi a fe lo ^en u;i the other 
was os his life touched th~ life o o^. 

th professor adds tH s v^r wtilkln definition of 
rreatness, "The rrent inoivlduals hay*’ be* n ret*t booauee 


















































































. 






-4 3 - 


lt one way or another, they huvo rushed beyond the ordinary 

limits of oro . If wlooked for the peculiar element 

Of Or.panslvenear in oh of our heroee we i , , 

brin**; hereon fur nearer ordinary life so that they il^ht 
serve ore effectively as Indications in the lar^e of what 
normal life could be.” 

It would a* ~eur thit. rofe»9or Overstreet has 
analyzed very well the rereonalltv of th" rent rrorhote 
and has su *eat9d the sources of their inspiration. They 
were men of expensive personality y:_j pushed j&ok. tLo 
boundaries o"* their iivln \,o torch tLc Ilfs of i«oa vna the 
lives of their fe^low aien. ro this double contact with 
ultimate reality they derives thtlr reat inr iration. 

ihat the prophets expanded the borders of their 
living to touch tbr» life of God is apparent to those who 
>ead their aessa-yes. o much did their lives touch <:od*s 
th&t they received a profound insight into tie natur of >od 
Under their leaders: ip Yahweh developed from a tribal deity 
who resided on ount inai to a uutijnal Cod who had 
authority wherever his people i.ht settle, from thence 
Yehweh *-.ave proaiee of beco.r.ln the uiversel od as 
conceived in tl hi best insight of Deutero-Isaiah. The 
narrow ritualism of their day became cult'' bnoxious to 

















■ 














tbora f r their lur.* er view of -ou demnuuea that he be 4_lven 
oral action rather than burnt ofrerln 6. 

This constantly expanding vie* or the nature of 
Yahweh becu e the 'r nt ootlvbtlon ol* their Jives. * hey 
now w* re charged with the responsibility of leading the 
people ’.nto a larger view of true roll 'ion. They became 
acutely : re th.it Yu hr* eh hud called them to t;,i6 taak and 
that they wore is me sen era to the ©ople. In a very 
r L sene I - ropheeiee came fr , 

o without equivocation they could deflultely any to the 
people, "Thus ealth Yuhweh". 

In rimes before, s s been su eated previously, 

such a formula was accompanied by its of ecstasy and 
irratl mil states. the re t pro bets these DhenojaenR 

disappeared and the words were used to Indicate a vital 
relatiorshi; with ‘'o'. 

oooi&l uyoholo y hue a tern "folkways" which It 
uses to de^erib,! the nablto, custo s unu traditions of any 
■ ople« D roared 1 

*.ia©e e foUntyi* ihero is e we to speak, 

a way to v/o.-shi" and a way of ^erforriln' tl ort every 
co on .ct of llv• n«*. To viol te n folkway 1? to trin upon 








-43 


one the censure of the ^rou which often u.ounts to 
ostracise*. This Is particularly eo when religious folkways 
ape resent. lhose oftant*© flowly ,.nd, often, at root 
ooat • 

Th r prophet® encountered the folkways of their day 
and outrrew tne?i. Yet thoir v^hloloo of exoroc8ion were 
till the thou ht : imo of the folkwuy. 
old formulae with new mean in . -X. puo^lo v.1. not always 
wu 1/oi< the new i^ciculii hut, i«Oii j a t *«v«w thox*0« 

or instance Isaiah wrote hi- cull accord in to the 

"folkways of the time hut that doea not oioe»n th-t he was 

an eoatstlc or that, he held Kh© sa *e concer t Ion of Yahv/eh 

s did the ordinary ~©r»on of the day. hi t it does reveal 

Is that Isaiah was oeeply o osseous of th. r ality ol' God 

$ 

and tna he understood the moral natur of tt t reality, 
lonr period Of r .t prosperity in the eighth Century B«C« 
htid brought a general lowerin of oral and economic 
standards against which Tsai&b felt called up n to object 
in the neme of "ahweh. Fe saw very clearly that "udah could 
not stand against tho reality o<* invasion in her weakened 
oral condition x*C with her corrv.pt government. The 
people thought that they oo 1: ap ease Yahweh by offering to 
him sacrifices m burnt offerin u >;nd by c lebratin their 













































. 



















. 

' 

. 

. 




. 













- 46 - 

S •• 1 fuit but b l \%Xf 9 

Yahweb demanded otiv . 

lheoe thou hta hr.d to h ve q focal rolnt ‘.bout w loh 
to ooncontrato themselves before tho pro'hot co Id bo 
organised for uotlon. The crisis or the tioe of late-ration 

car:* on© day whan ItMiah sat in tho temple contemplating 
the holiness ana th< ?•.. 1 :;-»lf 

-©it hie own c *.i It and had to experience u rold©6o to fore he 

0 . L'iQ 

he was ready to act. 

The experience of Taalsh i« described (Ieeleh 6) 
aco the folicway o' tfc© day and with tolling effect- 

lveness, ho aririt of his &X7©rienoe certainly could not 

o - i i 1 , : !v ..i V v f •' t' the day. 

Ifce propheta were vary conscious of the praaeuce of 
Yutoreh in their liv^s and felt ti *t Le was direct in - tbeir 
actions, in rofessor )verstro t f a terminology the w rushed 
baoV: the boundaries of their own ego ^nd touched tho 
diria* life of the nlvere*. The boundaries o'* their e^oa 
wore ^ushsd bick in another direction, too, for they brought 
their understanding of T hweh to boar upon tho practical 
politics ot tho day, Ih<j pro. hots *ere ot only ~en of 











' 
















■ 


■ 












































- 47 - 


God but they v;ere statesmen lb well. Accordingly the second 
source of their Inspiration wus derived fro. a deep 
consciousness of the needs of mankind as indlvidu la nd as 
u nation. Ahus there was built up in the pro bets a moral 
judgment that *as unique amongst the Jhiidren of Israel. 

It is, of course, difficult to te.ll where the moral demand 
of Yahweh ceased and the cryin social needs of the people 
be^an for the two arc complenientary. Both are a tremendous 
source of nspircjtion. 

The prophets were not always correct in their 
prophecies, and that is of little moment, but they were 
always correct when they spoke of the moral demands of 
Yahweh. Ezekiel, Jeremiah and beutero-Isuiah all foretold 
the return of the 0 ildren of Israel from exile. They rise 
to lyrical heights waen th©3 r describe th. pa ce, prosperity 
and happiness that will attend the return. Yahweh is to 
direct the return and it will be -ood for the people. The 
aotual history of the return is far from eoceful and 
comfortable. The records found in ive a^nple 

evidence of confusion «nd su.l luring. herein w~r« the prophet 
at fault. This optimistic note was .x>t the heart of the 
message about the return, however. The keynote of the 
messa 8 was that the people must mend their ways and obey 
the "oral dictates of Yahweh so that be might be abl* to 














'M ■ 





















' 


' 









r 














































oarry out ’ plana Tor Israel. 

*he :oral ana s irituul povs ty of the rtiessu o of 
the defeated ana frustrated -ukJwJ la clear to the care¬ 
ful reader of hie oraclea. Yet even this prophet rises to 
vine* 00 tea heirhts of .ioraj adnonltlon when he writes 
(56i2£f.), "I will tve you n now notvro arid I will out a 
now spirit In you, T .11 take away your hard nature and 
Ive you a nature tret can bo touched, T will put my own 
Irlt ItMl OU, r will ; ake you live v y ny lewe f and you 
shall obey and observe ay orders." 

±Le Inal Ut of neutero-f ealah in*. ir<*9» him ;rediot 
erroneously th^t harpy days . re ahead lor those who 
returned fre exile, iho eternal truth of his aessa e t 
however, Is intensely oral when ho reviews the causes for 
Cereel’s trouble# (bOjl), "tfhat writ 11 r ever 

hand to your other? henever did | rart with you or sell 
you to bosh? creditor 0 * was for your evil doin s that you 
were sole 1 , •twee for your bibb t at our other van 
divorced.'* (50:1). 

Here is a human element In uil prophecy n<2 because 
of that c ro to 'obleme is under¬ 

standable. Vhe 1 ort r.t t>o\ nt lies at l r the f-*ct that 











. 






















, 
























. I 




\ 



























- 49 - 


there were <3Ifferenees In the rredlotlons as to th© way 
t In s would happen, but In the fnct that the ropl.ato were 
In oo.lete u; cord e*»e©):1n o'* orul issues, zeklel 

(^b»prt. o' seen * pr»ytn til 

arutlee uyu'nat ti»e oLildren of isruol i'orucabts a 

tremendous buttle tfi.it is to ensue. j and will be 

defeated utterly and the arms that the hosts will leave 
behind will be sufficient tor firewood for yt 
The victory Is Ivon to lei'ae" by Yahweh for one purpose and 
that is to show the ower end the influence j!’ the true il a 
to cause of th -r:at victory people .111 be, induced to turn 
froni their evil v,uy» and follow *n all-*'owarfui ',od. 

ite ul ferent 1. t.e rloture that ©utero-Isuluh 
pelBte* is lo* ty e ree tl Lc 

lnsip.bt in the 31d Testa ent. There ib victory 

predicted for Israel but all that v e has to nroclse is a 

series of lndif Itles and wron s and suf* r!ii a. rbese the 
’•’111 s. .. , »y 

become the rede ptlve of Yabweh In the -orld. Her 

rrs&t reward will he in kuowlTK' that . Lac ~orved od in 
a ost effective lbe ^reat ufferto . ervunt 

passages (Isaiah 52:13 to the ead of chapter b3) '-;lve5 a 

very heart-searching description of what is to oo h. 














- 50 - 


It should be noted that the purpose of the root 
victory an: the purpose or tr.o r ;st sufferine arc 

Lf to lead th poo 11 to .inweiw rho 

prophets treed different roads. oh w J. s In the way that 

>1 ' loads la« u< 

vr^cted# ho 1 ort nt point la th t they botfe 
arrive at the ssrvi c^noluoioa. 

uch the au’ife thine occurs in the rophociec of 

. !..-:>•! v ) r.. 

Isaiah {33:50} ^sse- U that voj?uuui«fl a 111 net be disturbed 
end will live in <:et*oe, "u tent vrhoot pe a Are never 
pulled j: , . 080 ropea re never rent." ioah has a 
different idea for hi proclalma the destruction of 
<Teruaaie~w *0 says (3:18), "•Sion eh 1 be a plowed field, 
J.Ta 3nl3~ shall be a heap ruins, the te-plr hill a mere 
needed heiyht." 

Such a difference is nor 11 ihle In tho ultima to 
analysis. hat i. important is thut the_r oonce tlo. of 
true roll ion as b un a oral d? ana of V^hweb does not 
a If for. -us tii d& o saiah (l:lif.) f!n con¬ 
firmation i tie "erfect definition of reli lo iv«n by 
icah (6:8), n hat does 'V.-wch sfr frn ou tut to bo just 
' * . ** 








. 














■ 


























. 
















. 




' 
















■ 







•ui* 

. indlcutlOii tnat ta* Inspiration of t ho 

prophets com* fr the exik.iidln ?f their lives to touch 
the common life of the world Ik sern tu the *x»erlence of 
909&i hit of the oon 11 ct In hie parson >1 lty between 
love tirni Ju tlce oor.es on*? of t> • rede. t oraJ conceptions 
of n od known to roan, 'la sens of Justice de nded that 
Ms unfaithful wife be left to suffer the sIbt ry of 
itltut Lae ehe libel e i way* 

is deep love for his ki fe ua^u mu w> bna* )^r beck 
lato Ms hone, cut ef that oor.rHd Cu... tua idee of 

: v a ..... 

establish her in h r ureas touted place but she first of all 
•.» t o K.i'-r >i .. ^riod of purl lci.tion ana rapantanas* 

If man did this would not fMiweh do Infinitely ore for hla 
errinr people? ’•Come let ua return uuto Yahweh; for be 
lnMh torii und he will heel us; ne hath b itten, and he will 

blx^a US Up • d • 1 ) • 

heTerence bus already teen made in this section to 
Isaiah uuJ to the way in which he found the integration of 
hie idot « by centerin' them in .oral cod. It may be 
well to couple with that the impetus that wee lven to his 
cnro8r by Ms contact with the rradical affairs of the 
tLue. is first dexand w.i^ for tic reformation ol the 






















' 







■ 






j 
















Y 








































- 


social iau oral life of the uo 11 j t i i* at uses of 
th© reigns of Jcrtibotun XI and Uzsiali mlht bt abolished. 

^ hen ha lmilcd tr.o threatened lnv aion by tho ' aeyriau ho s t b 
ab u warning from Yuhwjh, but with great »agaoity counselled 
Ing Ahaz not to surrender to 'isayria. He was confident 
that Yahweh would look .fter hla own. k h«.z would not listen 
and became a vassal of \ 33 yria. force twenty-five yeara 
later Teaifih felt celled upon to purport soyria and 
demand that the nation remain true to her allegiances and 
not to revolt because '^gypt appeared t- have the present 
auvunta a. . nation Mi^ulu honour nar -^roo-onta, aMd the 

oral stall li t . m j:at» ' c ... 

prorhet foretells ^reat doom for his oountry because of her 
faithlessness. Later, when Assyria advanced a din, he 
once ore bade the country remain steadfast and r sist for 
ha had aith J h t Y fcweh would still • rotect is own. 
Sa&aaaharll « '■ aruaalaai s apart 

rhere la no renter statesman in Hebrew history 
than 1 aiah. If .it: cle^r, ornl In ;ghts had boon followed 
the people would have been aavod a lot of suffering. It 
was ..in clear sense of justice comb! ed /.1th hie Intense 
reli lous faith that inspired him to s^oak. Of course he 
was unpopular tut ho made a. lastin Impression upon Ms 

















. 























.. 






























































a/re 


?S3- 

Jereuiiah, who reuka first a^on^ tne *i*o*/i*jta in the 
matter of or3onu; roii^iou, vu. s uot only man o ou but 
bo wee also a eta to arum with grtal . ,. i.. 

t.1 i»i i aapj r^a, 

- 

.aayria xnd rypt war* In the throea or de^th ns world 
powers and the 3 tar of Babylon was risin ra idly. Fa lest in* 
wet* the buffer at.-te th. t fait the impact of nil these 
ehari: ee. lakln flu cue fro his erson&l Knowledge it od 
end from <* rout unoerstand in f the life of cwn # 

Jere. lab sav, that his land coul not nosai^ly stand unless 
the people cooperated ith Y hweh to build a nation after 
his law, coord Ir ly the prophet struck out in a vl orous 
attack gainst ornreselon, trickery, inJu3tloe, untruth 
and covetousne. i . ne was a I ion 

he included the prophets who did not r- ally spent the word 
or iahweh (6:io-17% 

Jereaiah considered Pima If a sun ©f destiny (1*5) 
by the decree of Yfr-hweh who atfieotea him e^en b< fore he 
wee torn, od ayed against a 

host le *or!d (lif* t 18, ltf). e was a very sensitive 
personality but so real w r the demands of Yahweh tnat 
h* overcame his retirin disposition and s* oka out coldly 





■ 


. 
















. V , 


■ 






. 










-M- 


TJ is oonvictior of Y'hweh *s inaiatonoe on h!e service c^ive 
Jeremiah v sense of deer* personal relationship with the 
divine, Tn a way it was also a matter of compensation and 
reaction against the priestly class for, although of a 
priestly family in Anathotb, he was not of the tenmle 
priesthood. This barred him on the one hand fniL social 
equality v/ith the temple priests and on the other hand from 
free association with the laity. ov~i-wo^punaaoion 

drove him from his l^aited sphere or activity inw a wioor 
sphere and into a bitter condemnation oi tne society tn^t 
caused his situation. 

The point of release for JereTiah came when the 
Scythian hordes swept towards alestina. It was the hand 
of Yahweh. The pronhetic measure was ’’repent or perish", 
and he declared that the Scythians were agents of Yahweh 
so that a reformation mi^ht be effected. A set back came 
when the threat of the barbarians failed to materialize. 

The shock of the failure cf ; is prophecy to work was offset 
Inr his conviction that Yahweh had ,1ust delayed punishment 
for a while. He then asked for rejentance while yet there 
was time. 

The reforms of Josiah in 621 S.C. must have found 
favour with Jeremiah for he constantly pleaded for a unity 




■ 

. 

. . . 

. 

. 

. 










. 


■ . . : " 



• .5 





-£> 5 - 


of urpoau betvtacin .wj people (7:22-24). iho 

yours taut followed t*.,* atn of Josiah *.eie unhappy ^nd 
disturbed Qa^olftlly whoa ths nation t*e>jan court tht 
f •'• *UT 83 t. ~. ylou < . %) rjc*t f Jure .i h* 

a ruin sev’ the hand of Tuirweh work in* out untahnient to his 
orrlr children. f?c laboured to free ' the nation faithful 
to her allegiance to babylon and when the siege of 
ruw^.K,... ►; r*\i \ \t dad(>tivoa or tho futur • 

-hr*n cm o the firr.t tiepox'tntlon onri the vacillations 

of :.«dekS It v. *» v-.:is alv.ayi» -‘teyjtVi >o curry the favour 

kept a clos* watch on Vryot and h<*r vosHibillties. t suoh 
trm oh ry for -tb L co..:v vory lndi-nant and assured the 

people that Yuhvef bad rr os" for dishonesty and lntrlrulng 
;he favour of Yahwefc could only be received if the nation 
war. uprl *ht **ru? <ncrnl. v< -i. thou h the oc evonts called 
forth his greatest , reaching (2&;i-v and 20:1-22) yet the 
prophet uu unable to stow the tide of revolt. The result 
was that /eruoalea vmo dootroyod. 

Jere lah -uat hove rufferrd erectly both spiritually 

hyslc: LI ■ ' ' ' : ■>■■)■■ i 

than forty yeuro he Uad spoken out of a deep devotion to 
hie :cc on the one hand and cut of i oou prehensile view of 








. 






















. 




. 
























' 






















-Dfl- 

huftt- n affairs on th other. ‘1 f: iti In ©5 r.rct Mo faith 
In th© ultimate redemption of ir.un woe at? 11 the oourcc of 
Mu ( rotitest hope. yen to .ia lust breat*. he wuq 

■ 

return ;if;uin to hiu ^m.i, Is finol meeue^e fr~ , Yahweh 

fellow MH f | f 

asith Yftihweh, *1 will rut .ay law in thoir inward porta and 
in their » be. ’ii writs it, and T wll thoir i 
I jople. ,w (31s31*39)• 

i Iti rtaltiti tlM n 9 

ouncer&s. The first v;.» for the welfare ef the *ord of 
luhweU as th od cf the C. ildren of Israel who dsaundad 

not ritual adoration but vortl .etion. ihu aecun *ua for 
the welfare of the nation of Israel that aho ould oboy 
the laws *oi an? t us prosper. Cut of then© t-vc cone* me 
^rew their reat ins irt. + lon. 

1-eet cfce lit' re salon be loft that the oro bate can b© 
explained entirely fr:.»2. th* e two sources it ".at be stuted 
thnt there is on. ' jt ooarc. of Ins.lratloa th t aoea not 
per it of investl \ tioxi. hat in ibt .... *;>t be ailed the 

eupra-ration 1 source. 'r. oV or ords a ter 11 baa i?oen 
wri" ter: there. 1 y t r ^ in elements th t oai. ot b* s:. ^lalnod 
or eren described. hy the roat rroptete were rrouped at 











— / ij 

/ *" 


oii© p*rtioul*x »tu. b in titu hf itcry o the <oxld utili 
•iudes u dsflnit ex;,least! *«. .ore thin t! • .^.i-.ace 

c/ , t r>o.sreaie,ci fttStfeOTSO Rtphoil ou/. b* fully 

explained can the >:r r<?u ranee o' t.fc> pro hots, i’hat, 
however, passes out or the present field intj the# nr ct 
philosophy uii. tt'-olo'-y. 

‘ 

whether the rrcphetH inu irctioj via roat or wfcot:er it 
was auaall» It has I n r oo nlzed th it thee an re 
possessed o j' human nature an-* therefore partook of Itr 

not untruor.ei *d ; y ^beir earthly raeorir~s. ;>orae rrophetr 

tat. I 

stood Jit the rertln" of religious ways. on : thes- ways 

led to a national r^ll^ion which interrreted history as * 
medium through wnich the aivia* r**venl«ci It. ?lf for the 

ur-ose of exaltic e chosen people. iht other t »y led to 
a re.ll Ion that *us personal, practical and universal. In 
this type of religion the ui>lne conceived aa entering 
into history to establish a relationship with the soul of 
man thus giving to naan a weep c neeru for and for his 
f in.- ii^tlo.. c. ci pros ts lad tht I to 
point towards the sue, nd way, some wort v*ry dsfi itr 
it and others groped in th.nt direction. Ths 













-5o- 

wore loath to folio a tb « direction j f prophitlo lospl ration 
for It8 ieiinds wcro too r*.*t. Iney c’ os* r^thor t.o torn 
away from the propb tlo asaa-e aad to follow th* /?av of 
narrow nationalism which *‘ouni its lo leal oonolualon In a 
r l L , i . * t ' r 

tho fifth century :<.G. 

3 the inspiration of xh jrr at pr o;hets too .ie«ik 
that It lid not pro parr? the ay for It a par atuation? .«oma 
centuries later two men op pea rod -- Join* th^ r»aptltt and 

rath* rt, 

continuation of tho prophetio line. ±hs attempt to 
understand .ntf explain thf»e two characters would be far 
I or® OO’OpleX 1 :*2 • 

Ihese men r erpetuatab and enhanaad true pro hstle lasrlrntio 
Jesus of azarsth raise it to such a heirht that a r\e<. 
religion a oaraci in th«.- worth. 

.he Christian jhurch id duj^osedi tho inheritor of 
the prophe ic tradition and inspiration, yet it 13 
eternally in aan^er of wanderIn ir*xc . staril ritualism 
r.,. o° for ettin th * .veif l tier matters of ethics nd 

od. 

True pro hello inspiration, ow ver, it always in a 









-bft- 


poaitioii 01 potential powur. ui ou- u^unUaliy inspires 
.an, and tt:a r.eoda of iuii± utaii»»i j ius*lr* uii« ®ew*xdv© 
to is ari'* to tilts is forever adc»«c that plus *nluii 
ffiak-i3 tr-.e future un; redid *ble. 









BlBLIOOfU IfY 


^navolonedta Brit, .nn?©a - dl<r,v«nth aitioxi - rtlolae on 

o:*ta»y, irunco and ^utel<* ay. 

i o: < > i4i LI clou LiSi»f Yol* 7U» tlola on 

ilia; ii .Mnn ( *»*otci.tnnt Boctrtna by 

j. 5trf.tU.it. 


yvs holo l c ; 1 > ^rue?? 


roe, C.A. 


iiurt, fte i'i; ** rd 


r T .. I I , 

T r.lreroity of Clilan^O thbb, CMoaro, 
1317, 

t 

nlvorelt rose, 0* <br1 df*, 1930. 


xYennin ar, >arl 


t J i U 

it r® . ■ f, *®i oi■ c., 1941 • 


Overstreet, . . 


. 

. . I9C., 9V v ork, 1925 


v«r*trfi*t, . . W*■ OiT* 

. . orton t do* r nc., f :*n York, 1927 

r, . rc /d tv- 

t K: tn?Ts, 

* >r : r. e, ; on - 1 Oo •, ondon, 1925. 

■ i . . L 

3.C.M. resa, 1ondon, 1932, 


. chaffer, L. . 

st.a>..li>TGI£LGGY, 



rec.f d i , • 


Schaffer, ... : r * 

w - *-A-» V- . -.4 >-■■ /-« 4 f 



nau^hton, ii; iin co i*w YorU f 

1936 

jjG»iey r . C., 

TxO- :*r. . G-YCOCLGCY, 
too* Uc • Umla Ltd., London, 

1925 















Old Featn- out loferenefts 


v, . . T 1 , 


Kent, C.F. 

Chuo. aribncr’o Jone, 1920. 

i'CJV. UjT, 7.4.. 

, 

Columbia Uni*#ratty r«ea, aw York, 

1924, 

Fowlor, : .r« 

.. iliTGSY 03* TOE LlfEiUiTURS or 

I NT I ' .• J , 

ac llljn 3o., ve York, 1.927. 

leklra, ' ♦ 

090, nildi) h Unwin, LU«, ■ondon, 1026. 

Oantorloy cnfl 
>Xoblnsou, 

a rx Tonr nr irmsL, 

ClfJtr*v6on r<ics, Oxford, 1932. 

iobin*oa, ; „ . 

T , 

, . 

sikinn©?, J. 

T : *CY J ESLIGIO , 

lv. rjlty riMStf, ;^:;br*ld •«, 1922. 

u,! > 'th, i R* 

- . I i. 1 i , 

tea Oh* a. luct , lon4o» # 1907. 

Sulth, g# . . 

'nut** ryw*** ~ i - r . . 

. “ ■ J iMlV - 41.*.-' * 44. 

ulveirtity of .r iua^c ;rc*s, c; lea^o, 
1925. 

S 1th, J. 

?•« ' -HO .HOT ;i:i PBOBL^S, 

rlwe Scribner*® >ns, ev» > »ork, 1916 

Sr1th, a.A- 

“Tv r»00i' 71X7 TV7LVK 770 ' P7 r fl, (2 vol 

•"•-7071707* ' ; , 

.0. i atroT-' $ Oon, T-aw ork, 1*396. 











































