






For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


@X UBBW 



















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/qualitativeanalyOOyoun 


3UU 


A QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS OF READING 
v ACHIEVEMENT IN EDMONTON SCHOOLS 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 


CAMPBELL YOUNG 
April, 1956 








UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and do 
recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for acceptance, a 
thesis entitled, n A Qualitative Analysis of Reading Achievement 
in Edmonton Schools, 11 submitted by Campbell Young, B. Educ., in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master 
of Education* 


April, 


1956 . 















ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


This thesis was made possible by the assistance, guidance, 
and cooperation of many people to whom the writer is greatly 
indebted. He is particularly grateful to Dr. G. M. Dunlop for 
his constant, stimulating help and encouragement during the 
course of the study. Thanks are expressed to Dr. R. E. Rees 
for his assistance in the early development of the thesis and 
to the other members of the committee, Dr. S. C. T. Clarke and 
Mss L. D. Baker, for their helpful advice and constructive 
criticism. 

Appreciation is extended to the teachers, principals, and 
educational leaders of Alberta whose cooperation made this survey 
possible. Finally, the writer wishes to express appreciation to 
the following persons for their help in the completion of the work: 
Mrs. I. E. Wells, Mr. G. G. Harman, and the wife and family of the 
writer. 


iii 







fC, \ 


, J: ■ 6 
















SYNOPSIS 


The primary purpose of this investigation was to determine the 
status of reading achievement of randomly selected samples of grade 
four and grade seven pupils in the Edmonton school system. Secondary 
aims of the study included a comparison of sex differences in reading 
achievement in the sample groups and an assessment of the value of 
the testing instruments used. 

The mean raw scores obtained by each sample for Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, and their seven components, were compared with the 
test norms, Reading achievement of boys and girls was compared and 
the differences tested for significance, A naive study was made of 
the percentages of correct scores of the above groups for the sub¬ 
components of the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties, The 
distributions of scores attained by the two samples for Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, Total Reading, and their seven components were tested 
for skewness. 

The mean scores of the samples exceeded test norms for the main 
sections of the test and the estimated norms of the seven component 
parts, with the exception of grade seven Mathematics, Scores made 
by each sample in the seven components of the tests revealed a 
variation in individual grade placement of more than seven grades, 
Reading strengths and weaknesses were suggested by the results in 
the sub-component tests. Evidence showed that sex differences in 
general reading ability were insignificant except for a few of the 


iv 













„ 














■ 




1 




































component skills* The normality of the distributions of scores for 
Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading suggests that the tests, 
on the whole, are good. However, departures from normality in the 
distributions of scores for certain of the components of the tests 
suggest a cautious approach in their use as diagnostic instruments* 




V 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PROBLEM. 1 

Introduction 1 

Survey Testing ................... 2 

Diagnostic Testing U 

Provincial Survey ......... . • • 6 

The Present Investigation ....... . 6 

Summary. 7 

II. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND TESTING INSTRUMENTS ...... 8 

The Sample ........... . ..... 8 

The Design of the Experiment ............ 9 

Diagnosing Reading Strengths and Weaknesses .... 10 

Sex Differences . 11 

Goodness of the Tests . ......... 11 

The California Reading Test ............ 16 

Summary and Conclusions .. 17 

III. RELATED STUDIES .. 19 

Testing for Reading Achievement .......... 19 

Diagnosis and Remedial Reading ........... 22 

Sex Differences in Reading Achievement ....... 23 

IV. STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES IN THE READING OF 

EDMONTON CHILDREN .. 29 

Presentation of the Grade Four Data ........ 29 

Presentation of the Grade Seven Data. 33 


















































CHAPTER PAGE 

Conclusions Relating to Grade Four Achievement . # . 38 

Conclusions Relating to Grade Seven Achievement • « 39 

General Conclusions ••••••••••«••«*• hO 

V. SEX DIFFERENCES .................... U3 

Comparison of Reading Achievement of Grade Four 

Boys and Girls bh 

Test for Significant Differences of Girls* and 

Boy’s Scores » ... , . « ... . h7 


Comparison of Percentages of Correct Responses of 

Grade Four Boys and Girls for the Diagnostic 

Analysis of Learning Difficulties • «.»••••» b9 


Conclusions for Grade Four • ... • • 5l 

Comparison of Reading Achievement of Grade Seven 

Boys and Girls • 52 

Test for Significant Differences of Scores of 

Grade Seven Boys and Girls.. . .. 57 


Comparison of the Percentages of Correct Responses 
of Grade Seven Boys and Girls for the Diagnostic 


Analysis of Learning Difficulties . , ..* 59 

Conclusions for Grade Seven 61 

General Conclusions «•••• . ••••• 62 

VI. GOODNESS OF THE TESTS ................. 6U 

Introduction 4 .. 6b 

6b 


vii 


Grade Four Sample 


















T 












CHAPTER 


PAGE 


Grade Seven Sample. 6? 

Conclusions for the Elementary Test, Form AA , . » , 68 

Conclusions for the Intermediate Test, Form AA . . * 70 

General Conclusions , , . •••••••••» 70 

VII. CONCLUSIONS AMD RECOMMENDATIONS ............ 71 

Strengths and Weaknesses in the Reading of 

Edmonton Children 71 

Sex Differences .. . * . . 72 

Grade Four ...... . 72 

Grade Seven . 73 

Comparisons of Grade Four and Grade Seven ...... 7k 

Goodness of the Tests ... , « 7? 

Recommendations , . 7 6 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ........... . ........... 78 



























LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I* Rank Order of the Major Reading Abilities • .••••• 13 

II* Sex Differences in Silent Reading on the I 9 I 4 .O Iowa 

Every-Pupil Tests of Basic Skills . *.. * * 25 

III* Sex Differences in Reading on the 19t0 Iowa Every- 

Pupil Tests of High School Achievement ....... 26 

IV*' Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Four in 

Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading with 
California Reading Test Norms for Grade Placement 

b.9 ........................ 29 

V. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores in the Seven Components 

for Grade Four with the Norms Estimated from the 
Diagnostic Profile at Grade Placement U.9 * * . * • 30 

VI* Scores Obtained by the Grade Four Sample for the Major 

Sections and the Seven Components of the Diagnostic 
Profile * . .......... . 31 

VII* Percentage Ratings of Correct Responses for Grade Four 
Students for the Components and Sub-components of 
the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties . * 32 

VIII* Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Seven in 

Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading with 
California Reading Test Norms for Grade Placement 

7.9 ........... . . ....... 33 

IX* Comparison of Mean Raw Scores in the Seven Components 

for Grade Seven and the Norms Estimated from the 
Diagnostic Profile at Grade Placement 7.9 * . * * * 3b 

X. Scores Obtained by the Grade Seven Sample for the 

Major Sections with the Seven Components of the 
Diagnostic Profile . . 35 

XI. Percentage Ratings of Correct Responses for Grade 

Seven Students for the Components and Sub-Components 
Included in the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning 
Difficulties ...... . ......... 37 





























TABLE 


PAGE 


:XII. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Four Boys 
in Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading 
with the California Test Norms for Grade 
Placement lu9 •. ......... 

XIII. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Four Girls 
in Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading 
with the California Test Norms for Grade 
Placement iup 


XIV. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores of Grade Four Boys 

and Girls in Vocabulary* Comprehension and 

Total Reading . . ..... „ . . 

XV. Comparison of the Mean Raw Scores for Grade Four 

Boys with the Estimated California Norms for the 
Seven Components . . ... 

X7I, Comparison of the Mean Raw Scores for Grade Four 
Girls with the Estimated California Norms for 
the Seven Components ..«•••••• . ... 


XVII. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores Between Boys and Girls 
in Grade Four for the Seven Components of the 
California Reading Test ............... 

XVIII. The Significance of the Differences of the Mean Scores 
Obtained by the Grade Four Boys and Girls in 
Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading . . . ♦ » 

XIX. The Significance of the Differences of the Mean Scores 

Obtained by the Grade Four Boys and Girls in the 
Seven Components of the Diagnostic Profile ...... 

XX. Percentage Ratings of Correct Responses for Grade Four 

Pupils for the Components and Sub-Components of the 
Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties . . . . . 


XXI. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Seven Boys in 

Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading with the 
California Test Norms for Grade Placement 7.9 » . . 

XXII. Comparison of Mean Raw Scores for Grade Seven Girls in 

Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading with 
the California Test Norms for Grade Placement 7«9 « 






U5 


k6 

H6 

k7 

k8 

U8 


50 

53 

53 


x 




































TABLE 


PAGE 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XIX. 

XXXI. 


Comparison of Mean Raw Scores of Grade Seven Boys 
and Girls in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and 
Total Reading . . ............... 5U 

Comparison of the Mean Raw Scores for Grade Seven 
Boys with the Estimated California Worms for 
the Seven Components ...... . ..... 55 

Comparison of the Mean Raw Scores for Grade Seven 
Girls with the Estimated California Worms for 
the Seven Components ... ... 55 

Comparison of Mean Raw Scores of Boys and Girls in 
Grade Seven for the Seven Components of the 
California Reading Test ............... 56 


The Significance of the Differences of the Mean Scores 
Obtained by the Grade Seven Boys and Girls in 
Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading ..... 57 

The Significance of the Differences of the Mean Scores 
Obtained by the Grade Seven Boys and Girls in the 
Seven Components of the Diagnostic Profile ...... 58 

Percentage Ratings of Correct Responses of Grade Seven 
Students for the Components and Sub-Components of 
the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties ... 60 


Skewness of Scores of Vocabulary and Comprehension 
Sections and The Seven Components of the Diagnostic 
Profile of the Test for Grade Four ♦ ... 65 

Skewness of Scores of Vocabulary and Comprehension 
Sections and the Seven Components of the Diagnostic 
Profile of the Test for Grade Seven .. 67 


xi 



























CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM 

1. Introduction 

Since reading is probably the most important skill to engage the 
attention of the school beginner, the progress of pupils in this subject 
must be under constant examination. Within a few weeks after instruction 
begins, individual differences in reading become apparent. As the 
children progress through the grades, differences tend to increase to 
a startling degree. Wrightstone^ found a spread of at least five grades 
in reading ability of 6581 third grade pupils in New York City. In a 

p 

similar study of 11,178 grade VIIA pupils, he found an even greater 
dispersion in reading grade scores, ranging from below grade five to 
better than grade twelve. 

The great range of levels of reading ability found in a single 
grade shows clearly the unsuitability of teaching as though all were 
of equal competence. In each class there is need for instruction at 
several levels of development. Concentrating upon the middle group 
results in loss for the superior and the inferior readers, who find 
themselves less able to benefit from the instruction. It is essential 


J. W. Wrightstone, Analysis of Intelligence and General Achieve¬ 
ment , Third Grade Classes (New York City) , March and May, 19^9; 
referred to by Leonard Wood, Educational Psychology , Third Edition; 
Edited by C. E. Skinner, New York, Prentice Hall inc., 1951» p» ^5* 

^J. W. Wrightstone, Analysis of Results: Survey of Intelligence 
and Reading Ability in 7 A Classes , Junior High Schools, February,19^7> 
Leonard Wood, Educational Psychology , Third Edition; Edited by C.E. 
Skinner, New York: Prentice Hall Inc., 1951» P« ^86. 



















for the teacher to know the level at which the child can operate 
effectively. Then he can be placed with a group working near his 
own reading level. 

Testing of achievement to permit early detection of superiority 
or weakness in reading is extremely important. Periodically the 
teacher may make an informal evaluation to check the progress of the 
class and its individual members. For a more precise measure standardized 
survey tests will serve the purpose better. Tests express the general 
level of reading achievement in useful age, grade, and percentile scores. 
Exposure of general areas of weakness may demand the more exact probing 
of a diagnostic test to uncover specific reading defects. With this 
information the teacher may plan more effectively to provide for the 
needs of both class and individual. 

2. Survey Testing 

In the words of Cronbach, survey tests "are used to screen people 

who could be helped by remedial teaching, to predict success in courses, 

and to check whether poor reading explains a subject’s poor performance 

3 

on a group mental test." They appraise student achievement and furnish 
important insights which are of aid in guidance of pupils toward defined 
objectives. Survey tests, such as the California Achievement Tests and 
the Iowa Every“pupil Tests of Basic Skills, sample more of the formally 

~3~" ——~ j 

-^Lee J. Cronbach, Essentials of Psychological Testing , New York, 
Harper and Brothers, 19^9» p. 287. 







3 


defined outcomes of our programme of studies in Alberta, The norms for 
such tests are carefully established from very large populations. When 
these are compared with locaD. results, the teacher or administrator is 
provided with valuable information concerning individual or group 
achievement. 

Test results can assist the administrator in securing a broad 
overview of the total educational situation. After tabulation of the 
scores and computation of the medians of school grades, comparisons 
can be made on a grade-for-grade basis with the norms provided by the 
test makers. The emphasis of the whole programme of instruction may be 
changed as a result of the findings derived from such tests. The re¬ 
teaching of skills already mastered may be avoided. The teaching of 
too advanced material may be prevented. The discovery of specific 
reading weaknesses throughout the system may point the way to a 
programme of remedial teaching in designated skills. 

Cronbach mentions four weaknesses of reading survey tests: 

(1) The scores on rate and comprehension are often inter¬ 
dependent, so that the pupil can raise one at the expense of the 
other. When only a single ‘rate of comprehension* score is obtained, 
the score is influenced by the subject’s tendency to read cautiously 
which will raise or lower his score relative to others. 

(2) Tests supposed to measure comprehension are often heavily 
speeded, so that they are strongly influenced by rate of reading. 

Such tests are of little value for diagnosing, although they are 
good predictors. 

(3) The reading test covers only a selected range of content, 

yet reading ability varies somewhat with different materials.. 

(4) Many tests measure onljr a limited type of comprehension .. 
Some reading tests measure only the simplest type of comprehension, 
whereas others demand deep and thorough interpretation. A survey 
test cannot measure all types of comprehension separately, which 
makes it important to use a test measuring the type of reading 
with which one is concerned. 


Ibid. , pp. 


288-289. 













i .. 

■ • . .. ■ ■ 




















' - ■ - '•>: : . 


r 

, 


■ 















4 


Survey tests are ordinarily intended to represent a student*s 
general level of reading development. They concern themselves with 
broader aspects and do not measure ability to employ the fundamental 
elements of reading skill* The attempt to identify particular causes 
of weakness seems to follow logically the discovery of general 
deficiency. The need to inquire into the sources of reading in¬ 
adequacies has stimulated the construction and use of a more exact 
measuring instrument, the diagnostic test. 

3. Diagnostic Testing 

Diagnostic measurement may contribute materially to the improve¬ 
ment of reading*. Diagnosis may be vague and general or it may be 
quite exact. The more accurate our diagnosis., the more likely we are 
to strike directly at the heart of the trouble. Careful diagnosis may 
be a lengthy process but it will usually result in a net saving of 
time. 

Before attempting diagnosis, some of the more common, causes of 
incompetence in reading should be considered by the teacher. Briefly, 
these include insufficient practice, improper methods of work, 
deficiency in fundamental skills, absence of interest, physical, defects, 
and subnormal intelligence. 

There are a number of naive diagnostic methods which the teacher 
may employ. Some of these are: teacher observation, a study of the 
developmental history of the student, contrasting the methods and 
achievements of the successful students with the weaker students. On 
the other hand, a good diagnostic test will reveal specific areas of 




5 


weakness by means of which the teacher will be guided more accurately 
in the formation of effective remedial programmes of study. 

We might expect the most accurate diagnosis of reading weaknesses 
from individual testing of students. The element of time, however, 
forces us to reserve the use of individual tests for cases demanding 
careful scrutiny. To assist the busy teacher who wants a diagnostic 
instrument which is less time-consuming, survey tests with varying 
diagnostic power have been developed. Examples of this type of test 
include The Iowa Silent Reading Test, The Sangren-Woody Test, and the 
Dvorak and Van Wagenen's Diagnostic Examination of Silent Reading 
Abilities. Of necessity the group tests will measure reading skills 
in less detail than the tests designated for administration to a 
single student. 

Kottmeyer^ states that a diagnostic test differs from a survey 
test in that it gives separate scores for a number of reading abilities 
while a survey test gives but a single score. 

To the degree that they give multiple scores, all tests are diag¬ 
nostic. Reading tests usually include measurement of such basic 
abilities as reading vocabulary and reading comprehension. Some tests 
also score ra.te of reading. 

One of the chief problems in relation to a diagnostic test is the 
reliability of the sub-test scores. Because short tests tend to be 
unreliable, part-scores based on a few test items are of limited value. 

■^W. Kottmeyer, Handbook for Remedial Reading , St. Louis, Webster 
Publishing Co., 194?, p. 79. 







6 


The test as a whole may be reliable, though less faith may be placed 
in the part scores. However, they possess real value if they provide 
suggestions of areas of possible reading difficulty. 

4. Provincial Survey 

In keeping with the theory that reasonably frequent appraisal 
helps to insure the improvement of an instructional programme, a 
survey of reading and language achievement in Alberta schools was 
conducted in May, 1953 by Dr. R. B. Rees and Dr. G. M. Dunlop.^ The 
data obtained from the survey were expected to reveal the levels of 
reading achievement in Alberta schools, the extent to which Alberta 
children approach the test norms, the nature of progress in reading 
after children leave the primary grades, and the relative achievement 
of pupils in different types of Alberta schools. Several studies of 
the data have been completed or are in the course of preparation. 

5. The Present Investigation 

The present investigation is related to Carmichaels? study of 
reading achievement in Alberta. The primary aim of the present study 
is the analysis of the strengths and weaknesses in reading of 192 
grade four students, and 196 grade seven students, randomly chosen 
from the Edmonton school system. Attention will be focused on the 

£ 

°A. Carmichael, A Survey of the Achievement of Alberta School 
Children in Readi ng, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 1954, p. 1. 

7 Ibid. 



























' 



















' 


f 











I 













. 








7 


scores made in reading vocabulary, reading comprehension, their 
seven component parts, and, to a certain extent, the sub-component 
elements. The testing instruments were the California Reading Test, 
Elementary Form AA and The California Reading Test, Intermediate Form 
AA. Secondary aims of the investigation include a comparison of sex 
differences in reading achievement in the sample groups, and an 
assessment of the value of the tests. 

6. Summary 

Reading is one of the most important skills developed in the 
elementary school. Periodic checks of the pupil’s acquisition of 
facility in this skill are important for both teacher and supervisor. 

A survey of reading achievement and a diagnosis of reading difficulties 
will aid the teacher in planning the instruction and especially the 
remedial programme in reading. A number of good survey and diagnostic 
tests are available which, used intelligently, may be of immense value 
in the improvement of reading. 

This investigation aims to discover: 

(1) The strengths and weaknesses in reading of a random sample 
of grade four and grade seven students in the Edmonton school 
system, 

(2) The sex differences in reading achievement in the sample 
groups, and 

(3) The value of The California Reading Test, Elementary Form AA 
and The California Reading Test, Intermediate Form AA. 











' f 


J 









CHAPTER II 


EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND TESTING INSTRUMENTS 

1. The Sample 

A survey of reading and language achievement in Alberta schools 
was conducted in May, 1953. One thousand pupils from each of grades 
four and seven were included. Two hundred pupils from each grade were 
randomly selected from each of the five organizational units: large 
urban, small urban, town, graded rural, and ungraded rural. 

Edmonton was selected to provide the large urban sample. 

Sufficient classes of grade four and grade seven pupils to fill the 

Q 

required sample were drawn according to a table of random numbers. 

All pupils in each class drawn were tested. Surplus answer 
sheets were withdrawn randomly before the tests were scored. With 
these precautions it was hoped to satisfy the criterion of randomness - 
that every individual in the large urban population should have the 
same probability of being chosen for the sample. 

Carmichael^ compared the reading achievement of four types of 
Alberta organizational units with one another and with the California 
Reading Test norms. The present investigation is allied to the main 
study and will concern itself with the large urban sample drawn from 
the Edmonton school system.. 

®E. F. Lindquist, Statistical Analysis in Educational Research , 
Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1940, p. 119-120. 

^Carmichael, on . cit ., p.l. 




















9 


2. The Design of the Experiment 

The data to be used in this study were obtained from the summary 
of scores and the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties on the 
last page of the California Reading Test booklet for each grade four 
and grade seven student. This material was transferred to data assembly 
sheets along with the pupil 1 s name, sex, age, and intelligence score. 
Boys' and girls' scores were recorded on separate data assembly sheets 
to permit more effective study of sex differences. 

In the California test, reading vocabulary and reading comprehension 
are the main fields tested. These are divided and sub-divided into 
component and sub-component parts. The test of vocabulary consists of 
four component parts. The vocabulary section is subdivided into 
seven sub-components in the California Reading Test, Elementary, Form 
AA. The test of reading comprehension consists of three component parts: 
Following Specific Directions, Reference Skills, and Interpretation of 
Meanings. These three components are further sub-divided in the 
Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties into eleven sub-components 
for grade seven, and twelve sub-components for grade four. The results 
obtained for each sub-component of the reading vocabulary and reading 
comprehension sections were recorded in the data assembly sheets. 

This information was utilized to study the three main problems 
set forth for this investigation: reading strengths and weaknesses of 
Edmonton children, sex differences related to reading, and the value of 
















the California Reading Tests. The methods described will refer to the 
grade seven sample. However, the organization and analysis of the grade 
four results followed, in essence, the same plan. 

3. Diagnosing Reading Strengths and Weaknesses 

Mean achievement of the grade seven sample was calculated for the 
total test, the two main sections, the components, and the sub-components 
of the test. The grade seven sample was in the ninth month of their 
grade seven year. Therefore, mean scores in Total Reading, Vocabulary, 
and Comprehension were compared with California Reading Test norms for 
grade placement 7.9. By means of a straight line drawn vertically on 
the diagnostic profile at grade placement 7.9» the norms for the seven 
components were estimated and compared with the sample’s mean component 
scores. Further analysis of the sample's scores for the main sections 
and components of the test provided additional data, such as number of 
perfect scores, range of scores, and median scores. 

The percentages of correct responses attained by the sample were 
calculated in the fifteen components and sub-components of the Diag¬ 
nostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties. A naive analysis of the 
results was made. 

Following an analysis of the reading strengths and weaknesses of 
grade four and grade seven samples, their respective results were 
compared jointly. 





■ : 








= r 




11 


4. Sex Differences 

Boys’ and girls’ scores were grouped separately in the data sheets 
to permit an easier comparison of the reading ability of the tx^o sexes. 
The groups' mean scores for the main sections were compared with the 
California test norms and one another. 

In similar fashion, the groups' mean scores in the seven components 
were compared -with each other and with the estimated norms for the 
diagnostic profile. The significance of the differences in the boys’ 
and girls' mean component scores was tested using the formula 

C.R. = D . 10 
0 ~ D 

The null hypothesis, that there is no significant difference in 
the means of the sex groups, was either accepted or rejected. 

A comparison was made of the boys' and girls' percentages of 
correct responses for each element of the Diagnostic Analysis of 
Learning Difficulties. 

Conclusions were drawn from the findings respecting the relative 
reading ability of the boys and. girls in the two grade levels tested. 

5. Goodness of the Tests 

A study was made of the goodness of the tests in the light of the 
data secured from the Edmonton samples. The distributions of scores in 
Vocabulary and Comprehension and the seven components of the diagnostic 
profile were tested for skewness. 


•**®Henry E. Garrett, Statistics in Psychology and Education , New 
York, Longmans, Green and Co., Inc., 1953* p. 215- 







/ .C f; 


I 










1 














j 








12 


Evaluations of the California Reading Tests advanced by its 
authors and critics were studied and are briefly presented in this 
report. Particular reference is made to one study which gathered data 
from leading specialists in the reading field.^- The author of this 
study found that the reading literature disclosed 214 abilities 
involved in the reading process. The original classification of 214 
abilities was abridged by five leading reading specialists to eighty- 
nine fundamental abilities. These eighty-nine abilities were then 
presented to 109 reading specialists who rated them as highly important, 
important, or unimportant. This rating of the major reading abilities 
is shown in the table below. Added to the table is a column in which 
asterisks indicate whether the skills listed here are included in one 
or other of the two California Reading Tests. 


^K. H. Burkhart, "An Analysis of Reading Abilities," Journal of 
Educational Research , Vol. 38, 1944-45 (Feb.1945)» pp. 430-439. 
















. 










, 






V 




13 


TABLE I 


RANK ORDER OF THE MAJOR READING ABILITIES 12 
(THE COLUMN ON THE CALIFORNIA TESTS WAS 
ADDED FOR THE PURPOSES OF THIS STUDY) 






Reading Abilities 

Rank Order 

California 




'Tests 

1. Observation 



a. 

Visual ability 

6 

* 

b. 

Auditory ability 

18 

* 

c. 

Comprehension 

2 


d. 

Speed 

4 


e. 

Attention 

1 


f. 

Reproduction 

3 

* 

g. ^ 

Perception 

14 


2. Research abilities 



a. 

Ability to locate data 

12 


b. 

Ability to select data 

7 


c. 

Ability to organize data 

11 

* 

d. 

Ability to be stimulated 




creatively 

13 


3. Vocabulary abilities 



a. 

Ability to acquire increas 

:ed 



vocabulary 

5 


b. 

Phonic abilities 

15 

❖ 

c. 

Ability to unlock words 

8 

* 

4. Aesthetic abilities 



a. 

Emotional appreciation 

9 


b. 

Literary appreciation 

17 


5. Hygienic abilities 

16 


6. Oral 

reading abilities 

10 



Burkhart*s study ranks speed as fourth in importance of the 
major reading abilities. The extent to which reading speed is 
involved in the California Tests may be questioned because its 
authors expect at least ninety per cent of the students to finish 
each section at the end of the allotted time. However, it has been 


12 


Ibid , p. 436. 






















14 


discovered that if additional time is given to students, they may 
increase their scores considerably.^ 

It would seem fair to assume that the California Reading Tests 
measure most of those reading skills indicated as important to Burkhart*s 
analysis. One significant exception is the ability to acquire increased 
vocabulary. Another possible exception is its failure to consider 
measurement of reading speed. 

Bloom has also named the essential reading skills. 

These skills are speed of reading; knowledge of word meaning, 
or vocabulary skill; reading for total meaning; reading for central 
thought; reading for comprehension of special factual information; 
the ability to read and comprehend and to organize the material 
that is read; and the ability to read and comprehend and to follow 
precise directions. ^ 

The California Reading Tests would seem to measure reasonably 
adequately these basic skills. 

In addition to basic reading skills such as recognition, 
comprehension, and retention there are complex adaptations of these 
skills which must be developed. Skill is required in the use of the 
index, table of contents, and other aids to finding materials. 

Competence is needed in the selection and evaluation of ideas for use 
in the solving of problems and the carrying out of oral and written 
projects and activities. Considering the limitations of a paper and 

13 

John C. Flanagan, Fourth Mental Measurement Yearbook (Edited, by 
O.K. Buros), Highland Park, New Jersey, The Gryphon Press, 1953* p.568. 

^M. E. Bloom et al, Effective Reading Instruction , Second Edition, 
New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1951» P* 246. 






































15 


pencil test, the California Reading Tests seem to make a satisfactory- 
estimate of the skills required in these specialized areas. 

Hobson praises the California Reading Test: 


There is no question that the reading skills measured are among 
the most important ones we strive to develop. The test materials 
appear to this reviewer to be well chosen and representative of 
material encountered by the child in his daily school work. The 
analytic feature should be a great aid to the teacher in assaying 
class and, to a lesser extent, individual strengths and weaknesses. 

The manual .has much to recommend it, particularly the 

sections on the diagnostic profile, the use of test resuits by 
administrators, and the adjustment of norms with relation to 
intelligence quotients medians, although in the last case something 
should have been said about the desirability of developing one's 

own norms . In general, this is a well thought out series 

of tests which deserves its wide use. 


While some criticism is offered by reading test experts, most of 
them would seem to agree with Flanagan that teachers will find the 
California Reading Test H a valuable tool in appraising the progress of 
pupils with respect to these important skills of vocabulary and reading 
comprehension. 

In her evaluation of the California Test Battery Anastasi makes 
the following criticism of the Diagnostic Analysis of Reading Difficulties. 

.Although of possible help in suggesting specific weaknesses in the 
individual's mastery of a skill, such an analysis may be quite mislead¬ 
ing because of the small number of items involved. The reliabilities 
of the five major tests at each level appear to be adequate for survey 
purposes. No reliabilities are reported, however, for the subtests, 
some of which are very short. As for the functional elements, it is 
apparent that chance errors of measurement may play a considerable 
part in the results obtained in individual cases. ' 

On the evidence it seems reasonable to question the reliability of 


~^J. R. Hobson, Fourth Year Mental Measurement Yearbook , Highland 
Park, New Jersey, The Gryphon Press, 1953» p. 56 9 . 

l6j. c. Flanagan, op , cit., p. 569* 

~^A. Anastasi, Psychological Testing , New York, The Macmillan Co., 
1954, p. 469. 
















•' i 



i 










16 


the sub-test scores for individual pupils. This defect is more 
serious in a diagnostic test than in a survey test. In the case of 
sub-test scores for an individual, it might be wiser to regard them as 
suggestive rather than as an analytical diagnosis of strength or 
weakness in a particular reading skill. In considering sub-test results 
for a group, chance errors would tend to cancel out and the resulting 
scores should prove more reliable. 

6. The California Reading Test 

When an instrument is chosen to test the reading abilities of 
pupils, it is necessary to determine whether it serves the purpose 
for which it was selected. The Califomia Reading Test was chosen to 
satisfy the purposes of the Alberta reading survey. The writer has 
examined the test's ability to measure pupil achievement in fundamental 
reading skills and to diagnose strengths and weaknesses in the essential 
elements of those skills. The usefulness of the tests in the measure¬ 
ment of major reading abilities and the elements of the main reading 
skills will be considered. 

The total test score is expressed in terms of reading age, grade 
placement, and percentile rank of pupils in relation to the general 
school population. The diagnostic profile on the last page of the 
test booklet shows graphically the student's achievement in the seven 
component skills with reference to his actual grade placement, his 
intelligence grade placement, and his chronological grade placement. 

The Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties reveals the elements 
of each component which are unsatisfactorily mastered. Taken together, 








' ' ■■ - ■ 


17 


these findings help to provide a basis for planning remedial instruction 
in the areas where individual students may be deficient. 

For the purpose of analyzing group deficiencies, a Class Record 
Sheet and a Summary of Class Data form, are made available with each 
package of test booklets. When these forms show the class to be 
performing at a desirable level of achievement, remedial instruction 
will be directed primarily toward individual students. However, if the 
class achievement falls below an expected level, use may be made of the 
Class Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties to assist in making 
a partial or complete class diagnosis® Data obtained by using these 
forms will provide information on which remedial work for the entire 
class may be based. 

The authors of the California Reading Test warn the teacher to be 
aware of the existence of more general basic factors which may be 
responsible for reading difficulty. These include inadequate mental 
maturity, physiological immaturity, visual or auditory defects, and 
social and environmental inadequacies.^ 

?. Summary and Conclusions 

This investigation is concerned with the reading ability of a 
large urban sample composed of grade four and grade seven pupils 
tested in Edmonton, Alberta, in May 1953* Scores obtained by each 
pupil in the Edmonton sample in the main sections, components, and 

■I Q 

°Emest W. Tiegs and Willis W. Clark, Manual, California Reading 
Test-Intermediate , California Test Bureau, Los Angeles, 1950* P* 16. 









r 


}?i 












18 


sub-components of the California Reading Tests were set down for study. 
Analysis revealed the groups’ reading strengths and weaknesses, sex 
differences in reading ability, and the general goodness of the tests. 

The California Reading Test is designed to measure pupil achieve¬ 
ment in fundamental reading skills and to diagnose strengths and 
weaknesses in the essential elements of reading skills. Accompanying 
the test are tables and forms which permit easy interpretation of the 
achievement of a class or of an individual and assist in the development 
of a remedial teaching program. 

The opinions of various reading experts would lead us to conclude 
that the California Reading Test does measure the fundamental reading 
skills adequately and reliably. The diagnostic features should prove 
of use in assaying class achievement. Individual subscores must be 
regarded as only suggestive. 



CHAPTER III 


RELATED STUDIES 

1. Testing for Reading Achievement 

One of the major activities of the elementary school pupil 
consists of learning to read. Competence in this complex skill is 
so important that teachers are anxious to promote its steady growth 
in their students. Once students begin to read, “reading progress 
needs to. be checked at every level of achievement to make certain 
that satisfactory results have been attained."19 Russell^0 believes 
that evaluation is one of the most effective ways of preventing 
crystallization or deterioration of an instructional program. 

The need for facts has lead to the publishing of more than 
twenty-seven hundred scientific studies on reading in the United 

p-i 

States and England since 1880. x 

An almost endless variety of investigations in reading has been 
made dealing with such matters as the effectiveness of modern 
instruction, correlation of reading test scores and mental ability, 
reading comprehension, sex differences in reading, comparison of 
reading ability between urban and rural children, criticism of 
reading tests, available library facilities, and a host of other 
topics. However, a large percentage of this research has probably gone 

■^A. m. Jordon, Measurement in Education , New York, McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., Inc., 1953, p.95* 

2^D. h. Russell, "Evaluation of Pupil Growth In and Through Reading" 
N.S.S.S. Forty-Eighth Yearbook , Part II, 19^9, p. 285. 

21w. S. Gray, Encyclopedia of Educational Research , 1952, p. 965. 















■ 


e - V &'■ 








20 


to measure children's achievement with the aim of improving reading 
instruction and raising the standards of reading accomplishment. 

Charges of inefficient reading instruction have been cast against 
the school in recent years. In order to satisfy the unprecedented 
interest in reading of the last three decades and, partly, to check 
the validity of the complaints of critics, modern investigators have 
been encouraged to undertake intensive research in the reading field. 

In 1938 a representative sample of 1156 pupils from grades one to 
eight in the schools of St. Louis, Missouri, were given the same tests 
administered by Charles H. Judd in 1916. The average scores were 
significantly higher in Oral Reading for the 1916 pupils, and slightly, 
but probably not significantly higher, in Silent Reading .^ 

Woods^ made a comparison of reading achievement in grade six 
between the school years of 1923-24 and 1933-34. Thirty-three schools 
in Los Angeles had comparable data for the ten year interval at the 
sixth grade level. Scores that averaged higher by half a grade were 
attained by the children of the later period, 1933-34. The New Stanford 
tests in reading were used in both periods, and the later schools were 
shown to be superior even when measured by a test designed specifically 

for the school population and goals of another day. 

24 

Tiegs compared the reading scores of approximately 230,000 
elementary pupils in seven states on the Stanford and Progressive 
Achievement Tests before and after 1945. The scores indicated a slight 

22 

R. J. Gerberich, "The First of the Three R's", T he Phi Delta 
Kappan , March, 1952, p. 345-349. 

2?L, E. Raths and P. Rothman, "Then and Now", N.B.A, Journal , 

April, 1952, p. 214. 

24 

E. W. Tiegs, Progressive Education , January, 1952, p. 106. 













c t 




:■ ' 





> 


■ 

* ■ • v ■ L 





21 


gain in the achievement-level of pupils despite the fact that more 
children who formerly failed and dropped out were remaining in school, 
and the average chronological age was decreasing. 

Scientific investigations into the reading achievement of Alberta 
pupils seem to be scarce. However, one study^5 indicated that pupils 
were.not declining in this skill. 

In a survey*"' 0 of reading ability in grade six, the Department of 
Education for the Province of Alberta gave the same reading tests to 
approximately 3000 pupils in 1947 and in 1953. The 1943 sample shows 
a slight increase in reading achievement, although the increase is not 
statistically significant. 

In a recent study, Carmichaeldiscovered that Alberta children 
exceeded the norms established for the California Reading Tests and 
were probably reading satisfactorily. She^ brought out the fact that 
grade four pupils in Alberta were achieving at a higher level for their 
grade than were the grade seven pupils. 

Coull^ found that Alberta children in grades four and seven were 
respectively superior and equal in reading achievement to the norms of 


^Curriculum Department, Department of Education. From, a report 
in the files, Jan. 1954. 

2 6 Ibid . 

^Carmichael, op . cit. , p. 60. 

^Carmichael, op. cit., p. 36. 

^W. H. Coull, A. Normative Survey of Reading Achievement of Alberta 
Children in Relation to Intelligence, Sex, Bilingualism, and Grade 

Placement, University of Alberta, Jan. 1956, p. 57* 












s 














22 


the California Reading Tests, Form AA, in terms of grade scores. He, 
too, found an indication of deceleration in growth of reading ability 
between grades four and seven. 

2. Diagnosis and Remedial Reading 

According to Gray^ 0 , very few studies have been reported concerning 
diagnosis and remedial work in reading. 

A N.S.S.E. report^ of 1937 indicated that a large percentage of 
boys and girls were more or less handicapped in reading. Frequently 
twenty to twenty-five per cent of the pupils of a class met serious 
difficulty in doing required reading. 

TraxLer pointed out that it is not practicable to try "to establish 
a general set of objectives that can be adapted in all remedial programs 
since the purposes are largely dependent on the deficiencies and the 
needs of the individual pupils. 

He-^ mentioned two general types of group organization which have 
been employed to assist retarded readers. They were regular classes which 
devoted part or all their time to remedial reading and small groups of 
pupils with similar difficulties received special instruction during 
free periods. 

30 

Gray, op . cit ., p. 1001. 

31 

saT. S. Gray, .Encyclopedia of .Educational Research , 19^1» p. 922. 

32 

A. E. TraxLer, "The Status of Research in Remedial Reading," 

Special Supplement to the English Journal , April 1939» p* 3-20. 


33jbid. 























f 














23 


o u 

Grareported that more recent innovations have been reviewed by 
such authorities as Blair -5 ', Kottmeyer 3 ^, and Strang 3 ^. The results of 
studies in which these various plans of organization have been used 
indicated that all of them have been more or less effective. Little 
objective evidence was available concerning their relative advantages 
and disadvantages. In the case of seriously retarded pupils, the 
evidence available was distinctly favorable to individual instruction. 


3. Sex Differences in Reading Achievement 

In 1927, Lincoln 3 ^ summarized the then existing literature relevant 
to sex differences in school accomplishments. At the elementary school 
level girls tended to be slightly superior to boys in reading. Statistical 
treatment of the differences was not usually reported, but from their 
magnitude it seems unlikely that the majority of them would have been 
found to be significant by conventional standards. 

Later reports on sex comparisons in reading have shown a conspicuous 
absence of significant differences. Commins 3 ^ obtained a non-significant 
difference of 5»2 raw score points in favor of girls on the reading tests 


3 ^W. S. Gray, Encyclopedia of Educational Research, 1952, p. 1003. 
35 g. m. Blair, Diagnostic and Remedial Teaching in Second-ary Schools , 
Macmillan, 1940. 422 p. 

36 W. Kottmeyer, Handbook for Remedial Reading , St. Louis, Webster 
Publishing Co,, 194?. l?9p. 

37R. Strang, N.S.S.B. Reading in the High School and College, Forty - 
Seventh Yearbook, Part II , University of Chicago Press,1948. 3l8p. 

33 S. A. Lincoln, Sex Differences in the Growth of American School 
Children, Baltimore, Warwick and York, 192?» Chapter IV. 

3 %. D. Commins, "More About Sex Differences," School and Society 
Vol. XXVIII, 1928, pp. 599-600. 

























« 





24 


of the Stanford Achievement Battery in the fifth grade. Traxler^, 
Moore^l, and Jordan^ failed to obtain significant sex differences in 
reading at the high school level. 

Stroud and Lindquist^ reported an extensive investigation of sex 
differences in reading achievement in the Iowa Every-Pupil Testing 
Program of 1940. The Iowa Every-Pupil Tests of Basic Skills (Elementary 
and Advanced) were used. The samples used in the results reported were 
drawn by selecting the papers of every tenth pupil from alphabetical 
lists, separately prepared for each grade within the school. The 
Elementary Battery was administered to grades three to five; the 
Advanced Battery to grades six to eight. 

The sex comparisons for the 1940 testing program are shown in 
Table II. The minus sign is used to signify a difference in favor 
of girls. 


^A. E. Traxler, "Sex Differences in the Rate of Reading in the 
High School, " Journal of Applied Psychology , Vol. XIX, 1935* pp. 351-352. 

^J. E. Moore, n A Further Study of Sex Differences in Speed of 
Reading," Peabody Journal of Education , Vol. XVII, 1940, pp. 359-362. 

Ll'? 

A. M. Jordon, "Sex Differences in Mental Traits," High School 
Journal , Vol. XX, 1937, pp. 254-261. 

^J. B. Stroud and E. F. Lindquist, "Sex Differences in Achievement 
in the Elementary and Secondary Schools," Journal of Educational 
Psychology , Vol. XXXIII, 1942, pp. 657-66?. 
















. . 

' 



















25 


TABLE II 

SEX DIFFERENCES IN SILENT READING ON THE 1940 
IOWA EVERY-PUPIL TESTS OF BASIC SKILLS^ 



Number 
Boys Girls 

Mean Scores 

Boys Girls 

^Difference 

Significance 

Ratio 

Reading 1 

Comorehension 

Grade III 

351 

362 

22.85 

24.97 

-2.12 

2.57 

Grade IV 

370 

371 

31.57 

34.32 

-2.75 

3.38 

Grade V 

346 

374 

38.30 

39.59 

-1.29 

1.77 

Grade VI 

432 

455 

29.60 

29.90 

-0.30 

0.39 

Grade VII 

533 

541 

34.64 

34.74 

-0.10 

0.14 

Grade VIII 

446 

424 

41.64 

42.11 

-0.47 

0.50 

Reading 

Vocabulary 

Grade III 

351 

362 

18.62 

20.22 

j 

-1.60 

2.30 

Grade IV 

370 

371 

25.99 

28.20 

-2.21 

3.46 

Grade V 

346 

374 

31.71 

33.41 

-1.70 

3.37 

Grade VI 

432 

455 

19.92 

20.17 

-0.25 

0.44 

Grade VII 

533 

541 

24.21 

24.67 

-0.46 

0.85 

Grade VIII 

446 

424 

29.81 

31.05 

-1.24 

2.38 


In each grade tested, girls’ mean scores were found to be superior 
to boys’ for reading comprehension and vocabulary. lA/hen the differences 
itfere subjected to tests of significance, girls appeared to be superior 
in reading comprehension in grades three and four. Significant differences 
favored, the girls in reading vocabulary for grades three, four, five and 
eight. It may be noted that the greatest significant difference appears 
at the grade four level while no significant difference is found at the 
grade seven level, the levels at which the Edmonton study was conducted. 

The last four studies reported seem to indicate that the differences 
between the sexes in reading achievement become smaller as students progress 


^Ibid. ., p. 664. 













































26 


from the lower to the higher grades. This assumption is borne out by 
the results of the Iowa Every-Pupil Tests of High School Achievement 
shown in Table III. 


TABLE III 

SEX DIFFERENCES IN READING ON THE 1940 IOWA EVERY-PUPIL 
TESTS OF HIGH SCHOOL ACHIEVEMENT^ 


Reading Test 

N- 

Boys Girls 

X 

Boys 

Girls 

Difference 

Significance 

Comprehension 

439 

551 

78.87 

79.71 

-0.81 

0.74 

Vocabulary 

439 

551 

22.96 

23.27 

-0.31 

0.57 


The results summarized by Table III would seem to Indicate that 
significant differences between the sexes in reading ability tend to 
disappear by the time the student reaches high school. 

Keyser 4 ^ reported general acceptance of the theory that girls are 
superior to boys in reading achievement in elementary school. This 
generalization was substantiated in an investigation by Carroll^ who 
found significant differences in favor of girls for reading achievement 
and visual discrimination. Donnelly^ found significant sex differences 


45 Ibid .. p. 66 2. 

^M.L.Keyser, "Research in Reading in The Elementary School," 

Review of Educational, Research, Vol. XXII, No. 2, April 1952, p. 70. 

W. Carroll, "Sex: Differences in Reading Readiness at the 
First Grade Level," Elementary English , Vol. XXV, Oct. 1948, pp. 370-375* 

E. Donnelly, "The Growth of Word-Recognition Skills in Grade 
One," Education , Vol. LVT, September, 1935 » PP* 40-43. 



































27 


appearing in favor of the girls as early as the third month of the 
first grade. 

49 

Ilg and Ames y reported that, as a group, girls appear to be more 
advanced than boys at every stage of the reading gradient. Olson-^ 
found that in the elementary grades girls are superior to boys on the 
average in reading comprehension, vocabulary, and basic language skills. 
Freeman and Miles-^ believed that scholastic achievement scores provided 
plenty of evidence to show that girls usually excelled in oral and 
silent reading. 

A trend toward more equal achievement of girls and boys has been 
noted in several studies. Potter’s-^^ study indicated that there was no 
significant sex difference in directional drawing, perceptual discrimination 
or reading. No significant differences in boys 1 and girls 1 scores on 
reading comprehension or word recognition were reported by McLaren-^ in a 
study of infant reading. In an investigation of children’s voluntary 
reading, Dunlop^ reported that girls read more than boys, but Woolner-55 
found no sex differences in voluntary reading activity. 


49 

y F. L. Ilg and L. B. Ames, "Developmental Trends in Reading Behavior,” 
Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic Psychology , Vol. LXXVT, 

June, 1950, pp. 291-312. 

50W. C. Olson, Child Development , Boston, D.C. Heath,1949>pp. 134-135* 

^-F. S. Freeman and C. C. Miles, "Sex Differences,” Encyclopaedia of 
Educational Research , 1952, p. 965 * 

-5%. C. Potter, "Perception of Symbol Orientation and Early Reading 
Success,” Contributions to Education, No. 939 » New York, Teachers College, 
Columbia University, 1949. 69p. 

-53v. M. McLaren, "Soci§-Economic Status and Reading Ability-A Study 
in Infant Reading," Studies in Reading , Vol. II, London, University of 
London Press, 1959» pp. 2-62. 

■5^3. C. Dunlop, "Children’s Leisure Reading Interests," Studies in 
Reading , Vol. II, London, University of London Press, 1959> pp. 81-195. 

H. B. Woolner, "Children’s Voluntary Reading As an Expression 
of Individuality," Contributions to Education , No. 944, New York, 

Teachers College, Columbia University, 1949* ll?p. 



















Coull"^ discovered no significant sex differences in reading 
achievement of grade seven pupils in Alberta when measurement was 
made by the California Reading Test, Intermediate Form AA. It should 
be noted that Coull*s finding agreed with the grade seven results in 
the Iowa Every-Pupil Testing Program of 19^0 reported earlier in this 
chapter in Table II. 


-5^Coull, op. cit. , p. 57* 





CHAPTER IV 


STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES IN THE 
READING OF EDMONTON CHILDREN 


1. Presentation of the Grade Four Data 

One of the main purposes of this study was to secure accurate, 
objective and unbiased information about the reading performance of the 
Edmonton sample as measured by the California Reading Tests. Tables IV 
to VII will present findings with respect to grade four. Tables VIII to 
XI will provide similar information about grade seven. 

Table IT compared mean achievement of the grade four sample with 
the norms of the California Test for Vocabulary, Comprehension, and 
'Total Reading. It is to be noted that the Edmonton data were secured 
in the ninth month in grade four. As a result, achievement will be 
compared with the test norms provided for grade 4.9.^ 

TABLE IV 

COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE FOUR IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH 
CALIFORNIA READING TEST NORMS FOR 
GRADE PLACEMENT 4.9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton] 

Raw Scores 1 

California Raw 
Score Norms 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

70.48 

66 

4.48 

Comprehension 

26.25 

21 

5.25 

Total Reading 

| 96.73 

8? 

| 9.73 


57 

Ernest W. Tiegs and Willis W. Clark, Manual, California Reading 
Test-Elementary , California Test Bureau, Los Angeles, 1950» P« 20. 
















30 


The comparison in Table IV indicates that the grade four sample 
exceeded the norms in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading. 

Table V draws a comparison of the means of the raw scores obtained 
by the grade four sample in the seven components of the California Reading 
Test with'the estimated norms for these components. The estimates were 
secured by drawing a vertical line through grade placement 4.9 on the 
diagnostic profile on the last page of the test booklet. 


TABLE V 

COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES IN THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 
FOR GRADE FOUR WITH THE NORMS ESTIMATED FROM THE 
DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE AT GRADE PLACEMENT 4.9 


Reading Skills 

Means of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms 

Differences 

Vocabulary 




Word Form 

23.66 

23.20 

.46 

Word Recognition 

18.96 

l?.6o 

1.36 

Opposites 

13.99 

12.60 

1.39 

Similarities 

13.91 

11.50 

2.4l 

Comprehension 




Following Direction 

s 7.18 

5.90 

1.28 

Reference Skills 

6.46 

5.50 

.96 

Interpretations 

12.61 

9.00 

3.61 


The mean scores of the Edmonton sample exceeded the estimated 


California norms in all seven components; the superiority in Inter¬ 
pretations being particularly striking. From this greatest display 
of superiority the difference of mean raw scores ranged downward to 
.46 in Word Form, the smallest difference noted. 

Table VI presents more data concerning scores obtained by the grade 


















31 


four sample in the two major sections and the seven components of the test. 


TABLE VI 

SCORES OBTAINED BY THE GRADE FOUR SAMPLE FOR THE 
MAJOR SECTIONS AND THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 
OF THE DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE 


Reading Skills 

Possible 

Score 

Number of 

Perfect Scores 

N=192 

Range of 

Scores 

Median 

Major sections 





Vocabulary 

90 

0 

33-88 

71.00 

Comprehension 

40 

0 

10-39 

26 . 1 ? 

Components 





Word Form 

25 

76 

11-25 

24.20 

Word Recognition 

20 

106 

1-20 

19.59 

Opposites 

23 

0 

0-22 

14.26 

Similarities 

22 

i 

3-22 

14.10 

Following Directions 

10 

19 

0-10 

7.36 

Reference Skills 

10 

6 

1-10 

6.55 

Interpretations 

20 

1 

3-20 

12.62 


A wide range in ability in the reading skills is clearly indicated. 
Reading grade placement levels in the seven components, estimated from 
the diagnostic profile, vary from below 2.0 to above 9*0. The median 
scores are in every case higher than the mean scores obtained by the group 
for the components shown in Table V. The fact that the groups’ mean and 
median scores exceeded the California component norms seems to indicate 
that the sample found the test relatively easy. 

Perfect scores in three of the components were comparatively numerous. 
Of the 192 pupils in the sample, perfect scores were made by 76 pupils 
in Word Form, by 106 in Word Recognition, and by 19 in Following Directions. 
It would appear that the tests are inadequate in that they fail to 



















32 


differentiate the ability levels of the many pupils attaining perfect 
scores. 

Table VII shows the percentages of correct responses attained by 
the grade four sample from, the total possible scores obtainable by the 
group in the 19 components and sub-components of the Diagnostic Analysis 
of Learning Difficulties. Ratings are given for 192 pupils. 

TABLE VII 

PERCENTAGE RATINGS OF CORRECT RESPONSES FOR GRADE FOUR 
STUDENTS FOR THE COMPONENTS AND SUB-COMPONENTS OF' THE 
DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS OF LEARNING DIFFICULTIES 


Reading Skills 

Percentages of 
Correct Responses 

Components 

Sub-components 

N=192 

Word Form 

Lower Case Words 


96.74 


Capitals 


95.31 


Miscellaneous Type Faces 

88.80 

Word Recognition 

Gross Differences 


98.44 


Initial Sounds or Endings 

94.12 

Opposites 

Basic Vocabulary 


60.82 

Similarities 

Basic Vocabulary 


63.26 

Following Directions 

Simple Directions 


78.39 


Direct Simple Choice 


77.26 


Definitions and Directions 

48.70 

Reference Skills 

Parts of Book 


77.08 


Alphabetizing 


59.64 


Table of Contents 


72.40 


Use of Index 


51.74 

Interpretations 

Topic or Central Idea 


85.16 


Directly Stated Facts 


81.86 


Making Inferences 


69.90 


Organization of Topics 


37.67 


Sequence of Events 


34.11 


The percentage of correct responses scored by the sample in 
the components and sub-components of the diagnostic analysis show, in 













■ 















. . ' .... 

.. 





















■ 



























33 


a general way, the elements of the reading skills which are easy for 
grade four pupils. However, these scores are merely suggestive for there 
are only a few test items in each sub-component of the diagnostic analysis* 
The relatively low percentages of correct responses obtained by the sample 
in the sub-components, Definitions and Directions, Use of Index, Organ¬ 
ization of Topics, and Sequence of Events, might point to weakness in these 
skills. To improve scores in reading comprehension teachers might be 
advised to provide more training in these areas. It should be remembered, 
however, that the position of the two sub-components at the end of the 
test might account, in part, for the relatively poor scores obtained. 

2. Presentation of the Grade Seven Data 

Table VIII presents a comparison in Vocabulary, Comprehension, 
and Total Reading of the means of the raw scores of the grade seven 
sample with the California Test norms provided for grade 7* 9*^ It is 
again to be noted that the Edmonton data were secured in the ninth 
month of grade seven. 

. TABLE VIII 

COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE SEVEN IN VOCABULARY, 

COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH CALIFORNIA READING TEST 
NORMS FOR GRADE PLACEMENT 7-9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

California Raw 
Score Norms 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

; 58.78 

57 

1*78 

Comprehension 

35-68 

35 

.68 

Total Reading 

9 4.45 

92 

2.45 


■^^Ernest W. Tiegs and Willis W. Clark, Manual, California Reading 
Test-Intermediate , California Test Bureau, Los Angeles, 1950» p.l6. 














34 


Comparison of the achievement of the grade four and grade seven 
samples with their respective test norms in Vocabulary, Comprehension, 
and Total Reading, reveals an apparent decline in the relative super¬ 
iority of the grade seven pupils. 

Table IX makes a comparison of the means of the raw scores obtained 
by the grade seven sample in the seven components of the California 
Reading Test with the estimated norms for these components. Following 
the same method used with grade four, estimates of normal performance 
in the ninth month of gradeseven were made from the diagnostic profile 
on the back page of the test booklet. 

TABLE IX 

COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES IN THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 
FOR GRADE SEVEN WITH THE NORMS ESTIMATED FROM THE 
DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE AT GRADE PLACEMENT 7.9 


Reading Skills 

1 Mean of Edmonton 

Raw Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms 

Difference 

Vocabulary 



1 

Mathematics 

15.80 

15.90 

i -.10 

Science 

13.53 

12.30 

1 1.23 

Social Science 

15.96 

14,80 

1.16 

General 

13.54 

13.30 

.24 

Comprehension 




Following Directions 

7.39 

6.30 

1.09 

Reference Skills 

9.31 

9.20 

.11 

Interpretations 

18.98 

17.80 

1.18 


The Edmonton sample mean scores exceeded the estimated California 


norms in all components but Mathematics where the sample deficiency 




























• - 


. 


V ' ' • •- • r ' '• •' 

' 







. • : • '■ .. ’ ' <7 

. 










i ;.- ■ • ■ • • ' ' : • 

■ * 




’ 





























35 


was slight. The remaining six components showed relatively small 
differences in favor of the Edmonton sample, ranging up to 1,23 for 
Science, 

Table X presents additional data about scores obtained by the grade 
seven sample in the two major sections and the seven components of the 
test. 


TABLE X 

SCORES OBTAINED BY THE GRADE SEVEN SAMPLE FOR THE 
MAJOR SECTIONS AND THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 
OF THE DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE 


Reading Skills 

Possible 

Score 

Number of 
Perfect Scores 
N = 196 

Range of 
Scores 

Median 

Major Sections 





Vocabulary 

90 

0 

15-66 

58.92 

Comprehension 

55 

0 

11-50 

36.02 

Components 





Mathematics 

22 

2 

3-22 

16.53 

Science 

23 

0 

0-21 

13.50 

Social Science 

23 

14 

0-23 

16.39 

General 

22 

1 

5-22 

13.76 

Following Directions 10 

34 

1-10 

7.71 

Reference Skills 

15 

1 

0-15 

9.50 

Interpretations 

30 

0 1 

7-29 

19.00 


Table X shows clearly that a wide range of reading ability exists 
in the grade seven sample, Reading grade placement levels in the 
seven components, estimated from the diagnostic profile, vary from 
below 4.0 to above 11.0. The median scores are in every case higher 





















36 


than the mean scores obtained by the group for the seven components. 

The sample's mean scores were higher than the estimated norms for the 
test with the previously noted exception, Mathematics. The slight 
superiority exhibited by the Edmonton sample, in relation to the 
estimated norms for the seven components, would seem to indicate that 
the skills measured were adequately mastered. 

The sample's mean raw score in Mathematics was 15*80 compared with 
an estimated norm of 15*90. However, the sample's median score of 16.53 
was higher than the norm. This seems to indicate that a majority of 
the sample earned higher ratings than the norm but a portion of the 
sample with relatively low scores depressed the mean score below the 
norm. 

In the sample of 196 pupils, perfect scores were made by 14 in 
the component, Social Science, and by 34 in Following Directions. 

There seems to be too great a percentage of perfect scores in these 
components with a resulting failure to differentiate the levels of skill 
among the more able students. The inability of the test to determine 
the upper achievement limit of these pupils depressed the mean scores 
of the group. 

Table XI shows the percentages of correct responses attained by 
the grade seven sample from the total possible scores obtainable by 
the group in the 15 components and sub-components of the Diagnostic 
Analysis of Learning Difficulties. Ratings are given for 196 pupils. 









r 












i 




37 


TABLE XI 

PERCENTAGE RATINGS OF CORRECT RESPONSES FOR GRADE SEVEN 
STUDENTS FOR THE COMPONENTS AND SUB-COMPONENTS INCLUDED 
IN THE DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS OF LEARNING DIFFICULTIES 


Reading Skills 


Percentages of 
Correct Responses 

Components 

Sub-components 

N = 196 

Mathematics 


71.71 

Science 


58.81 

Social Science 


69. Ill 

General 

Following Specific 


61.53 

Directions 

Simple Choice 

76.28 


Definitions and Directions 

73.28 

Reference Skills 

Parts of Book 

68.78 


Table of Contents 

88.27 


Use of Index 

83 . 81 * 

Interpretation of 

Selecting References 

31.8U 

Meanings 

Topic or Central Idea 

73.1*7 


Directly Stated Facts 

71.72 


Inferences 

68.80 


Organization of Topics 

1 * 5.28 


Sequence of Events 

38.78 


The percentages of correct responses scored by the sample in the 
components and sub-components of the diagnostic analysis suggest the 
elements of reading skills which were inadequately mastered. As with 
the grade four results^ these findings represent merely possible 
deficiencies in reading skill. The small number of items in the sub- 
tests render the reliability of their results open to question. How¬ 
ever 9 the relatively low percentages of correct responses obtained 


























■ 

- 

, 









by the sample in the sub-components, Selecting References, 
Organization of Topics, and Sequence of Events, hint at weakness 
in these skills. It should be noted that the grade four sample 
was also weak in Organization of Topics and Sequence of Events. 

The fact.that these two sub-components appear at the end of the 
test may have some bearing on the low scores attained in them by 
the sample* 

3. Conclusions Relating to Grade Four Achievement 

(a) The Edmonton grade four sample exceeded the California 
norms in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading. 

(b) In the comparison of the sample 1 s mean scores with the 
estimated norms of the seven components of the test, the Edmonton 
sample proved superior in all cases. This was particularly evide3,it 

.in the components, Similarities and Interpretations. The sample ! s 
median scores for the components were higher than its mean scores® 
This indicates that a majority of the group exceeded the norms. 

(c) Of the 192 pupils in the sample, perfect scores were 
achieved by 76 pupils in Word Form, by 106 in Word Recognition, 
and by 19 in Following Directions. These component parts failed 
signally to differentiate the ability levels of the top students. 
Component mean scores were, therefore, lower than they would have 
been if the test had more 1 ceiling. ! 

(d) A wide variation of the reading abilities of the individ¬ 
uals in the sample was shown. The estimated grade placement for the 






> • 






39 


seven component reading skills measured ranged from below 2,0 to 
above 9,0, 

(e) The percentages of correct responses scored by the sample 
in the components and sub-components indicated generally the elements 
of the reading skills which were mastered, and those which required 
remedial work. Weakness seems to be present in the sub-components, 
Definitions and Directions, Use of Index, Organization of Topics, 
and Sequence of Events. 

iu Conclusions Relating to Grade Seven Achievement 

(a) The Edmonton grade seven sample exceeded by rather small 
margins the California norms in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total 
Reading. 

(b) The mean scores of the sample for the seven components of 
reading ability surpassed the estimated norms with the exception of 
Mathematics. In no case was the difference much greater than 1.0. 

All the median scores for the components exceeded the estimated 
California norms* 

(c) In the sample of 196 pupils, perfect scores were made by 
Hi in the component. Social Science, and by 3U in Following 
Directions. There seems to be too great a percentage of perfect 
scores in these components with a resulting failure to differentiate 
the levels of skill among the top students. The inability of the 
test to determine the upper achievement limit of these pupils 
depressed the mean scores of the group. 





■ 



















ho 


(d) The grade seven results showed a wide variation in 
reading ability in the seven components, ranging in grade placement 
from below h.O to above 11.0 

(e) A study of the grade seven percentages of correct responses 
scored in the components and sub-components of the diagnostic 
analysis suggests possible points of reading weakness. Deficiency 
seemed to be present in the sub-components: Selecting References, 
Organization of Topics, and Sequence of Events. Perhaps Edmonton 
teachers might be well advised to provide more training in these 
techniques in order to improve reading comprehension. 

5. General Conclusions. 

(a) The scores of both the grade four and the grade seven 
samples for the two major and seven component parts of the test 
exceeded the estimated norms, with one exception, grade seven 
Mathematics. 

(b) The grade four margin of superiority over the test norms 
exceeded that of grade seven. This is true for Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, including all their respective component parts. 

Many possible causes might account for the relative advantage of 
the grade four sample. For example, it is possible that greater 
emphasis may be placed on reading in the primary grades than in 
the upper elementary; and that more advanced methods may be 
employed in the lower grades. Attention should be called to the 
fact that, with a mean intelligence rating of 111*it, the grade 



. 























ill 


sample is apparently superior to the grade seven sample with its 
mean rating of 107*7 

(c) Examination of the achievement of each sample in the 
seven components of their respective tests reveals a wide variation 
in individual grade placement scores. In grade four the grade 
scores ranged from below 2,0 to above 9*0. Similarly, in grade 
seven, the grade scores varied from below U.O to above 11.0. 

(d) Both groups contained pupils whose upper limits of 
ability were not adequately measured. Of the pupils in the grade 
four sample, perfect scores were made by 10 per cent in the 
component, Following Directions, 39 per cent in Word Form, and 

53 per cent in Word Recognition. In the grade seven sample, 
perfect scores were made by seven per cent of the pupils in 
Social Science and by 17 per cent in Following Directions. In 
these components, the range of ability was greater than the 
scores indicated. The mean scores would have been higher also 
had the better pupils been allowed to reach their upper limits 
of ability. These components seem unreliable because variation 
of a comparatively few points would cause a pupil to drop from 
the top of the group to the level of the average performer. 

(e) The Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties 
suggests elements of strength and weakness in reading skill. 

The grade four sample shows general strength in all seven 
components but definitely less superiority in the sub-components. 
Definitions and Directions, Use of Index, Organization of Topics, 













' 

• ' '■ 
















and Sequence of Events. The grade seven sample shows slightly 
superiority to the norms in all components except Mathematics* 
Comparatively low percentages of correct responses were achieved 
in the sub-components, Selecting References, Organization of 
Topics, and Sequence of Events. Edmonton teachers might be well 
advised to lay more stress on instruction that would improve these 
apparent deficiencies in reading skill. 





CHAPTER V 


SEX DIFFERENCES 

Research studies regarding sex differences generally indicate 

to 

that girls are superior to boys in reading achievement. Durrell 7 
reports that boys have much more difficulty in reading than do girls. 
Monroe b0 found that 86 per cent of Ul5 disabled readers studied were 
boys. However, Coull^ in his comparison of reading achievement of 
the grade seven pupils tested in the 1953 Alberta provincial survey 
of the language arts, found no significant difference between the 
mean scores of boys and girls in Total Reading on the California 
Reading Test, Intermediate, Form AA« 

The present study will seek to compare the reading abilities 
of boys and girls in each of the two Edmonton samples. The treatment 
of this phase of the study will be essentially the same as that used 
in Chapter IV where the results of the two Edmonton samples were 
measured against California norms. In addition, tests of significant 
difference will be applied to boys 1 and girls* results in the seven 
components of the tests in each sample. 

59 

Donald D. Durrell. I mprovement of Basic Reading Abilities , 

New York,' World Book Company, 19to, p. 2817 

^%arion Monroe, Children Who Cannot Read , Chicago, University 
of Chicago Press, 1932, ~ ~ 

Coull, A Normative Survey of Reading Achievement of 
Alberta Children in Relation to Intelligence, Sex, Bil ingu alism , 
and Grade Placement, University of Alberta, Edmonton,~"p. 3C7' 

















6 ■■ ; 






! ’ ? 
















1 


, Comparison of Reading Achievement of 
Grade Four Boys and Girls 

Tables XII and XIII respectively show a comparison of mean raw 

scores in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading of the grade 

four boys and the grade four girls with the California Test norms 

62 

provided for grade 5.9. 


TABLE XII 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAM SCORES FOR GRADE FOUR BOYS IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH THE 
-CALIFORNIA TEST NORMS FOR GRADE PLACEMENT 5.9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

California Raw Score 
Norms for Grade 5.9 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

70.22 

66 

u .22 

Comprehension 

25.92 

21 

u .92 

Total Reading 

96.15 

87 

9 . 1 U 


TABLE XIII 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE FOUR GIRLS IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH THE 
CALIFORNIA TEST NORMS FOR GRADE PLACEMENT 5.9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

California Raw Score 
Norms for Grade 5.9 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

70.77 

66 

u .77 

Comprehension 

26.62 

21 

5.62 

Total Reading 

97.38 

87 

10.38 


62 

Ernest W, Tiegs and Willis W. Clark, Manual, California Reading 
Test-Elementary, California Test Bureau, Los Angeles, 1950, p. 20, 























' 



















; • ' • ' 

. ■ • - ■ 
































We see that both boys and girls surpassed the test norms in 
Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading. 

The following table reveals that the girls were slightly ■ 
superior to the boys in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total 
Reading. 

TABLE XIV 

COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES OF GRADE FOUR BOYS AND 
GIRLS IN VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls* 
Raw Scores 

Mean of Boys* 
Raw Scores 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

70.77 

70.22 

.55 

Comprehension 

26.62 

25*92 

.70 

Total Reading 

97.38 

96.1k 

1.2U 


Tables XV and XVI make a comparison of the boys* and girls* 
scores respectively with the estimated California norms for the 


seven components 









? 











TABLE XV 


COMPARISON OF THE MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE FOUR BOYS WITH 
THE ESTIMATED CALIFORNIA NORMS FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Boys* 
Raw Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms for Grade U.9 

Difference 

Word Form 

23.U9 

23.20 

.29 

Word Recognition 

18.99 

17.60 

1.39 

Opposites 

13*90 

12*60 

1.30 

Similarities 

13.90 

11.30 

2 J 4 O 

Following Directions 

6*86 

5.90 

.96 

Reference Skills 

6*29 

3.30 

.79 

Interpretations 

12*77 

9.00 

3.77 


TABLE XVI 


COMPARISON OF THE MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE FOUR GIRLS WITH 
THE ESTIMATED CALIFORNIA NORMS FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls* 
Raw Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms for Grade U.9 

Difference 

Word Form 

23.8U 

23.20 

,6ii 

Word Recognition 

18*93 

17.60 

1.33 

Opposites 

1U.09 

12*60 

1 .U 9 

Similarities 

13.93 

11.30 

2.U3 

Following Directions 

7.33 

3.90 

1.63 

Reference Skills 

6.63 

3.30 

1.15 

Interpretations 

12.UU 

9.00 

3.1 


These tables point out the superiority of the grade four boys 5 
and girls* samples over test norms with respect to the seven component 
reading skills* This relative success parallels the similar supremacy 
of the samples over the test norms in Vocabulary and Comprehension* 






















U7 


Table XVII indicates a comparison of the mean raxtf scores of the 
boys* and the girls* samples for the seven components of the test. 


TABLE XVII 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES OF BOX'S AND GIRLS IN 
GRADE FOUR FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS OF TIE 
CALIFORNIA READING TEST 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls* 
Raw Scores 

Mean of Boys 1 
Raw Scores 

Difference 

Word Form 

23.8U 

23.U9 

.35 

Word Recognition 

18.93 

18.99 

-.06 

Opposites 

lluO 9 

13.90 

.19 

Similarities 

13.93 

13.90 

.03 

Following Directions 

7.53 

6.86 

.67 

Reference Skills 

6.6b 

6.29 

.36 

Interpretations 

12. hU 

12.77 

.33 


Except in Word Recognition and Interpretations, the mean raw 
scores of the girls were higher than those of the boys. It should be 
noted that in all categories the differences were so slight as to 
require special statistical treatment to determine significance. 


2. Test for Significant Differences of 
Girls 1 and Boys’ Scores 


A comparison was drawn of the test results of the grade four 
boys and girls for Vocabulary, Comprehension, Total Reading, and the 
seven components of the diagnostic profile. According to the null 
hypothesis, no significant differences were expected between the 


mean scores 





















U8 


The statistical data are presented in Tables XVIII and XIX. 


TABLE XVIII 


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF TIE DIFFERENCES OF TIE MEAN SCORES 
OBTAINED BY THE GRADE FOUR BOYS AND GIRLS IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING 


Reading Skills 

Gritical 

Ratio 

Compared with Value of CR 
at .01 and .05 

Levels of Significance 

Interpretation 



.01 

.05 


Vocabulary 

.38 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

C omprehension 

.62 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Total Reading 

.66 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 


TABLE XIX 


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCES OF THE MEAN SCORES 
OBTAINED BY THE GRADE FOUR BOYS AND GIRLS IN THE 
SEVEN COMPONENTS- OF THE DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE 


Reading Skills 

Critical 

Ratio 

Compared with Value of CR 
at .01 and .05 

Levels of Significance 

Interpretation 



.01 

Lf\ 

O 

• 1 


Word Form 

1.25 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Word Recognition 

.20 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Opposites 

.33 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Similarities 

.05 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Following 




Significant at 

Directions 

2.58 

2.60 ; 

1.97 

,05 level 

Reference Skills 

1.38 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Interpretations 

.69 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 











































h9 


The null hypothesis which stated that no significant difference 
was expected in the mean scores of the boys and girls for Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, Total Reading and for the seven components, was upheld 
in all but the component, Following Directions. The girls* mean was 
significantly higher than the boys* in Following Directions at the 
.05 per cent level of confidence. In fact, the critical ratio of the 
means for this skill was on the verge of significance at the .01 per 
cent level where t equals 2.60. 

It Is suggested that the superiority of the girls in Following 
Directions may be explained by their relative submissiveness, greater 
attentiveness in school, and their higher regard for success in 
school work. 

3» Comparison of Percentages of Correct Responses 
of Grade Four Boys and Girls for the Diagnostic 
Analysis of Learning Difficulties 

Table XX shows the percentages of correct responses attained by 
the boys and girls of grade four in each of the 19 components and 
sub-components of the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties* 
Ratings are given for 91 girls and 101 boys. 


63 


Garrett, op, 


cit. 5 p. I|27* 




) 





' 



































TAELE XX 


PERCENTAGE RATINGS OF CORRECT RESPONSES FOR GRADE FOUR 
PUPILS FOR THE COMPONENTS AND SUB-COMPONENTS OF THE 
DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS OF LEARNING DIFFICULTIES 


Reading skills 

Percentages of 
Correct Responses 

Components 

Sub-c omponents 

Boys n=101 

Girls n=91 

Word Form 

Lower Case words 

96,2k 

97.29 


Capitals 

9 k, 9b 

96.15 


Miscellaneous Type Faces 

87,79 

89.93 

Word Recognition 

Gross Differences 

97.69 

99.27 


Initial Sounds or Endings 

9U.U7 

93.73 

Opposites 

Basic Vocabulary 

60. UU 

61.25 

Similarities 

Basic Vocabulary 

63.19 

63.3b 

Following Specific 
Directions 

Simple Directions 

75.25 

81.87 


Direct Simple Choice 

73.76 

81.1)4. 


Definitions and Directions 

H6.53 

51.10 

Reference Skills 

Parts of Book 

78.22 

75.82 


Alphabetizing 

55.Lf5 

6U.29 


Table of Contents 

69,6k 

75.U6 


Use of Index 

50.83 

52.75 

Interpretation of 
Meanings 

Topic or Central Idea 

86. lU 

8)4.07 


Directly Stated Facts 

79.5U 

8U.U3 


Making Inferences 

72.28 

67.25 


Organization of Topics 

39.27 

35.90 


Sequence of Events 

36.63 

31.32 


It will be noted that the percentages of correct responses for 
the 19 components and sub-components of the Diagnostic Analysis of 
Learning Difficulties reveal that the girls obtained high scores in 
all but six of the reading skills. The boys’ greatest strength lay 
with Interpretation of Meanings where they excelled the girls in four 




















































51 


of the five sub-component scores* The girls were superior to the 
boys in the sub-component scores of the components, Word Form, 
Opposites, Similarities, and Following Specific Directions. Of the 
six sub-component scores in the remaining components, Word 
Recognition and Reference Skills, the girls 1 ratings surpassed the 
boys* in four. 

A comparison of reading abilities of the boys and girls of the 
grade four sample revealed a modicum of support for the theory that 
girls surpass boys in reading. However, while the girls 1 slight 
superiority was general, it was undoubtedly insignificant with the 
exception of the skill in Following Directions, 

U. Conclusions for Grade Four 

(a) The boys and girls of the sample exceeded the test norms 
in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading. While the girls ! 
margin of superiority was slightly greater than the boys* in these 
major sections of the test, the differences were insignificant, 

(b) The boys and girls exceeded the estimated test norms for 
the seven components of the test. 

(c) The girls were slightly superior to the boys in five of 
the seven components. The exceptions were Word Recognition and 
Interpretations. 

(d) The differences between boys and girls in the mean raw 
scores in the seven components were not significant except in 
Following Directions where the girls were superior at the .05 per 


cent level 






' ' 1 


r 














52 


(e) In the groups * percentages of correct responses for the 
19 components and sub-components of the diagnostic analysis, the 
girls obtained slightly higher scores in all but six of the reading 
skills. The small number of test items in each sub-component made 
any test for significant differences seem unwarranted. 

(f) The results of this study of the girls* and boys* reading 
ability in the grade four sample reveal a minor tendency for the 
girls generally to exceed the boys. Only in Following Directions 
was the difference between the groups found to be significantly 

in favour of the girls. 

5. Comparison of Reading Achievement of Grade Seven 
Boys and Girls 

The boys and girls in the grade seven sample were then 
compared in the same manner as those in grade four. Scores obtained 
by the groups were compared with test norms and one another. 

Tables XXI and XXII respectively show a'comparison of mean raw 
scores in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading of the grade 
seven boys and the grade seven girls with the California Test norms 
provided for grade 7®9»^ 


Ernest W. Tiegs and Willis W. Clark, Manual, California 
Reading Test-Intermediate, California Test Bureau, Los Angeles, 

1950, p. 16. ' 












TABLE XXI 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE SEVEN BOYS IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH THE 
CALIFORNIA TEST NORMS FOR GRADE PLACEMENT 7.9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

California Raw Score 
Norms 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

60.23 

57 

3.23 

Comprehension 

3h.82 

35 

-.18 

Total Reading 

95.0k 

92 

3.0U 


TABLE XXII 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE SEVEN GIRLS IN 
VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING WITH THE 
CALIFORNIA TEST NORMS FOR GRADE PLACEMENT 7.9 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Edmonton 
Raw Scores 

California Raw Score 
Norms 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

57,149 

57 

•U9 

Comprehension 

36.UU 

35 

i.UU 

Total Reading 

93.93 

92 

1.93 


We see then that the grade seven boys exceeded the norm in 


Vocabulary but fell short of it in Comprehension by a slight margin. 
However, they were well above the norm in their Total Reading score. 
The girls 1 mean scores were superior to the test norms in Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, and Total Reading. 































Sh 


The following table reveals that the boys excelled the girls 
in Vocabulary and Total Reading but were surpassed* in turn* by the 
girls in Comprehension. 


TABLE mil 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES OF GRADE SEVEN BOYS AND 
GIRLS IN VOCABULARY* COMPREHENSION* AND TOTAL READING 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls 1 
Raw Scores 

Mean of Boys 1 
Raw Scores 

Difference 

Vocabulary 

57.1*9 

60.23 

-2.71* 

Comprehension 

36 .1*1* 

3U.82 

1.62 

Total Reading 

93.93 

95.0k 

-1.11 


In the grade four sample* the girls’ margin of superiority over 
the boys in Vocabulary* Comprehension* and Total Reading was not 


significant. However* in grade seven* the boys surpassed the girls 
in Vocabulary and Total Reading. This may mean that some of the 
deficiencies of boys in grade four are being made up. 

Tables XXIV and XXV make a comparison of the mean scores of the 
boys and girls respectively with the estimated California norms for 
the seven components. 




















55 


TABLE XXIV 


COMPARISON OF THE MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE 
SEVEN BOYS WITH THE ESTIMATED CALIFORNIA 
NORMS FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Boys* 
Raw Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms 

Difference 

Mathematics 

16.03 

i 15.90 

.13 

Science 

Hull 

12.30 

1.81 

Social Science 

i6. m 

14.80 

1.61 

General 

13.70 

13.30 

.Uo 

Following Directions 

7.0° 

6.30 

.79 

Reference Skills 

9.02 

9.20 

".18 

Interpretations 

18.71). 

17.80 

.91) 


TABLE XXV 


COMPARISON OF THE MEAN RAW SCORES FOR GRADE 
SEVEN GIRLS WITH THE ESTIMATED CALIFORNIA 
NORMS FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls* 
Raitf Scores 

Estimated California 
Norms 

Difference 

Mathematics 

15.59 

15.90 

-.31 

Science 

13.01 

12.30 

.71 

Social Science 

15.57 

14.80 

.77 

General 

13.39 

13.30 

.09 

Following Directions 

7.65 

6.30 

1.35 1 

Reference Skills 

9.57 

9.20 

.37 

Interpretations 

19.19 

17.80 

1.39 


With two exceptions } the evidence demonstrates the slight 





























56 


superiority of the grade seven boys and girls over the norms for the 
seven component reading skills. The boys fell just below the norm 
in Reference Skills. The girls were a little below the norm in 
Mathematics vocabulary. The results confirmed the relative advantage 
of the groups over the norms in the major sections of the test as 
already noted* 

Table XXVI points out a comparison of the mean raw scores of the 
boys 1 and the girls 1 samples for the seven components of the test. 


TABLE XXVI 


COMPARISON OF MEAN RAW SCORES OF BOTS AND GIRLS 
IN GRADE SEVEN FOR THE SEVEN COMPONENTS OF 
THE CALIFORNIA READING TEST 


Reading Skills 

Mean of Girls 1 
Raw Scores 

Mean of Boys 8 
Raw Scores 

Difference 

Mathematics 

15*59 

16.03 

-»hk 

Science 

13*01 

14.11 

-1.10 

Social Science 

15*57 

16. n 

-.SU 

General 

13*39 

13.70 

-.31 

Following Directions 

7*65 

7.09 

.56 

Reference Skills 

9*57 

9.02 

.55 

Interpretations 

19*19 

18.714- 

-1*5 


The boys excelled the girls in each component of Vocabulary 
while the girls were superior in each component of Comprehension. 
The differences in all categories were so slight as to require 
statistical treatment to determine significance. 















57 


6. Test for Significant Differences of Scores 
of Grade Seven Boys and Girls 

A comparison was made between the test results of grade seven 
boys and those of grade seven girls in regard to Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, Total Reading and the seven components of the 
diagnostic profile. The null hypothesis stated that no signif¬ 
icant differences were expected in the mean scores. 

The statistical data are presented in Tables XXVII and 
XXVIII. 

TABLE XXVII 


THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCES OF THE MEAN 
SCORES OBTAINED BY THE GRADE SEVEN BOYS AND GIRLS 
IN VOCABULARY, COMPREHENSION, AND TOTAL READING 


Reading Skills 

Critical 

Ratio 

Compared with Value of CR 
at ,01 and .05 

Levels of Significance 

L . .. . 

Interpretation 


i 

.01 

.05 


Vocabulary 

1.43 

2.60 

1.97 

Plot significant 

Comprehension 

1.49 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Total Reading 

.42 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 























58 


TABLE XXVIII 


TEE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DIFFERENCES OF THE MEAN 
SCORES OBTAINED BY THE GRADE SEVEN BOYS AND GIRLS 
IN THE SEVEN COMPONENTS OF THE DIAGNOSTIC PROFILE 


Components 

Critical 

Compared with Value of CR 

Interpretation 


Ratio 

at .01 and .05 




Levels of Significance 




*01 

,05 


Mathematics 

.U'5 

2.60 

1,97 

Not significant 

Science 

2.16 

2.60 

1.97 

Significant at 
,05 level only 

Social Science 

1,23 

' 2.60 

1*97 

Not significant 

General 

,30 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Following 




Significant at 

Directions 

2.00 

2,60 

1.97 

.05 level only 

Reference Skills 

1,57 

2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 

Interpretations 


2.60 

1.97 

Not significant 


The null hypothesis, which stated that no significant difference 
was expected in the mean scores of the boys and girls for Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, Total Reading, and the seven components, was upheld in 
all but two of the components. The girls* mean was significantly 
higher than the boys 1 mean in Following Directions at the ,05 per 
cent level of confidence* The boys* mean was significantly higher 
than the girls* in Science vocabulary at the *05 per cent level of 
confidence. 

The girls have continued to exceed the boys in Following 
Directions, as was the case in grade four* however, the margin of 
superiority was not quite so marked* Boys might be expected to 






















59 


surpass girls in Science vocabulary since their interests normally 
tend in that direction. "While the differences in the mean scores 
of the remaining components were not significant, it is to be noted 
in Table XXVI that the boys and girls were respectively superior in 
Vocabulary and Comprehension. 

This is in general agreement with the findings reported by 
65 

Coull who found no significant difference between the mean scores 
of grade seven boys and girls in Total Reading on the California 
Reading Test, Intermediate, Form AA. 

7# Comparison of the Percentages of Correct Responses 
of Grade Seven Boys and Girls for the Diagnostic 
Analysis of Learning Difficulties 

Table XXIX shows the percentages of correct responses obtained 
by the boys and the girls of grade seven in each of the 15 components 
and sub-components of the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties. 
Ratings are given for lOli girls and 92 boys. 

CJgj@|' 


Coull, op. cit ., p. 57# 












€ 











60 


TABLE XXIX 


PERCENTAGE RATINGS OF CORRECT RESPONSES OF GRADE SEVEN 
STUDENTS FOR THE COMPONENTS AND SUB-COMPONENTS OF THE 
DIAGNOSTIC ANALYSIS OF LEARNING DIFFICULTIES 


Reading Skills 

Percentage Ratings of 
Correct Responses 

Components 

Sub-c omponents 

Boys n=92 

Girls n=10U 

Mathematics 

Basic Vocabulary 

72.88 

70.67 

Science 

Basic Vocabulary 

61.3b 

56.56 

Social Science 

Basic Vocabulary 

71.36 

67.68 

General 

Basic Vocabulary 

62.25 

60.88 

Following Directions 

Simple Choice 
Definitions and 

75.5b 

76.92 


Directions 

69.70 

76.hb 

Reference Skills 

Parts of Book 

66.96 

70.38 


Table of Contents 

90.22 

86.5b 


Use of Index 

81.16 

86.22 

Interpretation of 

Selected References 

28.70 

3b. 62 

Meanings 

Topic or Central Idea 

70.65 

75.96 


Directly Stated Facts 

71.7b 

71.7b 


Inferences 

69.88 

67.86 


Organization of Topics 

b5.65 

bb.95 


Sequence of Events 

30.98 

b5.67 


In percentage of correct responses* the girls obtained higher 
scores in the component, Following Directions, and led in three of 
the four sub-components of Reference Skills. The boys excelled in 
all four of the basic Vocabulary components, Mathematics, Science, 
Social Science, and General. There was a division of superiority in 
the five sub-components of interpretations with the boys leading in 


three out of five 











































61 


The small number of test items in most of the test 1 s sub¬ 
components make a statistical comparison of boys 1 and girls* scores 
of little value. The percentage ratings do not vary more than seven 
per cent except in the final sub-component. Sequence of Events, where 
the difference favours the girls by nearly 15 per cent. 

8. Conclusions for Grade Seven 

(a) The mean scores of both boys and girls in the same exceeded 
the test norms in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading with 
one exception. The boys* group fell slightly below the norm in 
Comprehension. 

(b) The boys excelled the girls in Vocabulary and Total Reading. 
This was a reversal of their respective positions in the grade four 
results. Perhaps the boys have caught up to the girls in reading 
ability. 

(c) The girls proved superior in Comprehension and enjoyed a 
greater margin over the boys in this skill than did the girls in 
grade four. 

(d) Both groups exceeded the estimated test norms for the 
seven components of the test, with two exceptions. The boys were 
inferior in Reference Skills. The girls fell short in Mathematics 
vocabulary. 

(e) The boys excelled the girls in the Vocabulary components. 

The girls were superior in the Comprehension skills. 

(f) The differences between boys and girls in mean raw scores 









62 


in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading were not significant* 

(g) With two exceptions, the differences between boys and girls 
in mean raw scores in the seven components were not significant. In 
the Vocabulary skill. Science, the boys were superior at the .05 per 
cent level of significance. In the Comprehension skill, Following 
Directions, at the .05 per cent level of significance, the girls 
proved to be superior to the boys. 

(h) In the groups* percentages of correct responses for the 
fifteen components and sub-components of the Diagnostic Analysis of 
Learning Difficulties, the boys were superior in eight. The girls* 
strength was concentrated mostly in the components. Following 
Directions and Reference Skills. The percentage ratings do not 
vary more than seven per cent except in the final sub-component. 
Sequence of Events, where the difference favors the girls by nearly 
15 per cent. In grade four, the boys were relatively stronger in 
this skill. 

9* General Conclusions 

(a) In Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading, the grade 
four boys and girls exceeded the norms by greater margins than did 
the grade seven pupils. The grade seven boys fell slightly below 
the expected norm in Comprehension. 

(b) In grade four the boys and girls exceeded the estimated 
norms for the seven components in all cases. The grade seven pupils 
exceeded all the component norms, with two exceptions. The girls 








I 


1 









.. , ' ■ 


! 





■ 











63 


were below the norm in Mathematics vocabulary. The boys 1 score in 
Reference Skills was inferior to the estimated norm, 

(c) Grade four girls were superior to the boys in Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, and Total Reading, In no case was the difference 
significant. They excelled the boys in five of the seven components. 
In only one of the components. Following Directions, was the 
difference significant, 

(d) In grade seven the boys and girls shared honours. The 
boys were superior in Vocabulary, Total Reading, and in the four 
components of Vocabulary, The girls led in the Comprehension section 
and its three components. No significant difference was found in the 
scores of boys and girls in Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total 
Reading. The boys and girls were respectively superior at a signifi¬ 
cant level in Science vocabulary and Following Directions. 

(e) At both grade levels, the girls were superior to the boys 
in the component. Following Directions, at the ,03 per cent level 
of significance, 

(f) In the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties at the 
grade four level, the girls led in 13 out of 19 sub-components. In 
grade seven the girls were superior in only seven out of fifteen. 
Because of the few items in each sub-component it is not sound to 
predict a trend. However, this study seems to indicate that by 
grade seven the boys have overcome the relative weakness in reading 
skills that was evident in grade four. Investigation of the results 
in the seven reading components and the main test sections for both 
grades would tend to substantiate this conclusion. 









CHAPTER VI 


GOODNESS OF THE TESTS 

1. Intraduction 

The values claimed for the California Reading Tests by authors 
and critics have been presented in Chapter II. We shall now attempt 
to determine the value of these instruments by examining the evidence 
resulting from testing the Edmonton samples. 

It seems reasonable to assume that the California Reading Tests 
are constructed in such a way that, if a large random sample is tested, 
the frequency distribution of the resulting scores will closely resemble 
the normal curve. Should there be any significant deviation from 
normality when a large, randomly chosen sample is tested, it may indicate 
the existence of defects in the test, undetected selective factors in 
the sampling, or poor administration off the test and its results. 

Carmichael 0 outlined the methods used to obtain a random sample 
in the provincial survey. Standard procedures were followed. No effort 
was spared to secure uniformly excellent administration and handling of 
the tests and their results. 

2. Grade Four Sample 

Table XXX summarizes the results of tests for skewness of the 
scores for grade four in Vocabulary and Comprehension and the seven 
components of the diagnostic profile. 

66 

A. Carmichael, on. cit., p. 8. 



- 

* 

. ■ • '• . • ' 

;■ : ' ■ " ' ' ■ 

■ > . ' 

. • • 1 ' ■ ■■■ ' : 

. 

, 

• • r 

y.-.c.:. : 'J 1 : . ‘ • 










. 








65 


TABLE XXX 


SKEWNESS OF SCORES OF VOCABULARY AND COMPREHENSION 
SECTIONS AND THE SEVEN COMPONENTS OF THE DIAGNOSTIC 
PROFILE OF THE TEST FOR GRADE FOUR 


Reading Skills 

S. 

S.E. 

C.R. 

Level of 
Significance 

Sections 

Vocabulary 

-1.23 

.94 

-1.31 


Comprehension 

.22 

.54 

.41 

- 

Components 

Word Form 

-.78 

.14 

-5.57 

.01 

Word Recognition 

-.85 

.12 

-7.08 

.01 

Opposites 

-.40 

.40 

-1.0 

- 

Similarities 

-.45 

.40 

-1.13 

- 

Following Directions 

-.39 

.19 

- 2.05 

.05 

Reference Skills 

-.12 

.18 

-.67 

- 

Interpretations 

.30 

.33 

.91 

- 


N.B., S - Skewness; S.E. - Standard Error of 


Skewness; C.R. - Critical Ratio 


The measurements of skewness in Vocabulary and Comprehension 
revealed non-significant departures from, normality. However, when 
the scores for the seven Components were examined, evidence of 
significant skewness in their distributions was apparent in 
several instances. 

The normality of the distributions for Vocabulary and 
Comprehension for the grade four sample indicates that, on the 
whole, the Elementary Test, Form AA, meets this requirement. 

The distributions of scores for components, Word Form and Word 
Recognition, were skewed, negatively at the .01 per cent level of 
significance. Asymmetry in these cases may result from the lack 






























66 


of more advanced items in the tests with the result that little 
discrimination among superior students would be possible. Exclusion 
of these items would prevent an extension of the curve at the upper 
end of the distribution. In a somewhat lesser degree, the same 
criticism was true for the component, Following Directions, for which 
the distribution of scores was skewed negatively at the .05 per cent 
level of significance. 

Negative skewness of the distributions of scores for Word Form, 
Word Recognition, and Following Directions in the Elementary Test, 

Form AA, was sufficient to jeopardize the value of the test as an 
effective diagnostic instrument for Edmonton schools. 

Except for Interpretations, the components were skewed negatively, 
but represented no significant deviation from normality. 

The distribution of Total Reading scores approached the normal 
curve. This tendency characterizes most good tests. However, only 
four of the seven components exhibited normality in their distributions 
of scores. The divergence from normality on the part of the remaining 
components indicates two possibilities: the items of these components 
are weak or are insufficient in number. 

Significant skewness of a negative nature indicated those parts 
of the test that were too easjr for the Edmonton sample. This suggests 
that the curriculum of the pupils on whom the California Reading Tests 
were standardized does not require the Edmonton schools' level of 
achievement. Therefore, the tests will deal unfairly with superior 
members in any group of Edmonton pupils. 









■: ' 









/ 


. 




' 













67 


3. Grade Seven Sample 


Table XXXI summarizes the results of tests for skewness and 
their significance for the grade seven distributions of scores in 
Vocabulary and Comprehension and the seven components of the 
diagnostic profile 


TABLE XXXI 

SKEWNESS OF SCORES OF VOCABULARY AND COMPREHENSION 
SECTIONS AND THE SEVEN COMPONENTS OF THE DIAGNOSTIC 
PROFILE OF THE TEST FOR GRADE SEVEN 


Reading Skills 

S. 

S.E. 

C.R. 

Level of 
Significance 

Sections 





Vocabulary 

„.q4 

1.19 

-.79 


Comprehension 

-.64 

.81 

-.79 

— 

Components 





Mathematics 

-1.23 

.29 

-4.24 

,01 

Science 

.21 

.32 

.66 

- 

Social Science 

-.54 

.45 

-1.20 

- 

General 

-.23 

.2? 

.85 

- 

Following Directions 

-.59 

.21 

-2.81 

.01 

Reference Skills 

-.28 

.23 

-1.22 

- 

Interpretations 

-.11 

.50 

-.22 

— 


N.B., S - Skewness; S.E. - Standard Error of Skewness; 


C.R. - Critical Ratio. 

The normality of the distributions of scores for the Vocabulary 
and Comprehension sections attained by the grade seven sample suggests 
that the Intermediate test, on the whole, is good. The measurement 
of Skewness in Vocabulary and Comprehension represent departures 
from normality that are relatively mild and non-significant. 





















J'iW ; 




■ 












ITO 1*0 











■ ' V 1 , ' ' • " • 




The range of difficulty covered by the test items in the 
components of Science, Social Science, General, Reference Skills, 
and Interpretations, appeared to suit the sample, for the resulting 
distributions of scores exhibited no significant deviation from 
normality. 

The other component parts may not be so well constructed, 
however. The extreme negative skewness of the distributions of scores 
for the components. Mathematics and Following Directions, suggests 
that these tests were far too easy for the sample and failed to 
discriminate among the abler members of the group. 

The writer agrees with the authors who point out in the test 
manual that "because of the limited number of items (10 to 30 ), 
scores on the seven sections of each test should be used only as" 
guides to indicate the presence of student difficulties in the 
seven major diagnostic areas.Nevertheless, when measuring the 
achievement of 196 people, it seems reasonable to expect less deviation 
from normality in the distribution of scores than has been shown in 
the components, Mathematics and Following Directions. 

4. Conclusions for the Elementary Test, Form AA 

(a) The normality of the distributions of scores for the 
vocabulary and comprehension sections for the grade four sample 
indicates that, on the whole, the Elementary Test-Form AA is good. 

The measurements of skewness in the two main sections of the test 
reveal non-significant departures from normality. 

6?Tiegs and Clark,, op. cit., p. 4. 




69 


(b) Evidence of significant skewness in the distribution of 
scores for three of the seven components was found. The distributions 
of scores for Word Form and Word Recognition were skewed negatively 

at the .01 per cent level of significance. If the more advanced factors 
of a skill are excluded from measurement in a test, the resulting curve 
of the distribution of scores will be asymmetrical. Little discrimination 
among superior students will be possible. These two skills must have 
been presented in a too simple form for the sample group. In a somewhat 
lesser degree, the same criticism is true for the component, Following 
Directions, for which distribution of scores was skewed negatively at 
the .05 per cent level of significance. 

(c) Negative skewness of the distributions of scores for Word 
Form., Word Recognition, and. Following Directions in the Elementary 
Test-Form. AA was sufficient to impair the value of the test as a 
diagnostic instrument. It could not be used effectively for that 
purpose in Edmonton schools. 

(d) Except for Interpretations, the remaining components were 
skewed negatively, but to so slight an extent that they represented 
no significant deviation from normality. 

(e) The distribution of Total Reading scores approached the normal 
curve. However, the negative skewness of scores of three of the 
components suggested that the items which composed them were weak or 
insufficient in number. 

(f) This tendency toward negative skewness of the scores suggests 
that the more demanding standards of the Alberta reading programme 
renders the California Tests too easy for Edmonton pupils. 




70 


5. Conclusions for the Intermediate Test-Form AA 

(a) The normality of the distributions of scores for the 
Vocabulary and Comprehension sections obtained by the grade seven 
sample suggests that the Intermediate Test-Form AA, on the whole, is 
good. 

. (b) No significant deviation from normality in the distributions 
of scores for the components, Science, Social Science, General, 
Reference Skills, and Interpretations was found. 

(c) The distributions of scores for the components, Mathematics 
and Following Directions, were skewed negatively at the ,01 per cent 
level of significance. These components evidently failed to 
discriminate among the more capable members of the group. 

(d) The paucity of items in the various components suggests 
that resulting scores for individuals be used as general estimates 
rather than precise measures of ability. 

6. General Conclusions 

In the light of the findings the value of the tests seems to lie 
mainly in their use as survey instruments. The diagnostic components 
and sub-components should prove helpful, however, in suggesting 
possible strengths and weaknesses in the reading ability of groups 
or individuals. These findings agree in the main with the evaluation 
of the tests by the critics and claims of the authors. 






CHAPTER VII 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

Almost without exception, the normal class in a city school 
contains pupils whose reading skills vary all along the scale from 
good to poor. The periodic testing of pupils' reading strengths and 
weaknesses is a useful, practice, particularly if teachers and adminis¬ 
trators are ready and able to provide improved reading instruction 
based on the findings of the tests. Survey and diagnostic tests are 
designed to assist in the planning of a helpful reading programme in 
the classroom. 

This investigation has sought to answer three questions related 
to the reading ability of two samples of Edmonton school pupils tested 
by the California Reading Tests. A summary of the conclusions and some 
recommendations follow. 

1. Strengths and Weaknesses in the Reading of 
Edmonton Children 

(a) The mean scores of both grade four and grade seven sample 
groups exceeded test norms for Vocabulary, Comprehension, Total Reading, 
and the estimated norms for the seven component parts, with the 
exception of grade seven Mathematics. The margin of superiority was 
less in grade seven than in grade four. 

(b) Scores made by each sample in the seven components of their 
respective tests revealed a variation in individual grade placement 




72 


scores of more than seven grades. The grade four sample varied from 
below grade 2.0 to above grade 9.0. The grade seven sample varied in 
grade placement from below 4.0 to above 11.0. Both samples contained 
pupils itfhose upper limits of reading ability were not adequately measured. 
The true range of ability may have varied.more than was indicated by the 
test results. 

(c) The relatively low percentages of correct responses obtained 

by the grade four sample in the sub-components, Definitions and Directions, 
Use of Index, Organization of Topics, and Sequence of Events, might point 
to weaknesses in these skills. Perhaps grade four teachers in Edmonton 
should be advised to provide more training in these areas of reading- 
comprehension . 

(d) The grade seven sample achieved relatively low percentages of 
correct responses in the sub-components, Selecting References, 

Organization of Topics, and Sequence of Events. This suggests possible 
weaknesses in these skills and hints that Edmonton grade seven teachers 
might provide more training to improve their students’ techniques in 
these skills. 

(e) It should be noted that both samples were weak in Organization 
of Topics and Sequence of Events. 

2. Sex Differences 

The findings pertinent to the grade four sample are: 

(a) The boys and girls of this sample exceed the test norms in 
Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading. 

(b) The girls were slightly superior to the boys in Vocabulary, 




73 


Comprehension, and Total Reading. The differences in their mean raw 
scores were not significant. 

(c) The boys and girls exceeded the estimated test norms for the 
seven components of the test. 

(d) The girls exceeded the boys in five of the seven components. 
The exceptions were Word Recognition and Interpretations. 

(e) The differences between boys and girls in the mean raw scores 
of the seven components were not significant except in Following 
Directions where the girls were superior at the .05 per cent level. 

(f) In the groups’ percentages of correct responses for the 19 
components and sub-components of the diagnostic analysis, the girls 
obtained higher scores in all but six of the reading skills. The small 
number of test items in each sub-component made any test for significant 
differences seem unwarranted. 

The findings pertinent to the grade seven sample are: 

(a) In Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Total Reading, the mean 
scores of the boys and the girls in the grade seven sample exceeded 
the test norms with one exception. The boys' group fell slightly 
below the norm in Comprehension. 

(b) The boys excelled the girls in Vocabulary and Total Reading. 
The girls proved superior in Comprehension. In no case was the 
difference in mean raw scores significant. 

(c) With two exceptions, the boys and girls exceeded the 
estimated test norms for the seven components of the test. The boys 



■ • ■ , • 




* 

1 

. 




I 



■ 


• ■ 

: 




■ 




.... ; • • • '• 

. 






74 


were inferior in Reference Skills. The girls fell short in Mathematics 
vocabulary. 

(d) The boys excelled the girls in the Vocabulary components* The 
girls were superior in the Comprehension skills. 

(e) The differences between boys and girls in the mean raw scores 
in the seven components were not significant except in Science vocabulary 
and Following Directions. The boys and girls were respectively superior 
in these components at the ,05 per cent level of significance. 

(f) In the groups* percentages of correct responses for the 15 
components and sub-components of the diagnostic analysis, the boys were 
superior in eight. The girls’ strength was mostly concentrated in the 
components. Following Directions and Reference Skills. 

A comparison of the findings of grades four and seven follows: 

(a) In grade four the girls surpassed the boys in Vocabulary, 
Comprehension, and Total Reading. The girls in grade seven maintained 
their superiority in Comprehension but were excelled by the boys in 
Vocabulary and Total Reading. 

(b) The superiority of girls over boys in grade four in the main 
sections of the test was also true in the component parts where the 
girls.excelled in all but Word Recognition and Interpretations. The 
difference was significant in one component, Following Directions. 

On the other hand, in grade seven the girls surpassed the boys in the 
components of Comprehension only, while the boys scored higher in the 
components of Vocabulary. The boys and girls were respectively superior 








75 


a t a significant level in Science vocabulary and Following Directions. 

It should be noted that the girls were significantly superior to the 
boys in Following Directions at both grade levels. 

(c) In the Diagnostic Analysis of Learning Difficulties at the 
grade four level, the girls led in 13 out of 19 sub-components. However, 
in grade seven the girls excelled the boys in only seven of the 15 items. 

(d) The findings with respect to the various divisions in each 
test might suggest that the girls have lost their earlier tendency 
toward superiority in general reading skills. 

3. Goodness of the Tests 

(a) The normality of the distributions of scores for the Vocabulary 
and Comprehension sections attained by the two samples suggests that 

the tests, on the whole, are good. 

(b) Departures from normality in the distribution of scores 
for certain of the components of the two California tests suggest a 
cautious approach in the use of the tests as diagnostic instruments. 
Significant skewness of distributions of scores was noted in the 
components, Word Form, Word Recognition, and Following Directions 
in the California Reading Test, Elementary, Form AA. In the 
California Reading Test, Intermediate, Form AA, skewness was 
significant in the components, Mathematics vocabulary and Following 
Directions. 

(c) The findings in relation to the Edmonton sample indicate 
that the value of the tests seems to lie mainly in their use in survey 



programmes with the diagnostic components and sub-components being 
helpful in suggesting possible strengths and weaknesses in reading 
ability at the individual or group level. 

4. Recommendations 

(a) The relatively low percentages of correct responses obtained 
by the grade four sample in the sub-components, Definitions and 
Directions, Use of Index, Organization of Topics, and Sequence of 
Events, might point to weaknesses in these skills. Therefore, grade 
four teachers should perhaps be advised to provide more training in 
these areas in order to improve the reading comprehension of their 
pupils. 

(b) The grade seven sample achieved relatively low percentages 
of correct responses in the sub-components, Selecting References, 
Organization of Topics, and Sequence of Events. This suggests possible 
weakness in these skills and hints that Edmonton grade seven teachers 
might be well advised to place more emphasis on these specific areas 

of the reading programme. 

(c) An examination of scores obtained in the component tests 
revealed that in each sample, the range of reading ability extended 
over more than seven grades. While it is difficult to attend to the 
needs of individuals in a lfrge class with such divergent levels of 
ability, teachers and administrators are obligated to plan their 
reading programme with these individual differences in mind. 



(d) In the components and sub-components of the tests where many 
pupils made perfect scores, the provision of more difficult items to 
ensure measurement of the upper ability levels of Edmonton children 
seems required. 

(e) Local norms should be developed for the main sections and 
the seven components of the California Reading Tests. 

(f) The California Reading Tests should be used as survey tests 
and as a means of suggesting the reading strengths and weaknesses of 
groups and individuals. It has not been proven adequate as a precise 
diagnostic instrument. 








BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Anastasi, A. Psych ologic al Testing , New York: The Macmillan 
Company, 1954/" p 7 ¥6?7 " 

Blair, G.M. Diagnostic and Remedial Teaching in S eco ndar y 

Schools, New York: The Macmillan Company, 19lTo/ p. 422. 

Bloom, M.E. et al. Effective Reading Instruction , Second Edition 
New-York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc,, 1951, p. 246* 

Burkhart, K.H, ”An Analysis of Reading Abilities,” Journal of 
Educational Research XXXVIII, February, 1945, ppT 430-439. 

Carmichael, A, A Survey of the Achievement of Alberta School 

Children in Reading, M, Ed, Thesis, University of Alberta, 

19357 ~ 

Carroll, M.W. ”Sex Differences in Reading Readiness at the First 
Grade Level.” Elementary English XXV, October, 1948, 

PP. 370-375* 

Commins, W,D, ”More About Sex Differences.” School and Society 
XXVIII, 1928, pp. 599-600. 

Coull, ¥.H. A Normative Survey of Reading Achievement of Alberta 
Children in Relation to Intelligence, Sex, Bilingualism, and 
G rade Plac ernent, M, Ed, Thesis, University of Alberta, 
January, 19567” 

Oronbach, Lee J, Essentials of Psychological Testing . New York: 
Harper and Brothers, 19597 p. 28?. 

Curriculum Department, Department of Education, January/ - , 19?4# 

Department of Education, Annual Report, Edmonton, Queen 1 s Printer 
1951* 

Donnelly, H.E, ”The Growth of Word-Recognition Skills in Grade 
One.” Education LVI, September, 193?* pp* 40-43* 

Dunlop, D.C. "Children* s Leisure Reading Interests.” Studies in 
Reading II, London: University of London Press, 19507 
pp. 81-105. 

Flanagan, John C. The Fourth Mental Measurements Yearbook . New 
Jersey: The Gryphon Press, 1953. 





























Freeman, F.S. and Miles, C.C. "Sex Differences/' Encyclopedia 
of Educational Research , 1952* 

Garrett, H.E. Statistics in Psychology and Education , New York: 
Longmans, Green and Co., Inc., 1953. 

Gerberich, R.-J. "The First of the Three R»S." The Phi Delta 
Kappan, March, 1952, 

Gray, W.S. Encyclopedia of Educational Research . 1952. 

Hobson, J.R. Fourth Year Mental Measurements Yearbo ok. New Jersey 
The Gryphon Press, 1953* 

Ilg, F.L. and .Ames, L.B. "Developmental Trends in Reading 
Behavior." Pedagogical Seminary and Journal of Genetic 
Psychology LXXVI, June, 1950. 

Jordan, A.M* Measurement in Education . New York: McGraw-Hill 
Book Go., Inc., 1953* 

Jordan, A.M. "Sex Differences in Mental Traits." High School 
Journal XX, 1937* pp. 25U-261. 

Kottemeyer, W* Handbook for Remedial Reading . St, Louis: Webster 
Publishing Go., 19H7• 

Keyser, M.L. "Research in Reading in the Elementary School." 

Review of Educational Research XX II, No. 2, April, 1952. 

Lindquist, E.F. Statistical Analysis in Educational Research . 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 19C0~» 

Lincoln, E.A. Sex Differences in the Growth of American School 
Children . Baltimore: Warwick and York, 1927V 

Moore, J.E. "A Further Study of Sex Differences in Speed of 
Reading." Peabody Journal of Education XVII, 19U0, 
pp. 359-362 

McLaren, V.M* "Socio-Economic Status and Reading Ability-A 

Study in Infant Reading." Studies in Reading II, London: 
University of London Press, 1956. 

Olson, W.C. Child Development . Boston: D.C. Heath, 19U9# 

Potter, M.C. "Perception of Symbol Orientation and Early Reading 
Success," Contributions to Education No. 939. New York: 
Teachers College, Columbia University, 19l;9« 




















} 













Russell, D.H* "Evaluation of Pupil Growth In and Through Reading." 
N.S.S.E. For ty -Eighth Yearbook , Part II, 19U9. 

Strang, R. N.S.S.E. Reading in the High School and College, Forty - 
Seventh Yearbook , Part II, University of Chicago Press, 19UB. 

Tiegs, E.W. Progressive Education . January, 1952. 

Tiegs, E.W. and Clark, W.W. Manual, California Reading Test , 
I ntermediate . Los Angeles: California Test Bureau, 1950. 

Tiegs, E.W. and Clark, W.W. Manual, California Reading Test , 
Elementar y. Los Angeles: California Test Bureau, 195o, 

Traxler, A.E. "Sex Differences in the Rate of Reading in the 
High School." Journal of Applied Psychology XIX, 1935. 

Traxler, A.E. "The Status of Research In Remedial Reading," 

Special Supplement to the English Journal , April, 1939. 

Wrightstone, J.W. Analysis of Intelligence and General 

Achievement . Third Grade Classes (few York City), March 
and May, 19U9: cited by Leonard Wood, Educational 
Psychology , Third Edition* Edited by CTET^kinner. 

New York: Prentice Hall Inc., 1951® 

' Biy • m 

Wrightstone, J.W. Analysis of Results; Survey of Intelligence 
and Reading Ability in 7 A Classes . Junior High Schools, 
February, 19177' LeonaFd"Wood", Educational Psychology , 

Third Editionj Edited by C.E. Skinner. New York: 

Prentice Hall Inc., 1951. 













































