






































HOLLINGER 
pH 8.5 

MILL RUN F3-1543 






For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that 


they have read and recommend to the Faculty 
Council for acceptance a dissertation on 
"The Present Situation in Elementary Education” 
submitted by Francis Melville Quance, B.A. , in 
partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of M.A. 


Edmonton» 
April, 1915* 

























W>j£ 

,e^ j% 




THE 

PRESENT SITUATION 
I N 

ELEMENTARY EDUCATION, 

TTH* v t* »*"»• ?< n if o is n i" ■ ■ \ »* r * 1 »"v v’W •*"«%» ♦* »*'V V t* 


P, M, Q U A N C E. 

'H !' . - ;f - - .. v ,, 










PREFACE 


!♦»»**» IMM* H 1* l»IM» If 

The writer does not attempt in tills 
brief survey of the situation of elementary 
education to offer any solution to the problems 
which are occupying the attention of so many 
eminent educators in the world today. His 
purpose is merely to state in as concise a way 
as possible the main currents which seem most 
evident in the stream of elementary education. 

In fact, through the necessity of cur¬ 
tailing the statement, some phases of the sub¬ 
ject which to many educators at the present 
time may seem vital, have been only briefly 
treated, or wholly omitted. 

The writer’s personal experience and 
observation as a teacher in elementary schools 
is responsible for many views stated. His 
indebtedness, however, is due to the writers 
quoted in the appended bibliography, and to 
others mentioned in the course of the discussion. 











Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/quance1915 


t» ?♦ W M f* t» M ♦» t* tf }f }V }f ft !* ?* f* tf f* M f* t* t* t* ft f* f? I* J* f# I* t? 


WHAT IS EDUCATION? 

— Many philosophers and wise 

men have asKed this question in the past and 
still the problem is occupying the minds of many 
of our Keenest thinKers today* There was a time 
when the ideal of education was as clear as the 
noon-tide sun, but the means and methods by which 
this ideal could be actualized constituted the 
problem. Today, our sciiools and educational, 
laboratories are replete with all the external 
mechanisms which the resourcefulness of the 
human intellect can provide as a means for educ¬ 
ation, but educators are not quite so certain of 
the ideal, and so, the perennial question returns, 
What is Education? 

When we looK at our schools and see what 
to our forefathers would be an appalling programme 

of studies; when we see the teachers plodding 
diligently along cramming the sponge-liKe mind 









. 

H) $ . ' 

~ 

: ' »■ ‘ 

- 

- 

; 

- 



( 2 ) 


of the pupil with a multitude of frequently 
unrelated facta and that pupil either borrowing 
from the physical strength a loan which can never 
be repaid in order to reproduce these facts in a 
praiseworthy way at examination time, or as is 
frequently the case, the child becoming a nervous 
wreck through over strain; or when we see the strug¬ 
gle becoming so keen that the less bright students, 
the very ones who especially need an education, 
drop out of school because of discouragement 
through the inability to maintain the race, we are 
forced to ask ourselves again whether we have the 
true ideal of education. Is this the laborious, 
exacting, competitive struggle an education demands? 
For what end? For discipline? If so, is this 
the truest ideal? 

And if this seems to be painting the sinis¬ 
ter aspect, let us cast a glance for a moment at 
our system in a happier mood. At six or seven 
years of age our boys and girls enter school, and 
they are engaged in raffia work, in weaving, in 


, 

; 

V 

1 i i J 

... , ■ ' • . . = ■ . 

- 

. 

. • ,. ■ . • 



(3) 


marching and singing. In later years they do 
cabinet worn or worn in the metals. We see a 
whole class of pupils going out to the woods on 
a 51 Nature Study * excursion, or, maybe, to hold 
an open air session of school. These exercises 
are very fascinating to the children, but we are 
apt to hear a fond parent asK, "Is it for this I 
sent my boy to school? Is it not to learn reading, 
writing and arithmetic?" And so we revert to the 
question, What is the educational ideal? Is it 
but to do in the school that which pleases the 
pupil, that which interests him, or is there some¬ 
thing further? 

Happily each of these sides is over 
colored, but together they do show that the modern 
educator faces the problem between those two ten¬ 
dencies in the educational ideal representing res¬ 
pectively that of the so called "old" and "new" 
education. 

This leads us then to the discussion of 
our present educational ideal, and the tendencies 
which we can detect therein. Whatever these are 

















, 






















' 












(4) 


in general, they may have to a very large extent 
their particular application in elementary education* 

Throughout the history of education we can 
note certain problems, problems which found their 
original statement probably with Plato and in vary¬ 
ing garb have occurred to educators ever since. 

One of the most persistent of these problems has 
been the relation of the individual to society. 

In fact, it is quite possible that all the prob¬ 
lems which educators, whether ancient or modern, 
have met have been in their final analysis but a 
particular phase of this more inclusive one. Be¬ 
fore the Homan genius had been shorn of its viril¬ 
ity and brilliance by a decadent society, the alms 
of her education were wholly moral ones, that is, 
relating to practical conduct. And when in the 
Middle Ages the dominant influence was the Chris¬ 
tian religion, the solution of the Greek educational 
problem lay in the principle of Christian love or 
charity, which harmonized the individual and social 
factors. But as in tills Mediaeval period this 





(5) 

principle of Christian love tended towards self- 
effacement and consequent acceptance of authority, 

i 

so in the following period of the Renaissance a 
reactionary movement towards individualism ensued. 
Herein arose a divorce between school and church 
and the nationalisation of the schools followed. 

And so without pursuing this point more in detail 
we may venture to assert that whether in the 
Realistic Education of Rabelais and Bacon , the 
Disciplinary Education of Locke, or the Natural¬ 
istic Education of Rousseau: or whether in the 
Education representing its psychological, scient¬ 
ific, or sociological tendencies, there has been 
that constant problem involved in the accentua¬ 
tion of the individual or society, or in the effort 
to completely harmonize both, 

I may be permitted to make a rather lengthy 
quotation but one which sums uxj most concisely the 
tendency of the present educational ideal by quoting 
the definitions of the leading modern educators as 
cited and commented upon by Mr, Monroe, 


0 

X ' 

' , 



- 

- 

r , ' < 


'4/ . .1 . ■ 




( 6 ) 


"Education has been defined as preparation 
for citizenship, as adjustment to society, as 
preparation for life in institutions, as the acqui¬ 
sition of the racial Inheritance. 

But definitions more acceptable to present 
thought seek to combine both factors and to find 
a harmonisation of them in the nature of the edu¬ 
cational process. Thus Professor James, from the 
psychological and hence individualistic point of- 
view, defines education as * the organisation of 
acquired habits of action such as will fit the 
individual to his physical and social environment ! . 
President Butler ! s view emphasizes the sociological 
standpoint but gives both elements. It is that 
education is the gradual adjustment of the indiv¬ 
idual to the spiritual possessions of the race.’ 
These factors are more closely related in Prof¬ 
essor Horne's definition, which clearly reveals 
this eclectic tendency as including the psycholog¬ 
ical, the scientific, and the sociological elements 
in our present thought of education. This definition 
is as follows:- 'Education is the superior adjustment 











- 






• i. 


' : ' 

« 

' 

• 1 

’ 

- 

’ ' 






- 






(?) 


of a physically and mentally developed conscious 
being to his intellectual, emotional and volit¬ 
ional environment, 1 The one who has done more 
than anyone else to elaborate this eclectic view 
of education that harmonizes the conflicting 
ideas of the old tendencies and in whose writings 
a fuller presentation of many of these points 
stated will be found, is Professor John Dewey, 

He defines education as "the process of remaXing 
experience, by giving the individual better con¬ 
trol over his own powers 1 . Here both individual 
and social factors are emphasized and harmonized. 
Prom whatever interest, whether practical or theor¬ 
etical, or from whatever line of investigation 
the problem of education is now approached, its 
meaning is given in some tterms of this harmoniza¬ 
tion of social and Individual factors. It is 
the process of conforming the individual to the 
given standard or type in such a manner that his 
inherent capacities are developed, his greatest 
usefulness and happiness obtained, and, at the 

same time, the highest welfare of society is 
1 

conserved.* 

1 Monroe, History of Education, pp 754, et seq. 














f . 

. 








I 






. 


i ■ 










, , 

", ' 



( 8 ) 


This eclectic tendency of modern education 
is one of its happiest and most hopeful signs. The 
ne plus ultra of educator or philosopher, social 
worker or religionist is the one heresy. And yet 
there always has been this constant struggle bet¬ 
ween tradition and progress. Every thought we think, 
every emotion we experience, every act we do tends 
to fix and set our disposition and conduct for the 
future. Consequently, the educational system 
through which one generation passes has a strong 
predisposition to be passed on as its heritage to 
the next. But the relations of the members of 
society are not static or fixed. They are ever 
changing through new interactions, and so the 
child will not be prepared to accept the educational 
manna sent down from a dtstant ancestry unquestion- 
ingly. 


Professor Wad ter Raleigh in his work on 
Wordsworth gives a splendid illustration of this 
tendency to fetter ourselves to what is least im¬ 
perfect. He contrasts the poet f s passionate at¬ 
tachment to the people to the Indifference that 
that many of their leaders show. He quotes a 








( 


* 





• 

. 




. • 
























■ 






. 



, 




. 



. ! J ■ ' 

' 




. 




. 

1 - O' ' ' • 




. 



( 9 ) 


sentence from the "Borderers" In which are set 
forth the transitory nature of action and the 
permanent nature of suffering. 

"Action Is transltory-a step, a Mow, 

The motion of a muscle this way or that— 

•Tis done, and In the after vacancy 
We wonder at ourselves like men betrayed. 
Suffering is permanent, obscure and dark, 

And shares the natiire of infinity". 

Professor Raleigh adds these significant words 
" A great crisis in human affairs usually closes 
the education of those who take part in it. They 
make their choice by the best of their lights, and 
then, whether they win or lose, pride does the rest. 
Likewise, we all take a side, speak our opinion, 
strike our blow, and then defend it through thick 
and thin. Right or wrong we fight for it to 
the bitter end, if necessary, and close that chap¬ 
ter of our education, " 

From this the modern educator is freeing 
himself, for he is beginning to recognize that 
education is an endless process. Both for the 
individual and for the world education is a pro¬ 
cess that is endless in its power of widening, 








r 

/ 














. ' 










. 



( 10 ) 


enlarging and liberating. It Is the liberating 
of us from the men we are today that in the future 
we may become the men that we were meant to be. 

It is appropriating the heritage of the past, adap¬ 
ting it to the environment of the present, and 
transmitting it with all necessary transformations 
to posterity, 

Though the conception has been more or 
less vaguely foreshadowed from the time of Plato 
to that of Wallace and Fiske, yet it is especially 
since the latter part of the nineteenth century 
that the principle of evolution has been incorpor¬ 
ated into our thinking, A stern, rigid logic 
following the pathway lit by this principle, has 
forced conclusions upon us which we have been slow 
to accept, or to understand the far-reaching results 
thereof. In some spheres these have been actually 
feared; in others, ignored, but the modern educator 
has a growing hope that by the aid of this conception 
an ideal of education may be reached which, though 
not static, yet in its development will ever be 
beyond serving as a guiding star to practise. 







. 


V-'. -"■ 

, . . 




. 




















( 11 ) 


It is this theory of evolution which 
is today unifying the psychological, the scien¬ 
tific and the sociological theories of education 
into one comprehensive whole, 

The child is regarded as a unit pro¬ 
gressively unifying himself with a wider unity. 

He is born into this complex physical and spiri¬ 
tual unity a formless yet plastic organism. He 
possesses in addition to his physiological endow¬ 
ment certain potential psychical functions which 
differentiate him from the lower organisms. These 
must be developed or evolved in order that he may 
be enabled to adjust himself to the higher psych¬ 
ical or spiritual realm in which he finds himself. 
It is just at this point that the principle of 
evolution which finds Its method of natural sel¬ 
ection applicable in the physical realm must 
postulate also the same in the psychical. w It 
was Mr, Wallace who pointed out, forty odd years 
ago, that the theory of evolution as applied to 
man could sustain itself only if it were acknow¬ 
ledged and admitted that there came a tine in 













( 12 ) 


the history of animal type and forms when nat¬ 
ural selection seized upon psychical or mental 
peculiarities and advantages and perpetuated them 
rather than merely physical peculiarities and 
advantages, ” 1 

Hence we see that with these two spheres 
needing developnent owing to the fact of a prolonged 
infancy there is a vital necessity and abundant op¬ 
portunity for education. The child at birth has 
numerous reflexes, but the organs of sight, hearing 
and touch all have to be developed before the physi¬ 
cal inheritance is in any degree his possession. 

He may discover that a bright flame burns and thus 
learn to Know that he should avoid it. The moth 
may scorch his wings and yet return to the flame. 
Thus the child profits by his experience but more 
than this he learns to pass this on to others. 

Likewise, natural selection seizes upon 
the psychical or mental peculiarities and perpetu¬ 
ates them. There is within the individual a self- 
activity ’ the tendency to unfold his essence by 


iThe Meaning of Education...Butler 


_ 






. . 

. 



















• 


































































~ i 



( 13 ) 




which he participates in the unity of the whole. 

It is this which helps him to realise his destiny, 

to worK out from within the highest aspifcatlona 
and ideals of his being. It is by this that he 

comes to Know himself and by Knowing himself to 

Know others the better and thus relate himself to 

society. In the spiritual sphere it is this self- 

activity which becomes the method of spiritual 

evolution, just as later Darwin posited natural 

selection as the method in biology and LamarcK 

that of use and disuse. 

But in this spiritual evolution what 
are the objects of its activity? What is the 
great spiritual heritage of men? Among the first, 
undoubtedly, is the great realm of literature. 
Literature, that crystallization of the thought 
of the past ages, the record of the lightning 
flashes of the imagination of a Dante or a Milton, 
or of the reason of an Aristotle or a Kant, 
Literature is the treasure house of the feelings 
and aspirations of our fathers, a veritable realm 
of abundant life which is their gift to posterity. 






. 










■ 







(14) 


Then there is the aesthetic inheritance, that 
love of the beautiful and the subline which has 
added so much to human life in painting, sculpture 
and music. In the great institutions and in rel¬ 
igion also we see into what worlds of values we 
are born. These are to be ours, but only by educ¬ 
ation, "Thus education is but a phase of the gene¬ 
ral process of evolution; it is a development by 
which one comes into the realization of the life 
of the all-encompassing unity of which he is but 
a unit, a development by which his life broadens 
until it has related itself to nature, until it 
enters sympathetically into all the activities 

society until it participates in the achievements 

2 

of the race and the aspirations of humanity"* 

The psychological, scientific and 
sociological aspects of education have necessarily 
been Interactive but largely they have emphasized 
the method, matter and institutions of education, 
respectively* In the educational process there 
is the child with his own individual character!stica, 

f History of Education, Monroe, p, 651 



0 







* 




- . 











- ' ' . ' ' 1 t ■ f ■ • • . • • : *< .. Cc' artP 

- . 

; 










- 
















■ 



■ 



























( 15 ) 


the inheritance of science, literature, art, 
religion and institutions, and the social world 
about the child. The theory of evolution accept¬ 
ing, as we said above, the principle of self-activity 
as its method points the way to the psychological 
treatment of the individual child with these char¬ 
acteristics, to the scientific and sociological 
tendencies in thfs educational process by showing 
that it is not complete till the child has devel¬ 
oped into a free man, into the full mastery of 
all his environment and become a fully developed 
citizen. 

Another tendency of the modern educa¬ 
tional ideal and one which has a very close bear¬ 
ing on elementary education is that which may be 
termed the democratic spirit of education. Dem¬ 
ocracy spells equal opportunity, but this is not 
alone for the maKlng of a living but also of a 
life. And the fullest life, as we have endeavored 
to show above, comes not ^ut by education* Hence 
the child of the poor should have no less an op¬ 
portunity of becoming as complete an inheritor 












C ■’ 


,. i i 

- ' ' ' ■ ' ♦ 

- 

. 


- 

. 

, ■ 

■ 

C * 












( 16 ) 


of the glorious past as the son of a plutocrat * 

It is his native right and it is the duty of that 
corporate body, the state, to see that he becomes 
the possessor of that right* 

Professor Butler well says?- "That 
democracy alone will be triumphant which has both 
intelligence and character* To develop them among 
the whole people is the task of education in a 
democracy** It is this alone that will give reason 
and light to that stream of tendency in the social 
and political system, and keep it from becoming a 
chimera as at the beginning of the nineteenth cent¬ 
ury. A generation which has not yet appropriated 
the social and political product of the past, yet 
living under its forms and institutions will 
quickly be out of tune with them, and resultant 
disharmonies will surely follow* It will feel that 
the times are out of joint and without the enlight¬ 
enment to discern the cause or the means of re&resf 
will imagine false ones with fatal results. 

The methods in which these various ideals 
are manifesting themselves in elementary education 






f 

















'* — : * 

... 

- 

* 

- 










( 17 ) 


at the present day will be pointed out at the 
proper time, suffice it to say here that they 
are more or less tangibly influencing the organi¬ 
zation of the school in every department. 

During the past decade, as we have 
looked at the civilized nations of the world, the 
question has often arisen, "With the social, poli¬ 
tical and religious differences and dissensions of 
their citizens, what is the unifying factor?" 
Readily the answer has been found, "In education, " 
Whatever men believe or do not believe in other 
spheres, they all have faith in the efficacy and 
necessity of education. For some nations this is 
their hopeful and redeeming feature. 

The writers on educational topics 
in these nations have been legion, and still the 
products of itheir pens seem not to lessen. Those 
of a decade or two ago in as far as they contain 
basic principles which are true and applicable in 
any age and under any conditions are still valuable 
to that extent, but as education is a progressive 










.. ) 

1 ■ 







( 18 ) 


science and art seeding ever to lay the foundation 
for the future society, and adapt its means to 
these conditions, the last word on ideals and 
organisation can never be said. 

It is not long since the conception 
of school organization included only the physical 
and the external in its sphere, but today all 
the conditions which in any way affect the school, 
and all that goes on in the school is the broad 
signification given to this phase of education. 

The old conceptions embraced more particularly 
the means and method, the external and the phys¬ 
ical- aspects, but the present conception emphas¬ 
izes the personal factors and those hitman rela¬ 
tions which are such a vital part of the work of 
the school. 

It was said above that development 
through the self-activity of the child is one of 
the basic principles of the present educational 
ideal. This is not a new discovery in Education 
in the least, as it was applied by Eroebel in the 


ase of very small children at least. But at the 









































• 



























• 

, ■ 


' 














, 
















_ 




0 










( 



. 










' 

; ■: J *' '- l 


( 19 ) 


present time it is being applied rationally and 
persistently to all phases of education which 
touch the child in all parts of the elementary 
schools. It is within the memory of many when 
the schoolmaster was a war lord dominating the 
schoolroom by his own will. To the child this 
was a system of repression rather than of expres¬ 
sion, The curriculum then to the pedagogue was 
of greater import than the child. There was no 
opening for the activity of the individual child, 
but with factory like precision and uniformity 
all conformed to the same standard. But a new 
day is dawning. The child is the center of int¬ 
erest, Character is the essential product. All 
organization is for his development. 

During the past half a century an 
Important movement has been in process, the 
nationalisation of elementary schools. From the 
nature of the case, schools, for the most part 
were under the control and support of voluntary 
organizations at first. But in the evolution of 
the state in modern culture nations there has 









. 


. ■ 

I 


r „ • 






( 20 ) 


been a gradual widening of the range of Its 
functions until it has found it expedient and 
socially profitable to take over and develop In 
full measure a wide range of educational activi¬ 
ties, In Canada and the United States the separ¬ 
ation of the control of elementary education from 
the church or philanthropist has been almost uni¬ 
formly maintained. But in the European countries 
the growth of elementary education was through the 
centuries so closely linked with the Church that 
all its traditions were bound to that institution, 
and only with great effort and stubborn resistance 
has this nationalisation taken place. In France 
the most perfect nationalization has been effected. 
England still has much opposition to overcome before 
such a result is accomplished there. 

In Canada and our neighbor to the 
South, tiie control of education is left to the 
province or the state. This is true also of Ger¬ 
many, but in England and more especially in France 
the central government maintains a direct part in 
the administration of the system. The system itself 
varies from province to province or from state to 







■ 




















• • ' 1 




. 




• 















. 









( 21 ) 

state in its details, but the principle of the 
central authority remains constant, in the Prov¬ 
ince of Alberta "Education" is one of the depart¬ 
ments over which a Cabinet Minister is placed. 
Serving under him in order are the Chief Inspector, 
Inspectors, Local Boards of Education, Principals 
and Teachers. The Chief Inspector and Inspectors 
are appointed by the Department of Education, the 
local Boards by the ratepayers of the school dist¬ 
ricts aid the Principal and teachers by these local 
Boards, in turn. Thus there Is a constant progres¬ 
sion of authority centralizing in the chief govern¬ 
ing body, the province* This system is fairly 
closely followed throughout the provinces of the 
Dominion, the principal difference being that in 
some instead of a Chief inspector there is a Super¬ 
intendent of Education whose duties are virtually 
the same, and in the Eastern provinces the inspec¬ 
tors are appointed by the Counties rather than by 
the Department of Education. 

The financial arrangements for the 
admlnxstration of education in the various prov¬ 
inces of the Dominion are uniform in principle. 



. ' ; ■ ■ I ■ j.K* 

- 

4 . - .1 

- 

. i' 

! ■■ 1 ■ 

. 

- 

- • 

- 




( 22 ) 


The local Boards of Education are empowered to ma&e 
assessments and levies upon the real property in 
their jurisdiction. A maximum rate Is set in Al¬ 
berta by the Government. This levy is supplemented 
by grants from the provincial Government. 

In relation to government grants for 
the purpose of carrying on elementary education the 
greatest contrast is apparent between certain States 
of the Union, and France, In the former all the 
necessary funds are raised locally, whereas in the 
latter all the salaries of the teachers are advanced 
by the central government of the country, leaving 
tfch.e local Board to provide only for the running 
expenses of the school, in England the Board of 
Education which is appointed by the British Govern¬ 
ment apportions the grants to schools on the condi¬ 
tion that the school measures up to a standard set 
by the Government in equipment and qualification 
of its teachers. The provinces of Germany on the 
other hand resemble the provinces of the Dominion 
in that the local government assists by a supple¬ 
mentary grant to the amount raised by the local 
Board. (Schulvorstand) 















- 


. 









* • '■ 


. 











— 














- 


■ 






( 23 ) 


A very patent and happy feature of 
the financial aspect today is the strong under¬ 
current of opinion that there should be no ret¬ 
renchment in expenditure upon elementary educa¬ 
tion, The salaries of the teachers have been 
very materially Increased during the past decade, 
and a greater willingness on the part of Boards 
to spend money upon equipment is very evident. 

In Germany there is still much to be done along 
tills line, as the majority of teachers there rec¬ 
eive less than three hundred dollars a year, but 
there is a strong movement there also to make 
the minimum yearly salary equal to that of civil 
servants, namely: one hundred marks or three 
hundred dollars. 


But with the Increased outlay upon 
elementary education, tuition fees are becoming 
an obsolete factor of the system. They are com¬ 
pletely abolished in France, the United States, 
England and Canada, but throughout Germany they 
are not yet fully eliminated. And along with this 












) 


' 

— 








; 






- " 

r 



( 24 ) 


abolition of fees, attendance of children between 
certain definite ages at the elementary schools, 
is made compulsory. No industrial or economic 
causes are allowed to conflict with the child ! s 
attendance at school. Acts are passed in pract¬ 
ically all countries to this effect, though some 
states in the Union have not yet met this necessity. 

In all modern elementary educational 
reform, the child’s highest interests are of great¬ 
est moment. Matters which a generation since were 
treated with lightest concern or wholly ignored 
are today receiving careful study and attention. 
Possibly in no sphere of education is this more true 
than in that which pertains to the physical condi¬ 
tions necessary in education, Mr. Dutton well 
says: •'The health of the child is always of first 
account whether in the home or in the school. Con¬ 
ditions have been so unfavorable in the schools 
of the past that it is a question whether the 
value of the formal education received, compensated 
for the injury done to the Health, School Boards 
and teachers assume a. grave responsibility in the 
care of children, and the use they ma&e of the 





















-t- ■ ' 


. 



















. 



•: v: 




•• 

. 










means at their disposal to this end is of first 
consideration in school management," 

This to a very high degree is being 
realised. In cities where there are Superinten¬ 
dents of Education the facts concerning the phys¬ 
ical conditions of education are kept more consis¬ 
tently and rationally before the Boards, but in 
rural districts the teachers themselves are many 
times largely responsible for a lack of advance 
along these lines. Many times Boards are glad to 
apportion the necessary funds if the teacher will 
but clearly show where improvements might profit¬ 
ably be made. But too often the teachers them¬ 
selves are too indifferent to this aspect of 
education. 

The most vital element, of course, 
is the ©choolhouse and the school site, k won¬ 
derful advancement has been made In school arch¬ 
itecture in recent years, due largely to the 
discoveries made by science and the medical pro¬ 
fession concerning the importance of health con¬ 
ditions as affected by fresh air, light, dust and 
good sanitation. The old school with its dark, 













- V ■ • ' - ' ■ 

" 

. 

. 

- 

• . c •• ' . • 

. 


c, , 

- a , ■ ’ in L 

■ ■ ■■ ■ ,f-: ■ f : • ■ • |..r ■ |; 

- 

- 







( 26 ) 


dingy rooms, with no ventilation except through 
the windows, is yielding steadily to the large, 
spacious room filled with light falling from the 
left, and having a ventilation system which pro¬ 
vides a constant change of &lr at all seasons 
Af the year. 

Naturally, the school building re¬ 
quired in the country will differ from that in 
the city, and that in the cold north from that 
in the warm south. Hitherto the country school- 
house has presented a most inhospitable appear¬ 
ance; but, as at least one-third of the school 
children of the country are registered in such 
schools, in as far as the financial condition 
of the community will permit, some attention 
should be paid as we know is being paid to the 
architectural effects of the buildings. The 
necessity of different heating and ventilating 
systems according to the mean temperature will 
also affect the style of the building and its 
ventilating system. On this continent this 
fact is being recognised and put into practical 
effect, but the needful legislation is not being 




* 


■ 






- 






- •. ' • . 1 . • . 












—- 




- 
























» 




















( 27 ) 

I given this matter in Europe which it warrants* 

Farrington states in reference to the lower 
schools of France that rooms are heated by stoves 
placed in the rooms, ventilation being secured by 
opening the windows. If the temperature should 
drop to fifty degrees the windows are either closed 
and thus source of the supply of fresh air cut off, 
or the windows left open and the children suffer 
with cold. 

There are many systems of heating and 

ventilating schoolrooms, bxit their efficacy depend© 
largely upon the local conditions. For instance, 
a complicated system poorly managed by an incom¬ 
petent amateur may be less effective than an in¬ 
ferior system carefully and expertly handled* In 
rural schools of one room, especially where fuel 
is plentiful, a fireplace should be constructed 
and used during the spring and autumn, where only 
a small amount of heat is required. This affords 
heat and ventilation together. But with any system 
the final responsibility rests upon the principal 
or teacher to ensure that the scholars suffer no 





















. 











. 





, 




— 




- 




. 












. 



■ 









( 28 ) 


detrimental effects. The cooperation of the 
scholars themselves should also be sought to 
secure the best that is possible from the faci¬ 
lities at hand. 

A very important consideration, 
after the type of school and system of ventil¬ 
ation is determined upon, is that of the school 
site. Modern educators are recognizing with ever 
increasing emphasis the important bearing environ¬ 
ment has upon the development of the child. 

There is no natural innate faculty for aesthetic 
appreciation. Hence the child must learn what 
is beautiful and thus we cannot fail to grasp 
the indisputable value of the aesthetic surround¬ 
ings in which the child spends one half his waiting 
hours, 

The ideal site is one which is high 
and dry, away from business blocks, factories and 
unnecessary noise and which is large enough to 
lend itself to landscape gardening. The building 
should be well back from the street with attrac¬ 
tive approaches to the building. At the rear of 
the building should be the playgrounds divided by 


_ ■ >. p 


_ 

* 1 





























. 


- 




( 29 ) 


a high board fence Into the parts for the boys 
artel girls, thus allowing the latter to enter into 
their sport in proper gymnastic dress. 

In rural schools much along this line 
can he done by the united efforts of the teacher 
and the pupils. The enactment of Arbor Day as a 
holiday is a state recognition of the importance 
of this work. Innumerable are the schools at 
present which have attractive avenues of trees 
leading to the school and a well cultivated gar¬ 
den in another part of the grounds, 

There are many other aspects of the 
physical condition of education as indicating the 
attention which is being paid to them today. The 
seating of the pupils with the single, adjustable 
desk and chair is an innovation which is helpful. 
The cheap shiny blackboard is being steadily re¬ 
placed by the natural slate board. The accumul¬ 
ation of dust, and infection thereby, is being 
reduced to a minimum. Drinking fountains are 
provided in town and city schools in place of the 
single cup. All these provisions are an indication 
of the broader viewpoint of modern educate on „ and 






























. 

. 




. 














(39 a) 


the Increasing conviction that the interests 
of the whole child should be studied, 

person said:- ’’Education is that 
which Is left after all is forgotten which was 
learned at school, sr What is left? Undoubtedly 
the results of the discipline received. But how 

is this discipline received and what are its 

■ 

values? If these values are of such paramount 
Importance in education, how are they expressed? 
These are questions which vitally concern us today. 

The object of discipline under an?/ 
circumstances is to make the individual willing 
and able to have his reason control his will in 
all mental and moral acts. At first the parent 
and the teacher are the ’’will” to the child and 
herein lies a real but hidden danger. Unless the 
child is liberated from the constant outward exer¬ 
tion of this ’’will* and receives that development 
by which his own reason mounts the throne and det¬ 
ermines his conduct, he becomes a rudderless ves¬ 
sel upon the sea of life and eventually a wreck. 














/ 


- 

f'.i . : 

, 

- 

~ 

- 




(so) 


There is, without doubt, no problem 
of education which has met v/ith such a reversal of 
attitude as the method how this enthronement of 
reason should be effected. One characteristic of 
the change lies in the fact that less is being said 
and written directly upon discipline qua discip¬ 
line, This is not to be interpreted as indicating 
that less stress is being placed on this phase of 
education, but its solution lies in connection with 
other phases. 

The immediate end of discipline in 
the schoolroom is to secure the power of attention, 
first upon an external object and then upon the 
subject object. This means that the attention 
upon all other objects is inhibited, and only the 
one object is held within the focus of,conscious¬ 
ness, Such inhibition may be produced through 
fear created by external compulsion or through a 
Keen, fresh, loving interest in the one object to 
be attended to. We often hear today f3?Om some 
of the raillers at the "New Education" objections 
to the effect that the modern method of malting 






. 










- 



























































the studies interesting and thus eliminating 
the drudgery of school studies from the life of 
the child is producing a weaker type of manhood 
than that of the past. The writer was told rec¬ 
ently by a teacher that the phonic method of 
teaching reading was not as good as the old word 
and letter system because it was easier. 

This scarcely needs or deserves 
refutation, and yet, because the old idea persists 
in some quarters even today, a few words may be 
said* It may be asked, "Who is there who follows 
a vocation which he does not like simply because 
it will bring him discipline?" Are not the unavoid¬ 
able disagreeable obstacles met with in sufficient 
numbers in the ordinary course of life without 
wasting one’s time erecting barriers for the dis¬ 
cipline it will give in demolishing them again? 

||It is not thus that the great achievments of life 
have been accomplished* Love has been the motive 
power which has supplied the dynamic to all work 
which is worth while, # And the work that is worth 
while in the school is that which is performed 
under the inspiration of former conquests, of the 









- 







( 33 ) 


child 1 s feeling that hie being is unfolding and 

with It a power received which helps him to 
overcome in the battle of school life* In this way 
he comes to see life as a whole in a truer perspec- 

tive and reason mounts as a queen upon the throne. 

' 

■ 

He goes out into life ready to curb his feelings 

* - . 

and act with discretion* 


Discipline in a school is deceived, 
perhaps, as much through the school atmosphere as 
in any other way, and the personality of the teach¬ 
er is paramount in the creation of this. In another 
part we shall discuss the function of the teacher 
at greater length, but here we shall point out 
some characteristics in the teacher which are vital 
in this phase of educational worK. A peasant, the 
rather of one of the pupils, visited at one time 
the school of Pestalozzi and he remarked:-"This 
is nob a school; it is a family," Here is the 

secret, and its explanation lies wholly in the 

. 

personality of the teacher, Nothing else can 
create such a feeling in the school* The plan 
;oday is to enlist the support of the scholars 















. 


















. ' . ■ 

_ 

- 

rl ’ ' *' 










• 




, 
















( 33 ) 


in the work of the school and thus make them 
accustomed to assume responsibilities. To this end 
the "School City" plan was devised. But throughout 
it all the teacher must maintain that constant and 
firm ana yet sympathetic attitude which will inter¬ 
pret itself to the child as strength and love. 

It is not wise to become too familiar, nor, on 
the other hand, to hold oneself aloof, but better 
to main tain that mean of reserved friendship by 
which the child will always feel that there is a 
power not yet revealed. 

If the object of discipline is to 
develop self control in the pupil, there should be 
no evidence of the lack of it in the teacher. 

This may be due to several causes. In the first 
place, the teacher may be timid. If so, he had 
better overcome it , or change his vocation. Or 
he may talk too much, or again, he may not be able 
to control his emotions. A single suaden outburst 
of anger on the part of the teacher often undoes tie 
good work of weeks, or even months. In short, the 
teacher must be the living epistle of all the virtues 

































. 













( 34 ) 


which he should nurture In the child. He should 
be prompt and punctual, careful and neat and orderly, 
alert and industrious, always evidencing that earn¬ 
estness in and love for the subjects which he desires 

I to inspire in the children. He also should be kind 
and courteous and truthful. And when he is all 
this, he should place every confidence in the pupils, 
making them feel that they are honor bound to live 
out the best. 

The appeal to the honor of the child 
is the most efficient substitute for corporal pun¬ 
ishment, Punishment at all times should be the 
natural result of the offence, Munsterburg rightly 
says:- "The real training which is to be gained can 
be secured only if at the bottom, of the pupil's mind 
an instinctive approval of the rebuke and punishment 
is alive and working,” The end of discipline is 
to draw the child nearer to you, but corporal pun¬ 
ishment defeats its own purpose for it alienates. 

It finds Itself growing into increasing disfavor, 
and in Prance has been prohibited entirely, by law. 

In Germany, where we have the impression that most 
rigid discipline is maintained, it is under the 
control of the Inspectors, each case with its causes 













' - 

, 






































- 









c 



( 35 ) 


and ^ther details being reported to him. In 
England, too, the raovemnet is towards a discipline 
with no less firmness but with more sympathy and 

reason. On our own continent a like tendency exists, 
in many places in the United States corporal pxunish- 
ment being completely prohibited. 

Space will not permit the discussion 
of the disciplinary value of play. Suffice it to 
state that this is a feature of school life which 
should not be overlooked by the teacher who is alert 
and not blind to his great opportunities. 

Nor can we do more than mention the 
fact that the home bears a vital relation to the 
ultimate results of the work of the school in this 
sphere. When the teacher and the parent equally 
recognize their infinite responsibility in the 
training of the children, and co-operate to develop 
sanely and wisely into the possession of the virtues 
of self-knowledge, self-reverence and self-control, 
then, and not till then, will the school or the 
home have fulfilled its glorious mission. 







f 













. 

- 












. 









( 36 ) 


About no phase of the educational prob¬ 
lems does such live and persistent struggle center 
as about the curriculum. It is the attitude of 
the "New" education towards tius that largely 
marks the line of change from the "Old”. But any 
cleavage in education should not bring us dismay. 

We see the same principle of change, conflict and 
adjustment in politics, business, science and 
religion. The conflict fcut shows us how vitally 
education is connected with life as a whole in all 
its movements. 

The vital problem of the last few decades 
has been, shall the child conform to the curricu¬ 
lum, or shall the curriculum conform to the child? 
Those who answer the first question in the affirm¬ 
ative have as their educational slogan,"Discipline ,* 
those who answer the latter thus have as theirs, 
"Interest," The former take the logical viewpoint 
of the curriculum; the latter, the psychological. 

But the question occurs:- Is there any real 
fundamental gap between the subject matter of the 
curriculum and the life experience of the child? 




- 

.. 

" 

p 

r 







( 37 ) 


Professor Dewey clearly states the case thus:- 
"From the side of the child, it is seeing how his 
experience already contains within itself elements— 
facts and truths—of just the same sort as those 
entering into the formulated stud#; ana, what is 
of more importance, of how it contains within itself 
the attitudes, the motives and the interests which 
have operated in developing and organising the 
subject matter to the plane which it now occupies, 
j From the side of the studies it is a question of 
interpreting them as outgrowths of forces operating 
in the child f s life, and of discovering the steps 
that intervene between the child’s present exper¬ 
ience and their rich maturity 

The subject matter of the curricula 
is not in its origin or in its development separa¬ 
ted from life. In its different phases it presents 
in organized form the results of the conflicting 
ideas and emotions of humanity; of will, playing 
against will; industry and commerce and calculation 
of mankind; of its romance and feats of daring; of 
its testing and painstaking experimenting. As an 














: 










. 






( 38 ) 


illustration we may take the subject of commer¬ 
cial geography. The pupil is told that the imports 
of merchandise into Canada for the calendar year 
1914 amounted to #481,315,512. What & meaningless 
mass of figures to a child* But for the teacher 
to take the child to the country and in imagination 
if not in reality, go through a day*s work on the 
farm, entering into all the operations, the milk¬ 
ing and feeding, sowing and reaping, buying and 
selling, threshing and hauling, shipping, calcul¬ 
ating and banking, what a changed aspect it gives 
to the child, 1 He knows that this farmer sold one 
thousand dollars worth of wheat and five hundred 
dollars worth of stock. Then following out the 
same course in talcing the child to the factory, 
pointing out the means of securing the raw mater¬ 
ial, how it was grown, the labor spent upon its 
production and its cost; the child enters into the 
experiences of those engaged in the labor of pro¬ 
duction, and thus instead of these figures being 
unintelligible to him they are full of meaning; 
lie finds that they represent the perfect organ¬ 
isation of the financial aspect of all the details 





1 

^ , ' 











(39) 


of trade. And just as commercial geography 
gives the life of the nation in terms of business 
in its net forms* so the. other subjects present it 
in other forms. The formulated results must not 
be divorced from the processes of life, "The logical 
is not set over against the psychological," 

Herein lies largely the secret of the 
conflict between the old and the new studies. There 
is no questioning the fact that it was once hard to 
find the means of extending the educational system 
in public schools, but it is equally hard now to 
find the means of confining it. It has been a 
strong temptation to introduce subjects into the 
curriculum as "happy thoughts". After they have 
found a lodgment in the course a reaction has set 
in against them* and they have either been rejected 
entirely or have found a very minor place upon the 
time-table. There has been an undercurrent of op¬ 
position against them. But in the light of what was 
said above why should there be any conflict? Why 
should they not rather reinforce each other? Why 
should nature study* drawing and art, music, hygiene* 




















































' 




























■ 














r 

















































- ' • ; - 






( 40 ) 


and manual work of various kinds not exist harmoniously 
on the same curriculum with the three P f s, if they 
all represent a totality of the experience of life 
in their own sphere? 

Fimdarnentally, then, we must answer 
that there is no reason whatever. But subjects of 
the traditional education held sway for such a long 
time that all the forms and machinery which they 
summoned to their assistance grew vitally into 
the very woof of the educational system, and, now 
that the course of study is being enriched by the 
addition of the incoming studies the demand is that 
these shall conform to the machinery of the former, 

"The conflict," as Professor Dewey says,"the conf¬ 
usion, the compromise, is not intrinsically bet¬ 
ween the older group of studies and the newer, but 
between the external conditions in which the former 
were realised and the aims and standards represented 
bt the newer, M Hence so long as the newer studies 
are laboring under these external conditions, they 
have not the opportunity of showing what benefit 
they can be. 




f 


( ) 




' o 


' “ f ‘ • ' ■ 

f 

. 


. 

- 

~ 

















( 41 ) 


This practice of enriching the 
school course has had all but a world wide sway 
in the nations in which the problems of education 
are receiving serious attention* Whereas but a 
few decades since the three R f s usurped fully 
ninety per cent of the total time given to the 
subjects in the elementary schools, in some cases 
as we shall see, this Trivlum is reduced to less 
than fifty per cent. 

The following table compiled from 
tables given by Dr, Payne will serve to show in 
a fairly accurate measure the relative positions 
of the several subjects in the United States, 
England, Germany and Prance, 











(42) 



America. 

..England.. 

u.i 

.Germany.•France. 

Religion, 

1 .Opening 

!4. • 

fxercises 

2.Reading & 

3.1 



Literature 

20,7 

15.3 


3.Writing 

4.7 

8 


4.Spelling 

4.7 

3,5 


5.Grammar 


4.5 



(1) 

(5) 

(5): (t 

6.Language 

14.4 

4,2 

34.2 : 33.3 

7.Composition 


4.5 

• 

8.Arithmetic 

17,3 

20.1 

17.2 T 15.3 

9.Geography 

7,2 

(2) 

5.9 

6.8 : 

: (' 

.Q.Hletory 

1.Oivil 

Government, 

4.8 

2.2 

4.2 | 16.5 

.2.Object 


(4) 


Wessons 

■ 

3. Elementary 
Science 


4 

: 6.3 


(1) . Includes Grammar and Language. 

(2) . Includes History and Civil Government. 

(3) . Is Recitation and Literature. 

(4) . Includes Object Lessons and Elementary Science. 

(5) . Includes Reading, Writing, Spelling, Grammar 

and Composition. 

(6) . Includes Reading, Spelling, Dictation, Grammar, 

Recitation and Composition. 

(7) . Includes Geography, History and Civics, 


































— 











(45) 




frnerica... 

England.. 

Gerawwr. .. 

.1.4. 

Nature Study 

(8) 

3.4 

5. 

15. 

Fhysiology 

.7 



16. 

Physical 

Training 

4.7 

5.1 

6.2 

17. 

Drawing 

6.4 

8.8 

5,2 

18. 

Music 

5.1 

4.8 

5. 5 

19. 

Manual Training 

Sewing and 
Cooking 

(9) 

2.4 

(10) 

2,9 

UD 

1.5 

20, 

French 

la 









9.6 

Two or 5 
recitations 
per week. 

5,8 


8.2 


One outstanding feature of the ^bove 
Table is the fact that Germany has not yet deci¬ 
ded to take into her curriculum the "fads and frills" 
which the other nations have done. The United 
States Commissioner of Education (in a letter dated 


(8) . iheludes Elementary Science and Mature study, 

(9) . Includes Cooking and Sewing. 

(10 ).* includes Woodwork and Cooking. 

11). Hand work for girls. 

































(44) 






January 7th, 1904) is authority for the statement 
that," The courses of study for the schools of 
German cities remain practically as they were in 
1894—5." 

The principal change in the curri¬ 
culum of Berlin from 1875 to 19C2 has been in 

' 

the elimination of nature studies in the first 

two grades, and the increase of gymnastics for 

‘ 

boys and the admission of girls to gymnastics. 

In France during the past forty years a new 
educational policy has guided and dominated her 
educators. This has been largely political. 
Determined to rise from her defeated self after 
the Fr anco-Prussian war she saw that every citi¬ 
zen should, be a soldier and every soldier an edu¬ 
cated man. Hence the primary duty of every teacher 
is national and the content studies receive such 
an important place upon the curriculum. 


The guiding principle in the educational 
growth in England was in complete contrast to that 
Of France, Whereas the end in French and German 





( 45 ) 


education Is the State, in England it is the indi¬ 
vidual* Hence there can be In no real sense a system 

of elementary schools. But of late years a tendency 
has arisen towards uniformity as against individual¬ 
ism, but as yet it has not affected the curriculum. 

In the United States the content of 
the curriculum rests very largely upon the bearing 
the subjects have to practical life. But for the 
most part the people refuse to have the subjects 
which have constituted the traditional curriculum 
for so long, displaced to any considerable extent. 
Hence it,is becoming cumbersome, and the scholars 
are compelled to spread their efforts over an appal¬ 
ling number of subjects. And when upon entrance 
of a new subject the people see that it is helpful 
they refuse to allow its abandonment. Mew York has 
set a bold example in reducing the time spent upon 
the three H*s to about sixty per cent, whwreas not 
many years since they held the maximum of ninety 
per cent. England has overcome this crowding of the 
curriculum by the introduction of the elective system 
which would permit the child in the rural school to 




. 





















r 















( 46 ) 


take gardening In place of shorthand or of iron- 
working in the city school* 

Although the writer has no data upon 
which to formulate a judgment, yet as the general 
situation and problem of Canadian education appears 
on the whole so similar to those of the United States, 
it might be safely inferred that the same tendency 
and the same principles of direction exist here as 
in the latter country* The basis of curriculum 
formation largely depends upon the actual service 
the learning of the subject will be in life* 

t one difference worthy of notice exists 
owever, between the place of authority for the fona¬ 
tion of the curriculum in the European countries 
and that in North America* For the former, the auth¬ 
ority is centralized in the National .Government; in 
the latter, it is in the provinces or even left to 
the local puperintendents* Each system presents its 
advantages and at the same time its disadvantages* 

The continental system secures greater uniformity* 

When a child moves from one district or state to 
another there is no break in the continuity of his 











f 
















( 47 ) 


course. But it lacks the individual initiative 
which is possible in the other. And in a country 
with rapidly changing local conditions this is 
highly important. 

Two problems arising directly from 
the curriculum have caused, and are still creating, 
a large amount of controversy. These are religious 
instructions in schools and vocational training. 

Let us consider religious instruction first. 

As was said above, religion forms part 
of the great inheritance of every individual. Hence, 
if the curriculum is to be representative of the 
complete experience of the race, religion should be 
incorporated within it. But religion is a life, 
an experience, an attitude. It cannot be defined 
in mathematical terms, and hence Its teaching may 
be so elusive that the child will grasp it in a very 
indefinite way. He will comprehend it more intell¬ 
igibly by the living example of the teacher and the 
daily course of the school routine. It is generally 
accepted that the end of religious instruction in 


1 I- 


- , - 

J . f 


■ 




i . 

. 




























♦ 

- 




( 48 ) 


schools is moral perfection. But to whet extent 
will this end be accomplished if the teacher teaching 
the subdivision on ^Temptation” for instance, and 
praying ’’Lead us not into temptation” is known by 


his pupils to be guilty of continued evil practises? 
Will it not be a more effective lesson in hypocrisy? 
If teachers were uniformly competent from the moral 

I and Intellectual aspects to give religious instruc¬ 
tion, the problem might be more easy of solution. 

But under the existing conditions probably the policy 
of Germany and England along this line is the less 
commendable to our reason. 

The further problem of vocational 
education looms large in these times of industrial¬ 
ism. The past has tenaciously held to the so called 
liberal educators, and the present sometimes goes 
to the either extreme in placing complete emphasis on 
the utilitarian aspect of education. But for the 
sake of integral development, all the valid aims 
of education should be kept in view during the pre¬ 
paratory period. Society demands that each adult, 














( • 

























































( 49 ) 


within the limit8 of his capacity, shall be phy¬ 
sically well, shall be vocationally capable, shall 
have civic and moral insight and motive, and shall 
keep alive some cultural or aesthetic interests. 

For the accomplisliraent of this end 
there must be a finer correlation of the subjects 
of the curriculum than at present exists, correl¬ 
ation of studies has been defined as the selection 
and arrangement in orderly sequence of such objects 
of study as shall give the child an insight into 
the world that he lives in, and a command over its 
resources such as is obtained by a helpful co-oper¬ 
ation with one ? s fellows! Accepting this definition 
it is evident that each subject must speak in terms 
of real life. But real life must be interpreted in 
terms of the child. Even the vocational side of 
education may be so taught as to have as little 
bearing upon the natural environment or social rel¬ 
ationship of the child as many subjects of the f lib¬ 
eral education 1 bore in the past, 

Report of committee of Fifteen, p, 41, 








- 







( 50 ) 


A common mistake In the presentation 
of this department of the curriculum is the emphasis 
placed upon its economic aspect. This emphasis 
confuses if it does not largely pervert the end. 

The child should under ordinary conditions, know 
little of the economic necessities of life. Hence 
the words of Professor Dewey are pertinent, "The 
aim is not the economic value of the products but 
the development of social power and insight. r The 
educative aspect from this point of view rests 
largely in the adaptation of the tools used to 
the period of physical and mental development of 
the child. The attempt was made in England to 
find a basis of correlation of the subjects in 
Geography, but it would seem that inasmuch as 
the development of the complexity of man’s tools 
is largely a history of the development of the 
race, that such a correlation may be sought in the 
vocational side of the curriculum. 

Before coming to the consideration of 
that most vital factor of all in the educational 


















. 

0 








n f ' 


























■ 






( 51 ) 


world—the teacher--some minor topics related to 
his work might he noted with profit. 

During the past few decades an infinite 
amount of work has been done in the psychological 
laboratories of the world. A so called "New* psy¬ 
chology has supplanted the "Old*. The child has 
been the subject of countless experiments, and 
these have been productive of important results 
to the Psychologist. The teacher has conceived 
the idea that he too must hold the child as an 
organism for scientific research* and by thus learn¬ 
ing more of his physical phenomena he may the better 
be able to adapt his methods to the laws of the 
mental life and development of the child. 

But just herein lies a danger to the 
average teacher. It is true that the knowledge of 
psychology may show a teacher whether his methods 
are following the correct course, but the average 
teacher should never in the school assume the atti¬ 
tude toward the child other than the purposive, as 
Professor Munsterberg terms it. That is, the child 





( 




- 

- 













- , 
























. 
























( 52 ) 


must be a living, real, ethical organism, and not 
an abstract entity to be analysed with microscopic 
exactness. Hence Psychology will not lay down a 
binding method for all individuals for the complete 
teaching of all subjects. It will point the direction, 
and the teacher himself must select his pathway, along 
which with the most effective results, he will lead 
his pupils. 

There are fundamental principles of 
method such as proceeding from individual notions to 
general notions based on the laws of apperception 
which are being applied by teachers with increasing 
thorct*ghne$s 9 of which space will not permit the dis¬ 
cussion here. But there is much to do yet along the 
line of working out and applying these principles. 

It is true that the nations have never yet seemed to 
realise what they owe the teachers in their elementary 
schools, in town and country# But they have been 
handicapped and overweighted by the shackles of the 
systems within which they have had to work. The 
evil effects of payment by results for years went to 
kill elementary education in the real sense, and to 







... 



, _L ■ 

. 

:■ • * ' 




















( 53 ) 

stunt and dwarf the mentality of the children. 

It seems almost incredible that a hundred and 
fourteen years ago Pestalozzi published, "How 
I Gertrude Teaches Her Children," and that twenty- 
eight years ago Proebel opened his first kinder¬ 
garten, and that still we are in many respects 
jfar behind the Pestalozzian and BToebel ideas* 

It has remained for Italian genius to add one 
more gift to civilization and to show the world 
how to lay a broad educational foundation on which 
a superstructure may be built which shall take 
into account the whole of the ehlld*s nature, by 
individualizing that nature to the fullest extent 
iffhlle developing in concord with it the true communal 
ideas of mutual friendship and service. 

Dottoressa Maries Montessori is an 
Italian lady who was assistant doctor at the Psy¬ 
chiatric Clinic of the University of Pome, She 
became interested in idiot and feeble minded 
children, and after studying pedagogical principles 
applicable to the latter, it dawned upon her that 
the same methods might be successfully applied to 

























. 

- 










( 54 ) 


normal children. Briefly Dr. Montessori’e 
method Is to allow the child, with as little 
teaching as possible to educate itself through 
the medium of the senses, and thus gradually dev¬ 


elop its latent faculties and character. One of 
her cardinal ideas is that the Innate faculties 
S>r this training through the senses are active 

i 

at a much earlier age in children than is commonly 

. 


supposed, and she seems, by her method, to have 
proved her belief. Another.of her principles 
seems to be that children are innately good if 
properly appreciated. She thus dispenses with 
the traditional idea that the child is filled with 
Original sin 1 , which, by the methodical application 

of corporal punishment, must be driven out. But 

* 

Dr, Montessori f s method is the exact antithesis 
of this, Bather than presupposing the evil in the 
child nature she helped the child to manifest the 
good in itself. And Instead of requiring teachers 
to say "DonH" or "Do* she keeps the teacher qua 


teacher in the background as much as possible and 






when the teacher is required she would have her 
say:- *»come and let us try this together,” 

We have dealt at some considerable 
length with this method, not because of its novelty 
but because of the widespread influence it is exer¬ 
ting, In June, 1911 f Switzerland passed a law est¬ 
ablishing the Montessori system in all its public 
schools. Two model schools ?/ere opened in Paris 
in September of the same year. Schools have also 
been established in India, China, Mexico, Korea, 
Honolulu and the Argentine Republic, The United 
States has also welcorned it and the Normal Schools 
of Canada are lecturing upon its methods and prin¬ 
ciples. 

Dr, Montessori®s educational method 
is for children of from three to six years, but, as 
she says in her preface, it is but the earnest of 
a work that, developing the same principle and 
method shall cover in a like manner the successive 
stages of education. Herein lies the great field 
of future pedagogical experimentation. Professor 
Dewey in his Elementary School is making a 













' t " ♦ « 

- 


- 


r 

' 






. 


( 56 ) 

systematic effort with children from four to 
thirteen to continue the application of these 
principles. Relative to Instruction in the 
formal, symbolic branches, the mastering of the 
ability to read, write and use figures intelli¬ 
gently, he says:- "in any school, if the child 
realizes the motive for the use end application 
of number and langxiage he has taken the longest 
step towards securing the power, and he can realize 
the motive only as he has some particuiar, not 
some general and remote use for the symbol.* 

Many of the devices of the method 
of the schools of today arise because of the 
failure of the child to discover this motive, 
and hence the knowledge is meaningless. Com¬ 
petitive drills, alternatives of punishments, 
or spoon feeding are resorted to by the teacher. 

At times the bug bear of examinations is held over 
their heads. But how unworthy these of the noble 
art? 






/ 








- 






If 

• 




0 














'' 












, ' ' ' 


*' 


_ • 




* 


< 













And yet does not our system, of grading, 
division of curriculum, promotion and examinations 
tend to this system of teaching? What opportunity 
of initiative presents itself? In a rural school, 
with one teacher responsible for possibly seven or 
eight grades, the outline programme of studies is 
a positive haven, A relief from such a position 
partially comes from the modern plan of centrali¬ 
sation or consolidation so that several schools 
unite in one. This is meeting with increasing 
approval because of the more successful results 
secured. But even with this there are disadvan¬ 
tages, When the programme of studies has its 
definite apportionment for each year, so that one 
year*s work may fit externally into that of tie 
next, there is a break in the continuity of the studies 
and they become formal and stereotyped rather than 
living and vital. And likewise, too, the teacher 
in a graded school retaining the same grade from 
year to year fails to grasp the unity of the 
whole process, and withoi.it such a conception the 








- 


- 














. 

- , 










teacher of that particular grade fails in one of 
the fundamental principles of pedagogy. 


What place should examinations hold 
in tills educative process? If we are agreed that 
all school work should be broadly educative; that 
character building is the high standard we must 
always ultimately maintain; then we must hold that 
examinations should fit into such a process. As 
Professor Dewey says:- "The things of the spirit 
do not lend themselves easily to that kind of exter¬ 
nal inspection which goes by the name of examina¬ 
tions, They do not lend themselves easily to exact 
quantitative measurement,* Then how shall they best 
be administered so as to secure the most effective 
results? 

■Two kinds of examination are possible, 
the written and oral. Of late, the written has al¬ 
most entirely usurped the place of the oral, and 
thereby the advantages of the latter have been lost. 
To place a class under an oral test for an hour 









reveal8 the readiness of the child to respond, 
the individual grasp of the whole subject, and 
at the same time is a lesson to the teacher in 
the shill of questioning. The written examination 
on the other hand gives the pupil a longer period 
for reflection, he must use his judgment in selec¬ 
ting and arranging, and it brings home to him. also 
his responsibility in the learning process. To 
the teacher it may be a revelation of the character 
of his own teaching and the weaknesses of his pupils. 

But when examinations are made the 
sole objective, the one and only goal of education 
as our modern system tends to do, the most serious 
injury results. The children learn to gather up 
by memory the lessons which they have received from 
the lips of their teachers, and they aim to repro¬ 
duce them with accuracy on the examination papers. 
This system has spread widely in every direction, 
even universities have been captivated by the fine 
compositions and brilliant statements elicited by 
their examinations. But such may represent merely 

















( . '■) 




















. 


, • I 


i •; .1. 1 v -r- • 










1 ■ 

—: • » ' : . • : . \ j . •. ' . . - » 

. 


. • . 













( 60 ) 


the product of a finely developed memory* and it 
is agreed that memory will never generate the 
ablest man, great though the services are which a 
strong memory will yield to its possessor. It 
would be better then if examinations are given— 
and it is granted that they do serve a useful 
purpose in the regime—that they be given unexpect¬ 
edly to the pupils and never be allowed to loom so 
high in the mind of the examinee that they are the 
sine qua non of his school life. 

We have now come to the discussion 
of that greatest factor in the educative process, 
namely, the teacher. In this process the teacher 
is the sun bringing light and life and growth to 
the dormant, yet eternally important potentiali¬ 
ties of the child. 

What nobler, what more sacred calling 
than that of the teacher? In whose hands are placed 
more fully the destinies of nations? It rests with 
him to blight the child or bless him, to lift or 

























( 61 ) 


degrade, to inspire with love or despair, to 
kindle within his breast a love of thejtrue, the 
good and the beautiful, or, of the false, the 
base and the ignoble; in short to curse or to 
save him. What an overpowering sense he should 
have of the infinite importance of his task. 

This Is the primal postulate of the successful 
teacher. If he speak with the tongues of men and 
of angels and has not this attltilde he is become 
sounding brass or a clanging cymbal. 

It has been repeated so often that it 
has almost attained the force of a pedagogical 
maxim that the teacher is born, not made. To a 
certain extent this is true, Plato recognised 
this principle when he formulated his law of the 
division of labor. But the fact that some were 
born to be genuine rulers was if anything the more 
potent argument that their training should be the 
more prolonged and thorough. Likewise the teacher, 
whether endowed with innate capacity or not, should 





. 

1 

X 




( 62 ) 


be as completely equipped as the efforts of the 
state and his own can accomplish. Important as 
the former are, the latter are much more so, for 
the personal element in the teacher is the crown of 
all qualifications. It is with those we especially 
wish to deal. 

All the civilized nations, recog¬ 
nizing the magnitude of the task of the educator, 
have provided the organization whereby the teacher 
may be mnade f \ This, of course, presupposes the 
readiness and willingness on the part of the future 
teacher to accept such training intelligently, and 
when he shall enter the profession as a certifi¬ 
cated teacher to put it into effect. 

In the Normal or training schools 
for elementary teachers there is reflected quite as 
much of the unsettled conditions as exist in the 
elementary school itself. During the past twenty- 
five years remarkable changes have taken place m 
society and in education, and they have exerted a 


. 

J. 





1 


. 



. V f • 

- „ ’ 



' , - , : ' 1 .i .. . ! 




X • • ; * •• ■ ' - J ; • ' 




( 63 ) 


reflex influence upon each other* The ultra- 
conservative© in these institutions, satisfied 
with their results in the past, cling tenaciously 
to the old forms and methods. But "Normal schools 
ought to lead rather than follow; they should 
be willing to make experiments; they should culti¬ 
vate open-mindedness and patient investigation on 
the part of their students; they should antici¬ 
pate the needs of communities in respect of the 

/ 

closer relationship of the school to the commu¬ 
nity; the treatment of peculiar, neglected, and 
defective children, the segregation of disturb¬ 
ing elements, the nurture and oversight of city 
children during vacations, the establishment of 
social centres,the relation of schools to public 
libraries, to museums, churches, to aesthetic 
culture, to commercial and industrial movements, 
to books and reading. Viewing the Normal School 
as the fountainhead of educational influence in 
the state, how important that its administration 





( 










t* 






; 


• 

I 





- J ■ 


: 














. 

~ • : 

[cr -. - ' “ ’ ' ' 








. 










( 64 ) 


should be alive to the rapidly changing condi¬ 
tions of modern life, to the discoveries of 
biological and psychological research, to the 
fruits of child study, to the wide range of 
physical defect which is to be recognized and 
considered in every school, to the methods of 
preventive ana corrective treatment, to all 
those pathological conditions which affect both 
teachers and pupil© w , 1 

This appears as an imposing prog¬ 
ramme for any Normal School to take cognizance 
of, yet these all enter into the educational 
problem and hence cannot be left out of the 
equipment of the teacher. In England and France 
the Normal Schools neglect to a very large extent 
the theoretical aspect of training. In a large 
number psychology has no allotment on the time¬ 
table, and thus there is no psychological basis 
for method or matter. The history of education 

is likewise omitted. Great stress, however, is 

Administration o<f Public Education in the 
United States, Dutton and Sneddeir. 










































; 

. 




( 65 ) 


laid upon practise, but imitation very often 
plays too important apart in this work, In 
Germany the religious qualification is emphas¬ 
ized, But in all the schools the intending 
teacher comes with an inheritance of ethical, 
social and physical qualities which go to consti¬ 
tute his personality and the question they must 
face is, ”0an this personality be improved and 
made more efficient for the work of the schools?” 

And this is the primary question 
that the individual teacher must face as he looks 
at himself throughout his career, A certain 
amount of healthy introspection is essential 
for the maintenance of a freshness and growth 
of personality necessary for one in constant 
contact with youth. If a teacher is to train 
others, still more must he train himself. Per¬ 
haps indeed the less he thinks about training 
others, and the more about training himself, the 
better it will be for him and for them. For 






( 66 ) 




the training of others is a process of giving out 
knowledge, but the teachers training of himself 
is a process of taking in knowledge, and it is 
more important to take in knowledge than to gi^e 
it out* The reason is that the influence of 
every teacher depends not ujjon what he says, nor 
even upon what he does, but upon what he is* He 
cannot be better or greater than himself* He 
cannot teach nobly if he himself is not noble* 
Water cannot rise higher than its source* That 
is the reason why he must first raise himself 
to a high intellectual and moral state; for so 
only can he hope to raise his pupils. 

As was said above, the teacher should 
at all times be courteous. Courteous to the 
paremts and not less so to his pupils* Dr, Arnold 
won his way to the hearts of Rugby boys by the 
simple respect which he showed in accepting their 
word as true, A teacher*s success has sometimes 
been imperilled by so slight a mistake as the 








( 67 ) 


matter of not returning boys* salutes on the 
street. For, courtesy begets courtesy; it is a 
passport to popularity. The way in which things 

are done is often more Important than the things 

. 

themselves, 

An important condition of courtesy 

is a sound and healthy body. When the physical 

. 

condition is low, the blood is thin and heart 
beat is weak, trifles annoy and irritate which 
otherwise woiaid be unnoticed. And it is in the 
interest of the pupils even more than in that of 
|the teacher that he observe the laws of health. 

o be well is often the true secret of teaching 
well. Fatigue conduces to futility, A weary 
schoolmaster is a dreary one. 




A teacher cannot afford to diminish 
.he time for both sleep and recreation which Nature 
.emands. If he does, her revenge will be sure, 
here are so many forms of exercise today that it 
s easy for a teacher to guard against the evil of 











• 

) 

; 















































' 

■ 



( 68 ) 


too sedentary a life* It is a hard lesson to learn, 
but necessary, nevertheless, paradoxical though it 
may seem, that one may often do more by doing less, 

A teacher ought always to be at his best* 

Another fact regarding the teaciier 
and one which is applicable to all professions is 
that the profession creates, or tends to create, 
a certain type of character* The teaching profess¬ 
ion seems to have a naturally cramping or narrowing 
influence upon the mind. Education is a hard taskmaster. 
It makes a heavy demand upon its votaries* It allows 
them scanty and precarious leisure, and often, when 
the leisure occurs, leaves them so weary that they 
are incapable of turning it to good account. The 
sabbatical vacation by which a teacher may be 
allowed a year*s absence on half-pay for travel 
or study is a plan that would produce a higher 
standard of efficiency among elementary teachers 
if it were adopted* The term ^experience* used 
in pedagogical commercialism may be the worst 
qualification which a teacher may present. It is 





( 69 ) 

mot more ♦’experience*♦ in such a sense that is 
needed, hut a more liberal draught at the ever- 
flowing stream of human culture. 

Then a schoolmaster raust not be a 
schoolmaster only; he roust be more than a school¬ 
master. He must be a man of wide interests and 
information. He must move freely in the world 
of affairs. Mr, Arthur Sidgwiek says of Dr. Arnold 
♦♦When he was composing sermons, histories, notes 
on Thucydides, and teaching Rugby better than any 
school was ever taught before, he was writ!ng 
letters, as his life shows, on ever?/ subject of 
interest; the Newmanxtee, Niebifhr, Rome, the Jews, 
the Chartists, London University, the French Rev¬ 
olution. This width of interest took hold of the 
boys, as it always does and must. Ana he himself 
knew it and felt it, ‘♦The more active my own mind 
is," he said, "the more it works upon great moral 
and political points, the better for the school," 
The more a teacher knows, the more he thinks, the 












) 






1 , ■■ ■ 

. 

: 1 " , - 

M 0 ” 0 . 

v ■ .. 




better teacher he rill be. Ail one learns is worth 
learning. All knowledge illustrates other know¬ 
ledge, As © precaution, against narrowness, he. 
should Indulge largely and lavishly in reading. 

Novel reading is refreshing, for it takes one out 
of hlnself and that, perhaps is the best holiday 
that anyone can have. It will give the mind an edge 
an elasticity, The peril of reading no novels is 
much more serious than that of reading too many. 

The teacher’s leisure is short, but 
it is made shorter than it is because so many things 
in it are made too long. The secret of getting 
through work is method, Order, it has bef3n said, 
is C-od*s first law. It should be the schoolmaster 8 s 
And by the way the teacher spends this leisure, he 
may be judged almost as well as by the way he does 
his work. 

The great need of the teacher, to 
conclude, is that he shall not forget his divine 
responsibility. A great teacher used to say that 




( 71 ) 


lie could never receive a new boy from his 
father’s hands without emotion. Certainly none can 
be without emotion, as he sends out one of his 
pupils in these difficult days to the stress and 
temptation of the world. He needs much patience, 
courage and wisdom in his glorious calling. The 
teacher should be able to say that, with whatever 
faults of temper and judgment he has wrought his 
tasks, yet he has unselfishly sought to do his 
pupils good. And when this is the universal ex¬ 
pression ©f the elementary teacher, the greatest 
step has been taken in the solution of the supreme 
problems which face the elementary school of our 
present generation. 

I» I* It 1* » It H W W t» l» II II tt 


FINIS. 























- 















DIB W 0 G R A P H Y. 

The School .J.L. Findlay 

The Child and the Curriculum..Dewey. 

Report of the Committee of Fifteen on Elementary 
Education.. .................... . 

The History of Education.... ..P. Monroe 

Psychology and the Teacher... .Masterburg 

Our Schoois—-Their Administration and 
Supervision.. ..... Chancellor 

The public Primary School System of 

France... Farrington 

Public Elementary School Curricula........ Payne 

German Education..... •............ Paulsen 

History' of Education...... . Painter 

German School System..... Seeley 

The Educational Situation,.. Dewey 

The School and Society..... Dewey 

The Place of Industries in 

Ilementary Education ,...,,................ Dopp 

Talks on Teaching,.. ... ..."Parker 















































U) 


TalKs to Teachers.. ., , ,.James 

School Management. .... .Dutton 

Administration of Public Education 


in the United States.,...Dutton & Snedder 

General Aims of the Teacher..... Farrar.* Ppple 

Encyclopaedia Brittanies—Article on Education. 

Training of Elementary School Teachers 
in Germany,.............. . ............Kandel 

Training of Elementary School Teachers 
in England and Wales...... .Sandlson 

Educational Reform...... .Eliot. 


H tt a v r» v ft t» >> ti »» i* st n v it t» »» it ft it it it it it w it it t> tt it tt t* n t* tt t> p v it 











































» 

















* 



♦ 


V' 


\ 


\ 



* 













