

tix UBBIS 

aiBBIlIIlSK 














Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 




https://archive.org/details/riseofsocialcredOOhust 




■H lb 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


T1IE RISE OF THE SOCIAL CREDIT MOVEMENT IN ALBERTA 

1932 - 1935 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY of ARTS and SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT of POLITICAL ECONOMY 

4 + by 

Mary-Louise Huston 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
I May - 1959 
















v ! ;> 








r 


t : ,1..: •' f 




1 










ABSTRACT 


The Rise of the Boole* 1 Credit Move ent In Alberto 

.. i2& - im 

Xn 1925# the Social Credit party in Albert a vo its firt electoral 
victory* The economic depression facilitated Its csuccc o at the polioj 
also Co- vlucive to Ito victory were Alberts 1 a political structure# 
neither stabilised by a Giro- g two-party system, lor tied by firm bonds 
of ini erect and sent Inert with the Canadian federal ayclemJ and a 
fUrda»ent list religious background hospitable to a political novenent 
of crusading reform* 

WiUlnn Aberhnrt, the lender of the Albert party# become a 
convert to Social Credit ideas in the sutts&r of 1952# e: d It is from 
this tine thet the movement 1 c -growth is a mly©a4* Three factors# 
leadership# ory nigation# and doctrine, contributed significantly to the 
move^nt 1 a development* 

As an outstanding charismatic leader, Aberhart symbolized the 
movement to his following, and provided ir. hi© person a focus for 
collective endeavour* At the se. a time, his shill nn t- otic la* helped 
the movement to ©umou'-t pot 'nttally divisive challenges# 

Tho Social Gvedlt or;- is- 1 'on ’rent initial impetus and continued 
ouste a oc from Aberhari* a efficient Prophetic Tlible In tiiute in 
Calgary* An early, fluid situ, .io was merited by growl ■; popular 
interest, but also by doctrinal and leadership conflicts. Early in 





19:54, however, Aberhcrt'o pooitio as le der wa© consolidated, a d th© 
airs adopted to Introduce Social Credit provincially. A:* exte siv© 
formal organisational structure vac qu icily developed, and internal 
cohesion and enthusiasm were etrengthenod by ©heriora, ©peed, so •, 
public meet! effective propararda technique©,, at informal study 
and fellovohi r: cocir tionc, 

A vital rally!" point, el no, m the accept** ae of a eorxaon 
doctri e witch offered both an n explanation* and a '"cure* for economic 
crisis, in culturally accept'-bio and under si'. .deble terns. The 
doctrine’s roll :lou» n d tsillarlal campon©? ts probably evoked an 
©motional accept-"re© from the people which *r*saooad" <ar£**a©i t could 
not r- -'dily dioloc e* The attractiveness of the bade “prl -ciples* 
of Social Credit - the Basic dividend * the Just Price, and the Cor start 
Plow of Credit «* was enhanced by their effective pro sente t--on in ethical 
terras, a :d ot simply ac remedial monetary devices# The doctrine 
me also propound© ' go as to have a definite .appeal to the internets 
of various aocioHseor osslc • roups* 

Or-onised roup opposition to the Social Credit ®&v®m t wettk* 
divided, and efe^civej and the root si ifica^t armae?-!© adviced 
a ai si the doctri-e - those de. ouetr'-tir lie economic a 1 political 
unfeasibility - were not each &e to be easily understood by the 
electorate* Above all, no Opposition spokersner eoul.' offer a compelling 
alternative which promised to satisfy popular needs a-. •' expectations# 





- i - 


nr.FAOE 

In 195 % the votero of Alberta elected the world* a first Social 
Credit over no t, r. d the party renalvn 1- power to this day* The 
causes a -d co’ nqtt© of this unique movement 1 o victory hen a been 
analysed i. n nuriber of studies, fret: various points of view. 

This the is ie re atari cte lardy to the a alyi-ds of three factors - 
leadership* or -a- inetlo**i r.i ~4 doctrine - which contribute d to the 
appeal of the Social Credit wjveneni In Alberta dnrin the period fron 
193?- to 1955* The year® prior to this st e are o ly lightly touched 
upo „ a-d the chan nee t~ the Alberta Social Cr.-dit party* ard In the 
sltir.tio a it face • after its initial victory 1. 1955 ore not dincuoood. 

Ever within thin United frtwmrk t several lama- •© c-alet* In 
the analysis of the leadership of tic Social Credit Eiovemnt* bio. ~ 
raphlcal detail a on Wililasa Aberha rt have not boo- included* an attempt 
is rr.de ir stead* to assese hie functional si ifica: c© to the growth of 
Social Credit in Alberts# 

As re -arts the development of the Social credit or aniaatior--, 
re search was re: derod difficult by the t;md*Nggg|*y of priory naierlslcf 
•either the Social Credit COnatitatio; a d By-L&wo of 1935? **©r the 
si mteo of the Edmonton and -Cal ary Convent lor ® of that year could be 
obint- edj but uueful inforrrtion wa derived fros the thesis of 
Malcolm 0# 1 aylor* who 4*d ho.ro arc See to tin e . 

The dicruseic-- of Social Credit doctrine io cor-fi .e4 nai ly to 














-li¬ 


en analysis of the appeals mad© to the electorate by Aberhart and his 
associates, rather the to a discussion of He rieri 4 an m ooo craie 
or political theory. ?kmrouo analyses of Social Credit an a nonolory 
theory exist, and the ideas of the ori irml expositor, l&jor Clifford 
• -ou Ip.., are Ivor o ly cursory site tic. here* Social Credit 
social or. political theory are considered in C*B,» ’acFhersorle 
on ,n c r 1 - cy i •* 1 be r t r » 

Chapter % which discusees the response to the doctrine. Indicates 
Only i" broad outline the reasons for f. e failure of opposition -roups 
to cou tor the provft or the social Credit moveutn t.* The hist or- of 
the U.r. A* 1 the province bee not yet bee. writ ten l a fuller a? elyolo 
of its rrowth and decline tioul, m ore- precisely IXluminct© the causes 
for Its complete anni’ ‘latter at the polls i. 1955* 

Several people hove rontrtbuied directly or indirectly to this 
Study* Their ns lets e© is -rat©fully aaknowled ;ed. 

"pedal the ?:s arc duo to Profs; sor E*B* Bociurktw* r.: c to 

Professor %K, Davy for the helpful uidaee f criticise, end cu actions 

received fron ther in the preparation: a d i-fritin of tide thesis) to 
dr. R.U t ?a:.'CG, for his careful read! and ucefhl coras: to o the 

fl- al draft) to the librorio a at the he lelatiro Library in IMisonton, 

a: d at t c * :-v..\o Journal, whose co-eporntio fro 8 lit-1 ■ d the 
Catherine of source materials) a. 4 to my hnsba d, for hie *uu,istsne# 
a d e court- erne t while this thesis «&o bci writlc. • 

Sol© responsibility for all view© expressed* and fox ay error. 


is that of the author. 





Abstract 


- ill - 

TABLE OF CCr-TE' JS 


Preface 

Table of Contents 


Chapter 1 # 

Inireduction 

i 

Chapter 2# 

The Leadorchip of the Social Credit 

O^vejse. t 

i? 

Chapter 5* 

Organisation of the Social Credit 

Movement 

36 

Chapter 4. 

The "'^ctrlro of the Alberta aoeial Credit 

Horcoeni 

66 

Chapter % 

Opposition to Social Credit 

108 

Copter 6* 

Conclusions 

135 

Bibliography 


153 




CHAPTER 1 


INTRODUCTION 


The underlying causes of the Social Credit party 1 , over¬ 
whelming electoral victory in 1955 rr will^knowni the 
depression* with its attendant evils - econo " , 

u employment, and widespread social and individ s - 

provided the indispensable basis for a crusadin'; movement of 
politic 1 reform* 

The causal relationship between economic distress and political 

ot1o is not an inexon ble one, however* 

To recognize tic t depressions r suit in r rim protest 
in the wheat belt tells little of the process by which economic 
reverses p roduce cl" r. s action; for many rural a d urban 
roups have bee exposed to depressions, without forming any 
1 r e protest movement* Obviou sly, some import t • ri : 
must intervene betseen the economic f ctor and organized 
social action.^- 

"Eco.omic distress” is, in part, a subjective concept; 
before organized political ction can occur, the situ tion must 
be defined by the people as a crisis. Economic deprivation, 
unless it runs counter to popular expectations, and unless it is 
stron ly felt to be unjust or unnecessary, or both, may not stimulate 
attempts at political reform. And, of course, the use of the 
ballot bo rr, a mea; r of redre sir; , or expressing econo - ic 
rievsnees, is not undertaken where the norms of the society, 


1, Seymour hartin Lipset, Agrerinn Socialism (Berkeley and 
Lon Angeles, 1950), 19« 







- 2 - 


embodied in its tr ditiono and institutions, do not indicate 

this particular form of action. 

Taylor has noted th t the central issues, Involvi prices, 

markets, and credit , which have historically constituted the basis 

for or anized agrarian protest movements in the United States, would, 

in a static society, have to be attached ar.d resolved by extralegal, 

revolutionary activity, or not attacked at all. 

In a dynamic society, which assumes that chan e is inevitable 
and encourages the masses to initiate change by democratic 
methods, the issues are attacked, and their resolution attempted 
by means of movements. 

Ever, in a societ where the economic dislocations caused by 
depressions do viol te the expectations of the people, and where 
democratic beliefs and institutions indicate organised political 
action as a mode of reform, political protest movements will not 
inevit bly succeed in capturing sufficient support to win a 
victory at the polls. 

The flourishing social movement is the result of a co e isl 
marriage between ele ents within the movement and external 
Social conditions. , . . If its own tive mechanics is 

seriously defective, the roost favorable milieu can produce 
nothin :; yet the most vigorous organism or organ isation 
remains dormant or dies in a milieu which provides it no 
nourishment.2 

The element within the Social Credit movement which we shall 
consider in the next four chapters ere its leadership, orgr ization, 
ar.d doctrine. These three interrelated and interdependent variables 


2. Carl C. Taylor, The Farmers’ Pavement, 1620-1920 (New Yori , 

1955). 500 . 

5* C. 1 ■ ci- 1 . oyc -e ‘ : United 'tie s 

(New Yor , 1956), 35. 






- 3 - 


operated together in reality to engender a vi ble movement of 
political protect. 

In this chapter, we shall indicate some of the "external 
cc: ditions" which fostered the development of Social Credit; and 
in our subsequent discussio of Social Credit doctrine, further 
dimensions of the external influences on the move ent's growth will 
be discussed, particularly the consistency of Social Credit with 
cultural norms, and its appeal to important subgroups of the .Alberta 
population. 

Econo ic Boc!: round 

The depression years Intensified and accentuated the economic 
disabilities which had affected the province of Iberl since its 
creation in 1905 . 

One of the loot frontiers for agricultural settlement in r orth 
America, Alberta ras subject to the usue.l exigencies of such an 
area.; the -ro s income of the province, whic was derived mainly 
from the sole of wheat on the world market, was extremely variable, 
while the costs which had to be met were more rigid. With no 
local capital surplus, capital had to be borrowed from outside 
sources, both by the farmers, for carrying on agricultural opera¬ 
tions, and by the government, to meet the growing costs of develop¬ 
ment and administration* 

Although agriculture was the basic industry in the province - 
in the 1950*3, more than half the value of the ro s product was 




- 4 - 


derived from the sale of agricultural products - Albert? was not 
such a homo eneous v' eat economy as the neighborin'" province of 
Saskatchewan. In the early years* however* the greater diversifica¬ 
tion of the Alberta economy was a somewhat mixed blessing.^ The 
scattered nature of the resources, arable land, and popul tion, 
invited heavy government expenditures on railway, irrigation, and 
telephone rojccto. The accumulation of over ent debt began early 
and continued. 

Albertans thus acquired an e rly experience with public 
debt which made the very debt-conscious durir e 1920*B# 

. . . Nevertheless, the provincial overnme t was faced 
with the necessity of borrowing more money every year to meet 
guarai tees and to provide public services,5 

At the same time, the private debt incurred by the farmers 

had readier a high level, partly because of technological change: 

Just before the fal in prices, grain far in,, in Canada was 

1 CSi bl ch : > . o r ys rc, 

there was a very rapid increase in the utiliz tion of power 
machinery, particularly of tJ I rves r-threcher. 

Along with this, the tractor and truck were being used to 
repl ce the work horse. ; 

V 

Most of the capital r quired to facilit te this change-over 
had to be borrowed from external sources, and until 1929 * it was 
not difficult to obtain. 


4. h.J. Hanson, "Public Finance in Alberts Since 1955% 
Cr-:sdis.: Jourr sl of ' cr oac:; ' oliti, I cicnoe , 
XVIII (August, 1952), 525. 

5. Ibid., 524. 


6. . . acGregor, The Ck 0 h ; rain r de (Toronto, 195) j 4?0. 







The impact of the depression was not fully felt in Alberta 
until 1950* I' that year, owing to the clocin of European 
markets, previous accumul tions of whe t, and production in excess 
of demand! the price >f whe t fell drastically* I I ry, 19J0# 
the price of No, 1 Northern in store Fort William ar.d Port Arthur 
was §1.50 a bushel. By December, the price had fallen to &r:d 

in | ' for whe A el* Prices 

to. w rc 20 , lower,^ The imp ct of these reductions In 
whe t prices was not restricted, of course, to the farmer 0 of 
Alberta, Business activity declined, with resulting and increasing 
unemployment, 

Fror: 1929 to 1950 j there was little borrowin from financial 
institutions, but the interest payments on previous debt had to be 
met, an obligation which if as increasingly regarded as an unjust 
burden on the people*s diminishing income. 

Nor was the drastic reduction in agricultural income parallelled 
by comparable reductions in the prices of all the goods which had to 
be purchased by the farmers. The Royal I sic on Price Spreads 
in 1955 revealed the extent to which the impersonal regulatory market 
had ceased to exist as a reality, however puls ting it remained in 
myth and memory, " The revelations of ”administered prices” in the 


7, A.F. 'IcGour, "Social Credit Legislation - A Survey”, 
v-T.'.n: di:- Journal of co'r.o 1 s ?-d ; otitic- Peirce , 

II, (November, 1956), 51 5-514. 

8, R, McQueen, ”Economic Aspects of Federalism; A Prairie View", 

Car.' :l Joni- -1 o o . . .d Politic i 'cirnce , I, 

(August, 1955), 565-564. 







- 6 - 


Canadian economy served to intensify the fanners' f 1 the 

imp 1 ct of the depression was fallin more heavily on them than on 

facturers, to pave the way for 1 tion of 

the ”Juot Price”. 

olitical Factors 

Political attitudes in Alberta, particularly the attitudes 
toward the Canadian federal system , and toward the two-party 
system, were profoundly conditioned by the economic facts of life* 
Part of the Social Credit movement’s strength lay in the extent to 
which it embodied continuity with the traditional political outlook 
of Albertans. 

Fro the beginning of Alberta’s life as a province, hostility 
to a federal structure believed to be weighted in favor of the 
Eastern provinces, and suspicion of a two-party system considered to 
be dominated by the same complex of industrial and financial 
interests, were powerful undercurrents in Albert;:, politics.''’ 

The West in general viewed the historic National Policy”, and 
its continuation by successive governments, as a means for developing 
the manufacturing and financial institutions of Ontario nd Quebec 
at the expense of the Western hinterland. Dominion policies on 
tariffs, railways, immigration, and natural resources were all 
regarded as means for facilitating the development of an area of 


9* Di t 

wo- party system arc found in the following books: 

W,L. •: orton. The Progressive rty is Canada (Toronto, 1950)# 
chaps, i and ii, p assim , 

J. • Mallory* Social i. ■ ;' w dec 1 "'o~cv v. Canada 

(Toronto, 195^)s chaps, i and iv, passim . 










- 7 - 


profitable investment, end a growing, certain m rket for the products 
of Eastern industry,But, as one exponent of the Prairie view 

expressed it: 

, , , it does seer to inhabitants of several of the provinces 
that the union has degenerated from a truly federal one to 
one in which two 1 rge provinces do conduct their economic 
life against the interests of the other members. They take 
all the advent-ge of the larger market that the federal principle 
gives them, but are not willing to pay the cost of federalism - 
that cost being that each member of a federal state is respon¬ 
sible in some degree for the economic welfare of the other 
members, * 11 

Flowing, in part, from this attitude towards the federal system, 
was a reluctance to embr. ce the two-party system. As MacPherson and 
Morton have pointed out, the Canadian two-party tradition never became 
firmly established in Alberta, 12 Liberal governments, it is true, 
held office from 1905 until 1921 - but the Alberta and Great Water¬ 
ways Railway scandal in 1909 was a traumatic event from which the 
party never fully recovered, a substantial Conservative party 
did not develop In the inhospitable atmosphere of a frontier area. 

Both parties were regarded as adjuncts of the federal parties, whose 
policies on t riffs, and on the n tural resources, were felt to 
have been against provincial inters ts. 


10. J, Mallory, op, cit ., chaps, i and iv, passim , 

11. McQueen, loc, cit ., 55^* 

12. G.B. MacPherson, Democracy in Alberta (Toronto, 1955 )> chap. i. 
Morton, op, cit ., chap, ii, passim . 

15* L.G. Thomas, n The Liberal Party in Alberts, 1905-21”, 

Canadian Historical Review , XXVIII (December, 1947), 420, 











- 8 - 


Belief in non-portisonship runs like a red thread through 
Alberta political history. In 1905» the Albert- Conservatives 
favored a continuation of the non-party government of the Territorial 
administration, but the Liberals, for political reasons, insisted 
on drawing the battle lines. By 1909* the incumbent Liberals 
had become convinced of the value of non-partisanship. Alberta, 
it was argued, had interests which could best be advanced if the 
people soke wit a united voice. A typical Liberal editorial 
reasoned thus* 

The occasion neithr r calls for nor admits the cleave e of 
the electorate along the lines of traditional party att chment. 
Parties exist to promote certain distinctive policies in 
respect of public affairs, and except when it presents to the 
electors this avowed and specific purpose, a party org&< ization 
is not only politically useless, but a public menace.^* 

But the rejection of the two-party system as an obstruction to 

de.ocr cy, and as a detriment to provincial interests did not reach 

its full development until 1921. At this time, the United Farmers 

of Alberta, which had been formed in 1909 as an economic pressure 

group and farmers* educational organization, went into politi s. 

As a pressure group, it had been quite successful in Alberta, and 

within the provincial fraisewor , the Liberals h d beer: responsive to 

the farmers’ needs. But i e problems which most affected the 

farmers - markets, tariffs, and freight rates, were outside of 

14. Edmonton Bulletin , March 9> 1909. 






- 9 - 


provincial jurisdiction. The U.F.A., as part of the whole Progressive 
rooveme: t in Canada, had come to reject the national parties which had 
bee, responsible for policy-making on the:© problems. U.F.A, 
adherents alleged that the party system was domino.ted by plutocrats, 
and used as an instrument to divide and rule the people.Further, 
it was charged, the conglomerate and unstable nature of the parties 
prevented the solution of political problems on their own merits. 
Advocated to replace party government was "group government". 

Spokesmen from various economic groups - never clearly defined, 
apart from farmers and labor - would be sent to the Legislature 
with cle r notions of the interests of their own groups, and a 
willingness to co-opercte with the representatives of other 
occupations, in a search for reasonable solutions to political 
problems. 

They were confident that it would work out, because in their 
view, all political problems were fundame tally economic problems, 
all economic problems reduced themselves to the interests of 
occupational groups, and once the exploitive order was over¬ 
thrown, all group interests would be funda entally harmonious, 
and all differences soluble by intelligent co-oper tion.^ 

The U.F. . was victorious at the polls in 1921, and again 

in 1926, although by this time, the tenuous "group government" theory 

had proved inoperable. The government had been considerably 

subdued by the stern realities of office. Like their Liberal 


15#'KacPherson, op. cit ., 40-44. 


16. ^9-50 






10 - 


predecessors, the U.F. . ministers had been compelled to direct 
their main efforts towards providing sound legislation and 
administration in Alberta, and towards improving the province's 
position vis-a-vis the federal government, especially as regards 
settlement of the natural resources problem. Tot "group government" 
was stressed in the 1926 U.F.A. campaign, but "non-partisan" 
government. The premier argued that a provincial legislature should 
have a free hand in meeting problems that confronted the province, 
without being hampered by considerations of party advant ge at 
Ottawa, 

McGillivray (the Conservative leader j could not st nd up for 
Alberta against the removal of the Crowsnest agree ent which 
is sure to be att eked in the near future, any more than 
Shaw ^gthe Liberal leader , could fight against a Liberal 
government at Ottawa, on the question of natural resources.^* 7 

Despite the onset of the depression, the U.F.'’. government was 

again returned in 1950. Its spokesmen emphasized the advantageous 

sale of the provincial railways, and the pending settlement of the 

natural resources problem. No intense opposition was forthcoming from 

the alternative parties. The Liberal Bulletin noted that there was 

no outstanding issue involved: "Neither the Government nor any 

opposition group has evolved a consistent policy so distinctive in 

character as to give it a considerable advantage".^ 3 


17. Edaortor Journal , June 12, If26. 

18. Ed lor.lQ. Bullet! , June 10, 1950* 









n- 


And the Conservative p rty wee reduced to urging thst "a 
representative govern? ent made up of honest men . . . wil hove no 
difficulty in rolvir; ; the gre t majority of the problems”. 19 

In 1955, a new chapter in Alberta political history began - 
but it did not represent a distinct break with the past. The 
accept bility of /\berhart*s denunciation of ”old-time political 
groups”, and the inability of the opposition to arouse public 
opinion again t the ”unconstituttonality” of Social Credit proposals, 
steamed in part from the weakness of the two-party system in the 
province, and from hostility towards the federal system. 

'leii-ious Background 

The nature of religious norms and organization in Alberta 
also increased popular susceptibility to the Social Credit message* 

The mixture of religion and politics in the develop ent of 
Social Credit, an aspect of the movement which was criticized by 
the opposition, was not, in f ct, a new phenomenon. Hence, Aberhart*s 
contention that ”a religion worth anything should be pr cticed in 
every sphere of life”, did not affront., but rot her cor formed to 
popular conceptions.^ 

Morton has noted that the farmers* movement formed only a part. 


19. Edmonton Bu11etin , June 10, 195°* 

20. Edmonton Journal , April 6, 1955* 








- 12 - 


although a major part, of a general refor movement which had been 

developing in the West from the time of the First War, The reformers 

espoused sue varied causes as prohibition* female suffrage, social 

welf re provisions, and the cleansing of political life. A 

Religious institutions which did not reflect in their doctrines 

and services he social needs and concerns of the people, found it 

difficult to maintain the devotion of their members. To many, 

the refor move ent became a functional substitute for religious 

faith. / number of the leaders of the reform movement were ministers 

or had received theological training - Henry Wise Wood, and Percival 

Baker, of the U.F. . ; Rev. J.S. Woodeworth; Rev* Salem &. Bland; 

Rev. R.C. Renders, Rev. William Irvine, and Rev. R.A. Hoey.^ 

A sociologist of religion has described the origin and function 

of religious activity as follows; 

Realizing the gap between their hopes and the realities of 
their exists’ ce, men everywhere seek closure by a leap of 
faith that says: this need not, this will not be true. . . * 

It is an attempt to explain what cannot otherwise be explained; 
to achieve power, all other powers having failed us; to estab¬ 
lish poise and serenity in the face of evil and suffering 
that other efforts have failed to eliminate.^*5 

Both the problems faced by the reformers - of social evil, and 

individual suffering - and the spirit of faith and high purpose 

animating their crusade, bore striking similarities to those of religion. 


21. Morton, op. cit ., 27ff» 

22. Ibid ., 28. 


25* J. Tilton linger, Reli ion. Society end the Individual 

(New York, 1957), 10. 








- 15 - 


Parallel to this religioficction of politics were structural 

changes in the religious organization of Alberta, Durin the first 

World War, and during the depre. sion years, the province witnessed 

the prolifer.tion of funda ent' list sects, of which berh rt’o 

Prophetic Bible movement waa but one among many. This sectarian 

growth sprang from the sa e socio-economic matrix as the political 

reform move ents, including Social Credit, As Mann says: 

Sociologically, sects are viewed ao institutions of social and 
religious protet, as bulwarks of certain disadvantaged social 
groups in their struggle against the social power, moral 
conventions and ethos of the middle classes, and against 
institutionalized and for all zed religions,^ 

Periods of social unrest create needs which the sheltered and 

institutionalized churches cannot meet. In Alberta, sectarian 

strength was concentrated in the rural areas and among marginal 

members of the urban population*^ 

Thus, the religious appeal of Social Credit proceeded on two 

related fronts: on the one hand, a greet number of the fundamentalists 

were favorably disposed to Aberhari because of his pre-eminence as 

an evangelist; and, on the other, the message he expounded was, in 

part, a quasi-religious doctrine of salvation. 


24, W.E, Mann, Sect, Cult, and Ohurc ir: alberta (Toronto, 1955)* 

25. Ibid , Chapter iv, "Liturgy and Doctrine: Their Role in Sect 

a d Cult Expansion*', discusses the appeal which the liveliness, 
informality, and enthusiasm of sect rian services h d for 
many people; the services of the established churches, on the 
other had, were characterized by gre ter formality, dignity, 
and intellectualism. Chapter iii concludes that sect rian 
support was found a ong persons of aver ge working-class income 
in the cities, and slightly less than average farm income 
in the rural areas. 





— lib — 

By as w© have seen, the economic situ tion of the province 

had deterior ted to the point where Albert one. must have been searching 
for an explanation of their position, and demanding a cure. The 
st t© was set for a movement which could interpret existing 
conditions in terras which were meaningful and accept ble to them* 

And it was in the su- mer of that year that William Aberhnrt, 

Calgary evangelist and hi h-echool principal, found in Social 
Credit writ in s the answer which he thought would put Alberta 
"forever outside the range of poverty in the midst of plenty". 



CHAPTER 2 


th i,i-/n hip OK ; ■■oci'H c-run ; ov= : T 

There is a period of waiting in the win s - often a very long 
period - for all the grent leaders whose entrance on the 
scene see s to us a most crucial point in the course of a mess 
movement. Accidents and the activities of other men have 
to set the stage for them before they can enter and at rt 
their performance.1 

In stressing the significance of William Aberhart 1 s leadership 
in the evolution of Social Credit in Alberta, we are not suggesting 
that individual personality is the determining f ctor in movements 
of political protest. Leadership is only one of the mechanisms 
through which economic distress is channelled into organized political 
action. The leader does not assume hie role through sheer force of 
personality alone. People must be ready to accept him because 
their distress has made them susceptible to his appeal. To a 
considerable extent, the lender can only justify, and articulate 
sentiments thst are already present. 

As the le der of Social Credit in Alberta, Aberhart was a 
charism-tic sy bol, a ski led tactician, a tireless organizer, and 
an outstanding propagandist. In this chapter, we shall consider 
only the first two aspects of his leadership, leaving for subsequent 
discussion his role in the Social Credit organization, and his 
significance as expositor of the doctrine. 


1. Eric Hotter» The True Believer (New York, 1958), 104, 







- 16 - 


Aberh rt as Charismatic Leader 

The charismatic leader is one who is regarded by his followers 
as possessing superi. tural, or at least, particularly exceptional 
qualities. ^ Unlike traditional or bureaucratic authority, bound by 
precedents or rules, charismatic authority is sustained by an 
emotional form of relationship between the leader and his following. 
The le' der is granted the personal devotion of those who recognize 
his charis a, nd he validates his claim to authority through his 
success. Charismatic leadership is likely to be born of n enthusiasm, 
despair, and hope”, 5 and the leader who blunders and fails, who is 
unable to sustain the enthusiasm, to conquer the despair, and to 
kindle the hope of his followers will not retain his charisma. 

The charismatic le: der is a powerful psycholo ical symbol, 
both to the adherents of the movement, and to those who oppose him. 

He symbolizes the aspir tions of the movement, its values, and its 
promise for success. He serves to unify his following, by providing 
in his person, a rallying point around which they may be mobilized 
for collective action. 

N 

The particular qualities needed by such a leader vary with the 
social circumstances whic he is called to set aright|but the very 
nature of charismatic authority requires that all such leaders possess 


2. ‘ax M eber, Theory of Social and Economic Organisation 
(London, 1947), 529 ff. 


5. Ibid 







- 17- 


one characteristic quality: complete self-confidence. The unquestion¬ 
ing faith of the people in a leader* a exceptional perers car.not be 
given to one who appe s to doubt his own abilities, 

Aberhart seemed to possess the complete assurance which is 
perhaps achieved only by those who have considered all the perplexing 
proble s of human life and destiny, and emerged with clear and 
satisfactory solutions. On the public platform, he was never at 
a loss, when questioned from the audience. During the Legislative 
hearings on Social Credit, he was so little disturbed by the 
criticisms advanced gainst his proposals by a University professor 
of economics, that he declared: "Professor Elliott is confusing 
income and production, , , . If Professor Elliott wants to say this 
book does not express what it says, then he should have the floor 
after I am through**.^ For a doctrine which was subjected to an 
extensive critique, the leader*s imperturbability was an enduring 
source of sustenance. 

Even before he turned to politics, Aberhart had built up a 
devoted personal following, as a r: suit of his weekly religious 
bro dcasts, stressing funda ente.list Biblical teaching and prophecy. 
Undoubtedly, many of his radio adherent® formed a nucleus of support 
for him when he turned to the propagation of Social Credit s a cure 

4, Alberta, Legislative As sc bly of Albert , The Douglas System 
of Social Credit (Evidence take: by the Agricultural Committee 
of the Alberta Legislature, Session 19^4* Edmonton, 19^4)£9 . 
(Hereinafter cited as The Dou ;1 . Syote of Social Credit ), 







- 18 - 


for economic and social evils. The readiness to accept charismatic 
authority^ s Mann has pointed out f was a noteworthy feature of 
many Alberta sects, 5 Aberhart was only the most successful among 
several dynamic religious leaders in the province. 

Faith in Aberhart rested not only on the popular corce tion 
of hi. as a God-fe- ring man, eelting to implement Christian 
principles in the fields of economics and politics. He was also known 
to be a capable teacher of high school mat emetics, and an excellent 
administrator. He was definitely not an incompetent failure, nor a 
social mi-fit. Long before he turned to Social Credit, berh rt had 
given proof of exceptional qualities which provided a basis for 
popular trust arid devotion. 

The pi es of the Albert" Joeini Grod-i Chronicle , the wee ly 
started in July, 1 95^$ reveal the extent to which Aberhart was 
promoted as a charismatic 1 eader, the symbol r£ the move mt, 

Nearly every issue contained a photograph of "William berhart; 

Founder of the Alberta Social Credit System' 1 , and editorials, letters, 
and columns urged the acceptance of the "system" or: the basis of 
faith in N Our Leader", 

Against the varied personific tions of social evil depicted by 
the Chronicle , Aberhart w: portrayed as an un.elfish, scholarly, and 

devoted mar of the people. 


5, W,E. ann. Sect, Cult and Church in Alberta (Toronto, 1955)> 
chap, vi, passim . 








- 19 - 


Cynics, money barons, political bosses . • • will oppose these 
new plans, claiming such men es Douglas and Aberhart rre only 
out for their own glorific-tion with no thought of the people 
whatsoever. The people of Canada have hearde d listened to 
William Aberhart over the r*dio for ye rs. , . . They know 
of his unchallenged scholastic ability* Surely a man of such 
char cter nd worth would not deliberately come to the people 
with a fake plan, a fake show, a fake political scheme, for 
a short glorification of himself. He has everythin : to lose, 
and nothin to gain, and his victory will be a victory for the 
people.^ 

Aberhart 1 o selfless toil for the movement, and his exceptional 

devotion to the cause were held up as examples for all the followers 

to emulate. The leader symbol was used to strengthen the motiv tion 

of individual adherents, and to facilitate the oper lions of the 

study groups which were subject, as organisations inevltsbly are, to 

personal conflicts ad squabbling. 

Our leader, who is as ne: r 100$ ma . as we can find, sends out 
the clarion call "We want 100$ Social Creditors". . . . There 
are no politicians required in Social Credit, all it wants 
is ITEI- AND WOMEN who can say we 1 re supporting Social Credit 
because we knew it is for the BENEFIT OF THE PEOPLE 01 
a. d when they ;ay it, THEY MEAN IT, Not because it is goii 
to brin us §25 a month* ... In your roup meetings you should 
rer ember this, jealousy and self should be forgotten but the 

SI 2AU E F OCIAL CNN NIT should be the only thing, . . . 
You know it is being led by a man who has gained respect and 
confidence all over Canada, a man who i not doing it for his 
own benefit, but for the benefit of his fellow man.? 


6. Albert Voe : 1 Credit Chronicle , July 27, 1934. (Hereirsfter 
cited as Chronicle). 


7. Ibid ., December 14, 19^4 






The ascription to Aberhart of specifically heroic qurlitieo, 

and the duty of the people to follow the path to prosperity which 

he had discovered, were indicated in an editorial which compared 

the depression to a "big faired-up fiery drr on th t he been invented 

by the financiers", arid Aberhart to St# George. 

• • . today the people of Alberta are being shown how to 
destroy the dragon of depression by a man of worth who is 
clean, honest and fair# • • • Mr. Aberhart has shown you a 
way out of depression, and if you have not enough courage and 
faith to forward the good work of Social Credit, then you 
deserve to suffer want, poverty and degr dation to the full# ' J 

One more editorial may be cited which exemplifies the 

emphasis on faith in the strong and courageous leader, who etmds in 

striking contrast to the weak and the wicked. 

Let the people of Alberta again prove that there cringing, 

crawling, pessimistic, weak-kneed n CAl ’: BE DO' * ere r 

We now whet Aberhart is and what is more, we know whet Social 

Credit means to the people of Albert- . You have a leader in William 

Aberhart that is one in a million, not a politician, not a 

trained statesman* not a man with practical experience in 

ru ning a country, not a big financier, not a grafter, not 

a man out for his personal glorific tion, but juet a HEAL 

GGD-FEABI G HE-MAN WH IS OUT FOR THE BETTERMENT OF SIS FELLOW 

CREATURE * 'D 1 SPITE OF EVERY OPPOSITION HAS TEE COURAGE OF 

HIS CO VICTIOES TO TELL THE WORLD HE IS RIGHT# He says 

"IT CA riE DONE". . . . Are we going.to listen to this man 

and back him to the limit, or are we going to abide by the 

snivel1in hireli gs of t e big monied interests who are 

weakly, and in humble voice bewailing, "It#.Can't..be.*. 

d-o-n-e".9 


8, Chronicle , January 11, 1955' 





21 - 


Thus, Aberh rt's 1 c of "practical experience i running a country" - 
which wao in part responsible for hi conviction th t "IT CAM BE DQKE" - 
was turned to advanto. e, by associating it with such opprobrious 
ter s as " rafter" and "financier". At the same time, the indigenous 
distrust of political activity was fanned, and the leader di: sociated 
from 3uch unworthy ambitions. 

Attempts to foster in-group loyalties and membership efforts 
around fie leader were mode through sue devices as the publication 
of ", Creed", which followers were urged to adopt, and of a chain 
letter which was to be copied and delivered to "each of five of 
your best Social Credit friends". 

The relevant passage in "My Creed" reads: 

I believe that VJillia? Aberhart undersnr.ds these principles 

[of Social Credit] and as the cknowledged leader of the 
Alberts Social Credit group can be trusted by the people of 
this province to bring in a syste of Social Credit ba ed upon 
the Douglas principles, applicable to our needs and the 
conditions in this province. 

I believe that it is my duty not alone to support William 
Aberhart and such Social Credit candidates who acknowledge 
his leadership for election to the Provincial Legislature at 
Edmonton, but to do my utmost to gain the support of others.-^ 

The emotional acceptance of Aberhart as leader provided a 
useful cene<t for the movement when the ideological differences 
between Aberhart, on the one hand, and Major Douglas, and his small 
band of devoted disciples in Alberta, were seized upon by the Opposition. 


10. Chronicle , May 10, 1955 





- 22 - 


Doctrinal differences, which h ve weakened other movements, probably 
had little effect on those who were mobilised behind Aberhart s 
"the ecknowledged lender of the Alberts Social Credit group". 

The chain letter, which began: 

I pled e to deliver myself out of economic slavery by support¬ 
ing only candidates at the next election who are rallied to 
the standard of 

William Afcorhart" 11 

was similarly designed to focus the hopes of the following on the 

leader. 

The Chronicle also published lyrics, adapted to the tunes of 
religious or popular songs, which the followers were urged to sing 
"at your next group meeting".* 2 These paeans, allegedly of folk 
origin, praised the Leader with even less restraint than was 
customarily exhibited in Chronicle editorials. 


They 1 re Following Qur Leader 1 s Footsteps 

(Tune: They 1 re Following in Father*s Footsteps) 

They*re following our Leader*s footsteps. 

They're following that grand old lad. 

Social Credit they'll all yell 
Feople want it, they know well. 


They know it's quickly coming 

And though it makes them sad, |_sicj 

They're following our William’s footsteps, yes, 

They're following that grand old lad,*5 


11. C ronicle, May 51, 19*5. 

12, Ibid ., August 5» 195^. 

15. Ibid. 











i 




Who ir He? by A. Knowles - Coleman. 
(Hymn tune* "Who is He in Yonder Stall?) 

Who is he, in yonder Hall? 

Calling to Albertans all. 

Aberfr rt, His he with glory, 
lending forth, a wand'rous story. 

Heed his words, so plain, so true, 

Note is pleadin e, all for you # 

Who is he with clarion voice? 

Toiling on, that you rejoice. 

Aberhart, His he who gently. 

Prays th t joy, you*11 have in plenty, 

Asking God, our future years, 

Fill with pleasure, not with tears. 

Who is he, t t clei s for all? 

Peace from [si<£] Social Credit’s call. 

Aberhart, His he with, wisdom, 

Gives to you this perfect system} 

Taken from a path long trod, 
liven you, through him, fro? God.^- ' 


Aberhart by A. Burt, Blackie. 
(Tune; Sweet Ms.r ie) 

You’re a real good ms. and fine, Aberhart 

Leader in the fighting line, Aberhart 

Wit your Bible in your hand 

You take a noble stand 

Put protection in our land, Aberhart. 

First you made salvation sure, Noble one. 

Then pa seed the word so pure, courageous one. 
From your church, across the air. 

Scattered broadcast everywhere- 

Messages of faith and cheer, Hwas well done. 


14, Chronicle , September 28, 1954 








- 24 - 


Then you heard the clarion call, full of power 

Pood and shelter for us all, every hour. 

With Social Credit r.t the top 

May your good work never stop 

Till politicians drop, from wealth’s high tower. 

Worn bodies, pallid faces 

Look to you,. 

■s you visit different places 

Speaking true, 

A word of cheer, a voice that’s kind 

God knows the smiles you leave behind 

A staunch good friend in you they find— 

Clean, true-blue,*5 

Apart from the customary adulation, these son a also suggested 
messa es, concerning Aberhart’s communications with God, and the 
divine origin of Social Credit, which the C ronicle itself seldom 
ventured to convey.In encouraging the following to sing such 
songs, the Chronicle as also fostering a well-known mechanism of 
crowd control.*? 

The Social Credit newspaper undoubtedly attempted to arouse 
feelings of passionate devotion to Aberhart, to encourage 
accept, ce of the doctrine on the b~sis of loyalty to the leader, 
to dispel ideological doubt and to propel collective endeavour by 
pre.entin the leader as a model of selflessness, rectitude, and 
intellectual penetration. It is impossible to estimate the impact 
which these journalistic flights had on promoting the charism-tic 


15* Chronicle , December 7, 

16. Of. post , 95 ff, 

17* CP. post . The role of collective singing will be di:cussed 
more fully in chap, iii, as a technique for strengthening 
organizational solidarity. 










- 25 - 

relationship. But an exa ination of the move ent itcelf indicates 
th t Aberhart was, in f ct, accepted by his followers as the exemplary 
leader. 

Wherever he went, Aberhart drew hu e, responsive crowds. A 
master of oratorical techniques, he seems to h: ve been extraordinarily 
successful in achieving rapport with his audiences. Diver: e 
reports exist that Opposition speakers were quelled by Aberhart*s 
following in response to his bidding. One such incident involved 
O.L. MacPherson, the U.F,'. Cabinet Minister involved in a divorce 
scandal. When he attempted to question Aberhart at a public meeting, 
the leader appealed to the audience "Are you going to let this man 
cross-examine me?" MacPherson was howled down.^ On another 
occasion, his control over the crowd was exerted in the opposite 
direction: at the Calgary Convention, the delegates began to boo 
at the mention of ex-Preraier Brownlee*s name. Aberhart restored 
calm, with the reprimand "Booing is a sign of lack of intelligence",^ 

This Convention, held on April 4 to 6, 1955* was a turning 
point in the development of the move ent. At this time, the long- 
awaited and official decision was m de to enter provincial politics. 
161 delegates, repre sent in the southern di trict of the Alberta 
Social Credit League, sweepingly endorsed Aberhart as their lender. 

His pre-eminence was emphasized during the dispute regarding 

18. Edmonton Journa1 , July 6, 1955* 

19. Ibid ., April 6, 1955. 






- 26 - 


candidate selection. The Resolutions Conn ittee had recom ended 
that each constituency chooi.e three or four candidates, a ong whom 
an Advisory Committee, headed by Aberhart, should have the final 
choice. Considerable debate on this issue resulted in ar: amendment 
being made to table the resolution. At this point, Aberhart 
forcefully indicated, "If you are not going to allow me to have 
any choice as to my su porters, then you will not hrve me as your 
leader. ... I will not have any wirepulling in the selection of 
candidates". The resolution was then accepted by the convention, 
and the amendment defeated. It was noted that nearly every speaker 
referred to him as "Our Leader", ifhile others used such phrases as 
"the mar whom we have never known to make a mistake", and "the only 
man in Alberta capable of forming a government today". Mrs. Edith 
Rogers, Social Credit organizer for northern Alberta, urged the 
people to "stand behind our leader. Elect honest men or they will 
sell out our leader and you for $0 pieces of silver".^ 0 

O' e of the delegates, A• 1 • • Key, president of the Drumhelle-r local, 
subsequently reported to his constituency association that the 
convention had been char cterized by undemocratic procedure, tbmt 
Aberhart was not following Douglasite principles, and that his 
attitude "in threatening to disband the movement is so nearly akin 
to Fascism that in my opinion it will alienate the sympathy of a 


20. Ed--onto . Journal , April 1955* 






- 27 - 


large proportion of the citizens".*^ 

The .local expelled Key almost iramedi; tely, deploring his action 
in using the name of the organisation "to further his personal 
opinion”, and asserting that its members were ”still 100$> behind 
our leader, Mr. William Aberhart". 2,? ' Aberhart reported the receipt 
of a number of telegra s from Drumheller pledging continued support, 
and warned that ar "epidemic of old-line politicians’ 1 , seeking 
election under the Alberta Social Credit League banner, should not 
be allowed to "destroy our cause ”.^ 

Another indication of the charismatic relationship rs the 
financial support Aberhart received from his followers. The 
economic basis for the leader’s mission, Weber contends, is 

oJi 

voluntary givi by the followers. Aberhart’s weekly r dio 
broadcasts were purportedly financed entirely by the membership, 
and the leader made a practice of announcing which locals, or 
individual contributors, h d sponsored each broadcast. The speaking 
tours undertaker by the many Social Credit lecturers appear to have 
been financed largely through the collections taker, at each meeting. 
These contributions must have represented real financial sacrifices 


21. Edmonton Journal , April 9» 1925* 

22. Chronicle , April 19, 1955* 

25. Edmonto. Journal , April 10, 195% 


24. Weber, op. cit ., 552-355- 








- 28 - 


at the time. It is likely that loyalty to the leader and his program 
was not only expressed, but also strengthened by these voluntary 
gift o. 

Aberhart symbolized the movement not only to his followers, 
but to those outside the fold. Major Douglas, who was maneuvered 
by the Opposition into making guarded criticisms of Aberhart*c 
proposals, nevertheless recognized Aberhart*s contribution in 
creating a "mass psychology" for the popularization of Social Credit 

doctrine* 

The Opposition denounced the "mass hysteria" allegedly 
created by Aberhart, and subjected him to a variety of personal 
criticisms, including charges that his gre t-grandfnther had been 
hanged in Arizona, that he was in Hitler's pay, and th t he woo 

A / 

planning to set up a religious dictatorship. ° Aberhart publicized 
and denied such allegations, and it is quite likely th t they aroused 
only contempt for their authors, and increased sympathetic iden- 
tific tion with their victim. 

Aberh rt s a i ctician 

Aberhart was a skilled and resourceful tactician, capable of 
adroit maneuvering to further the progress of the movement. 

25. id onto:: Journal , I ay 1^, 1955* 


26. Ibid ., August 14, 1955 












































. 

















. 








- 















































- 29 - 


This quality was strikingly app rent in hie replies to 
Premier Reid * s invit tion to submit a Social Credit plan to the 
Legislature, 

In February, 1955* Douglas had been hired by the U.F. /. 
government as a technical adviser on Social Credit, Aberhart 
immediately commented to the press that he favored having Douglas 
come to Alberta, and would be glad to co-operate with him, but suggested 
that the invi.t tion bore the marks of a pre-election strategy. 

When Reid, on March 7* requested Aberhart to present his own 
plan for Alberta, our Leader replied with a series of questions 
which implied doubt as to the Government’s motives in making such 
a request, especially in view of the coming election, and uncertainty 
os to the relationship that his proposed services would bear to 
those of Major .Douglas* 

Reid replied with brief, and somewhat evasive answers, 
closi ; his letter with an invitation to Aberhart to come to 
Edmonton for a fuller discussion of the proposal, Aberhart 
answered th t the Government’s motivation remained obscure to him, 
and th t he was unwilling to go to Edmonton, as n my school work 
at this time of year ie very important % Aberhart*s responses 
were characterized by the Chronicle as being ’’very straightforward 
and diplomatic”.27 

Aberhart was not alone in regarding the U,F,A, f s invit tions 


27* Chronic e , March 22, 1955' 






- 30 - 


to him and to Douglas as last-ditch politicwal maneuvers designed 
to demonstrate the unworkability of Social Credit in the province, 
and to publicise the divergencies between the Douglas and Aberhart 
versions of Social Credit. 

The Conservative leader st ted that it was "unnecess ry, 
unwise, and inopportune" to invite Douglas, and the j urnalistic 
voice of the Con ervative Party, the Edmonton Journal, added thot it 
war- "indefensible", quoting ex-premier Brownlee* s recent statement that 
"not it but disillusionment" could result from the attempt to 
inaugur te fecial Credit in the province; the Journal further 
charged that t e Government was opportunistically trying to enhance 
its own position vis-a-vis the Aberhart movement.^ 0 For by this 
time, the govern ent must have seen that the hand writ in.- on the 
wall, which had probably been visible for some time, was not 
written by the Liberal party, the largest Opposition group within 
the Legislature, but by Aberhart*s Social Credit movement. It 
was reported at this time th t every day, 1J3 to 20 mail inquiries 
were received by the clerk of the Legislative Assembly for printed 
copies of the evidence taken before the Agricultural Committee in 
1934, at which Aberhart, Douglas, and other spokesmen had testified 
on Social Credit.^9 


28. Edmonton Journs1 , February 2J, 1935* 

29. Ibid ., March 9, 1935. 








-51 - 


The Chronicle warned the followin ’ of Reid*s insincerity in 
"pretending to consider" Social Credit proposals, ;aid that Douglas 
was unfamilior with Alberta conditions, rki urged fait; in the 
leader who wo. fully aware of Alberta conditions and certain th:t 
a wor able pla coul be introduced. It pointed cut that Aberhart 
had thoroughly expounded his principles and th t it would be 
pointle: for him to go over them again at the legislature,^* 

On March l|?j Aberhart said he had been "warned" by 12 to 20 
groups not to become a political football by accepting the government 1 8 
proposal, and asked for further expressions of opinion from other 
locals. On Fare 17* he announced that he had received 80 letters 
from groups urging him not to make the trip. Locale from all over 
the province began voting resolutions that he wait for a "100^ 

Social Credit Government" before submitting his proposals. 

Finally, at the Calg f ry Convention on April B resolution 
urgin him not to go was passed, Aberhart, therefore, announced 
to Reid that the matter had been taken out of his hands by the 
pars .. of the people, "They have isipr seed upon me 

the importance of being available for educational work in Social 
Credit. ... I therefore feel obliged to inform you that I must 
bow to this mandate of the people".^ 


50, Chronicle , March 1, 1955* 

Jl# hduonlon Journal , April 12, 1955- 







One cannot assess the spontaneity of this "mandate" - but 
Aberhnrt's initi 1 reaction to to Dougl s invitation s a pre- 
electi strategy, the forthright opposition of the Social Credit 
organ to the whole sche e, and the suspicion of the government *s 
proposals expressed in Aberhart’s guarded replies, must have 
conditioned the popular response. In urging the groups to express 
their views, and in "bowing" to a decision which he had evidently 
fostered and desired, Aberhart prob bly strengthened the cohesion of 
the movement, and its devotion to him as a popular le der. 

The method devised for choosing candidates was another 
clever tactical move. As was mentioned earlier# Aberhart and his 
Advisory Board were empowered to ensure the Social Credit purity 
and devotion of all candidates chosen by the constituencies# The 
relevant resolution adopted at the Calgary Convention read: 

Where:s there will be a general attack against all Social 

Credit nominees; and 

Whereas it would be unwise for these nominations to occur 

prior to the date of the announcement of the election; 

Therefore, be it resolved that the leader nd his Advisory 

Committee do not announce names of any constituency candidate 

until after announcement of election dates. 52 

Adoption of this technique meant that in every constituency# 
three or four hopefuls would be ardently campaigning for Social 
Credit, and th t by the time the "winner" was announced by the 
Advisory Bo rd, the unsuccessful candidates would be so f r committed 


52. Chronicle,April 5, 1955< 





- 33 - 


to Social Credit that they would be unlikely to withdr w their 

vocal support, No information as to the questions asked by the 

Advisory Bo rd in 1935 exists; but among the list of questions 

asked e ch prospect in the 1940 elections was: M If not chosen, 

will you definitely work for the candidate chosen? "53 

At the same time, the Opposition in e ch constituency had to 

try to point out the weaknesses of four Social Crediters, r ther 

than one. In his autobiography, Norman James, one of the successful 

candidates, discusses these results* 

I wasn't yet the candidate, I was only one of four possibili¬ 
ties, so the Opposition couldn't concentrate on my personal 
character - or lack of it. That came 1 ter. The four possible 
candidates used to travel in pairs at that time, and share the 
honours and abuse, and it speaks rather well for the cause 
we represented th t every one of the four played the game 
fairly and squarely and never tried to trke an unfair advan¬ 
tage of the others.34 

Even after the interview with the Advisory Board, which James 

described as singularly gruelling, the decision was not announced. 

There were still four of us to share the abuse, so it wasn't so 
bad for the next few wee :s. They just didn't know upon whom 
to concentrate, and when you have to aim at four targets, you 
are liable to miss the lot, , , . And so the four of us went 
back on the job of "campaigning 8 . We didn't know muc about 
the technique, but we decided to tell just the plain truth. 

This was such a ghastly innovation th t the people were staggered, 
and the Opposition was thrown all out of gear.^ 


35, Malcolm . Taylor, The Social Credit Movement in Alberta 
(unpublished Noster's the is, University of California, 

Berkeley, 1942), 72. 

5^. Norman B. James, Autoblograp y of a obody (Toronto, 1947), 


35 . Ibid ., 182-185 
















. 


' , 





























, • j 



Another interest in feature of the campaign wan; the stated 

refusal to eng e in "mud-siinging 1 ". Aberhart never referred to 

the seduction and divorce cases involving Brownlee, and ‘cPherson, 

the Minister of Public Works, and the Chronicle , always at one 

with the leader in thou ht and feeling, in an editorial entitled: 

"Ye That Are Without Sin - Cast the First Stone", sternly refused 

to descend to attacks of this nature. 

We are trying to keep filth and scum out of this Social 
Credit movement. ... It is perfectly all right to criticize, 
perhaps to a certain extent ridicule an opposition party, 
but to t ke any man *3 personal misdeeds and publish them 
abroad for the sake of securing votes is undoubtedly one of 
the lowest forms of advertising that can be uced.-'° 

In view of the fact that the Chronicle associated the leaders 

of the "old-time political groups’ 1 with "capitalist moguls", and 

accused the:., among other things, of "lining and re-lining their 

pockets" at the expense of the people, this denunciation of 

"mud-siin ing" rings r ther hollowly. ^7 

Sincere or not, this righteous stand probably had the effect 

of enhancing still further Aberhart*s character In the eyes of his 

followers* The Chronicle reported one reaction, perhaps apocryphal, 

which may nevertheless have expressed a common feelings 

As one dear old lady said: "I don't claim to understand the 
fine points of the system, but if Mr, Aberhart says it is so, 
then I'm sure everything will be all right. . . . When our 
self-styled leaders have been philanderin'-, this man has been 


56. Chronicle , February 8, 1955* 


57. Ibid ., August 5, 1954 













. 








.... 

























































- 35 - 


spending days of concentrated study on problems that are 
rightly theirs.^ 

Aberhart hod prestige to gain, and nothing to lose in refusing 
to discuss scandals which were, in any case, thoroughly aired in 
most of t e Alberta newspapers. 

The Opposition attempted at various times to capitalize on 
the ideological differences between Aberh rt, and various Dougl sites, 
including the Major himself. It is safe to suggest that Aberhart*s 
st tus was not unduly damaged by these skirmishes. The last 
significant episode of this nature involved the publication of 
corresponds ce between Lymburn, the Attorney-General in the U.F.A* 
Cabinet, and Major Douglas. Douglas emphasized that Aberhart as 
a popular leader was concerned more with presenting an understandable 
picture of Social Credit, than with theoretical accuracy, and that 
he, Douglas, was not inclined to view Aberhart*s discrepancies too 
seriously. He added, however, that Aberhart 1 s explanation of 
” just price” and ”unearned incr© ent” did not correspond with those 
phrases es used in the H respons.i,bXe literature of Social Credit”, 
and that Aberhart had made the mistake of elaborating his scheme 
for Alberta in too gre t detail,39 

Aberhart replied that he had perhaps committed a ”brer ch of 
liter ry technique”, but that the whole dispute was primsrily a 


58• Chronicle , August 10, 193^. 


39. Edmontor. Jourr:a 1 , June 8, 1935' 






















































' 











--6 - 


matter of personality differences which the Qppoeitio we., try In." 
to ex loll • '"©op rdi Douglas* g carte tion th-1 \k h d ©labor ted 

too much# h© sold: 

I arc convinced th- 1 we could never have had the artontehlng 
recults that we have had If we continually ©poke In broad 
g© eralitiee, . . * Out her© in -cot err. Can- a, we look for 
resulto* In some ports* of the world they place great ©?•••,-basis 
or. tcohrique, ’whether the results cose or not* I hop© Major 
Douglas and the citlze o of Canada will not forget that 7 
was born and r 1 cd in , Canada, I can hardly alter my - rec¬ 
eive* ir:tc. . tv©, analytical nature# X do not find fault with 
Major Dou;;l a that hi a nature Is that f a carry* reserved 
Scotchman, We re not all alike, 40 

Thuo* the differences between the two conceptions of Social Credit 

were explai ed I er i it Individ • t, 

"'he Ghror icle* of course, took up the deforce of Aberhart* 

explaining# with a Biblical analogy# that Dougina had been 

unfaithful to hie prophetic vision# in a misguided attempt to 

piece© “the powers that be n .^ 

By emphacizir. the personalities involved# and by dismissing 
the substantive doctrinal differences as trivial and seise* tic# 

Aberh rt end his newspaper were able to indicate th© choice 
involveds were the voters going to opt for a real Alberts. # or 
a hair-spiittlr foreigner who showed th© "technical expert 1 a 

JiQ 

so ewhsi lofty contempt for the mere layman" 7 


40. r.dmo-.toi Jour:rl * Jur . Q, 1 933 * 

41, Chronicle* June 21# 1935 * 


42, Ibid 








In ihlo chapter, wo hove diocusced only two of the eigt.ifioo t 
aopecta of Aberhart 1 8 leoderehipi hlc role ue a eherlomat' c leader* 
who evoked n powerful emotional reepon• e fro© the people and c.ymbo~ 
Used t .o hope, and aspirations of the f>oclal Credit movement; 
and hi;.; o i .1 aa a t oticie , who wae ble to further the movement* & 
prop: re a 8 and to courier possible disruption, through the choice of 
effective sir t- glee. 

In our dlacuoaio; oi doctrine aid organ!action, further 
dime..- o’-or of Aberhsrt* s leadership will be indicate!* he not only 
modified Douglas’s doctrine i such a \m,f ae to enhance its appeal 
for a.. Alberts audience; he was also its moot skilled and tireless 
propagandist* And the powerful facial Orcd.it organisation, in 
both its formal a inforauaspect a, owed such of it r e.f ,'eotivene. a 
to the suet- ire ;■ a- d resourceful activities of the leader. 



CHAPTER 3 


OK A T..-.&TIO !■' Hi .-JI h U ' I .' /-d- h ‘I 1 

A major factor in the Social Credit party*s electoral victory 
wa its extensive and enthudhstic organization. Ary organization 
established to change or modify existing institutions does not 
emerge overnight, ready for effective combat. It results, rather, 
from a process of gradual development, which is marked by conflict, 
confusion, and the conscious efforts of many members. 

In this chapter, we shall describe the development of the 
Social Credit organization, noting particularly the conflicts in 
doctrine ad in leadership roles which characterized its early 
stages, and the uncertainty of aim which was radually replaced 
by effective, goal-directed behavior. At the same tire, we shell 
indicate the various means by which members were a tracted to 
the movement and sustained in their adherence. 

The Early Period 

The early growth of Aberhart’s Social Credit organization 
cannot be separated from the prior activities of the leader as 
a preacher of the Gospel. These activities were significant, 
not only because many of Aberhart's religious followers supported 
him when he turned to politics; but also because the well-developed 






- 39 - 


organization centring around the Prophetic Bible Institute in 
Calgary served as a bane for his extender oper tions. 

In 1918, Aberhart bsgan teachir a Sunday afternoon Bible 
class at the Westbourne Baptist Church in Calgary,* His classes 
became so popular that they began to be held in the larger Calgary 
theatres. In 1925* three years after the first radio bro dcast in 
Calgary, Aberhart began to broadcast regularly over CFCN, every 
Sunday afternoon from J to 5 p* • An exceptionally ifted radio 
speaker, he soon attracted a wide following. 

In 192?» a $65*000 church was built from the contributions 
of his listeners, who had been encouraged to contribute ” 25 p' 
bricks”. By 1935* 8 *t the peak of its influence, Aberhart’s 
religious organization included: the Calgary Prophetic Bible 
Institute, a chartered organization Welch co-ordinated the broadcast¬ 
ing operations, and had 1,275 payieg supporters;5 Aberh rt 
provided for ’’booster" and "associate” types of membership in his 
radio churc , according to the amount of contributions; a Calgary 
church, the Bible Institute Baptist Church, which he served as 
pastor; a Bible school for training le ders, of which Manning, 


1* W,E, Mann, Sect, Cult, and Church in Alberta 
(Toronto, 1955), 22 ff. 

2. Ibid ., 124. 

5 .Malcolm . Taylor, The Social Credft, Movement in Alberta 
(unpublished Master’s thesis. University of California, 
Berkeley, 1942), 57. 






- 4o - 


his religious and political successor, was the first gr duate; a 
Radio Sunday School, which sent ou printed lesson to children 
aged 5 i° 16» and was ertim ted to reach 8,000 families. At this 
tir e, he brosdcact for five hours e ch Sunday, and wa estimated 
to have a lictenir audie ce of 500,000 of which about 2^0,000 
were Albertans.^ A representative of the B.B.C, who visited Alberta 
in the middle 1950*s, stated thnt Aberhart was the master of every 
technique of the radio speaker,5 Radio was undoubtedly the most 
influential single medium of communication U;ed in the Social 
Credit political campaign. Through radio, Aberhart's message was 
dramatically brought to thousands of isolated farm homes in the 
province; and public opinion research indicates that radio has a 
particular influence among the lower income and educational groups 
of persons for whom Aberhart probably had the re test appeal 

As the Social Credit movement developed, its activities were 
closely connected wit those of the Institute. One writer observed 


4, Mann, op, cit ,, 22. 

5* John A. Irving, "Psychological Aspects of the Social Credit 
Movement in Alberta”, Canadian Journal of Psychology , I 
(September, 1947)> 158. This series of 5 articles on the 
,l Psychological Aspects of the Social Credit ove rent in Alberta” 
appeared in the 1947 Canadian Journal of Psychology . s follows: 
Part i - "The Development of the Movement n ,(March). 

Part ii- "The Response of the People", (June). 

Part iii - "An Interpretation of the Movement", (September), 

6, Paul P. Laz&rsfeld, Radio and the Printed Page (New York, 1940), 

15 ft* 









- 4l - 


that the Prophetic Bible Institute was the n nerve centre” of the 
electoral campaign; here, rural visitors were welcomed on their 
visits to Calgary, broadcasts were made, and liter ture and 
speakers prep: red and sent forth, 1 

The Conversion to Social Credit 

Ab: rhart was converted to Social Credit in the summer of 1952, 
after reading Maurice Colbourne's "Unemployment or War", an 
influential exposition of Social Credit theory, given to him by 

Q 

a friend w ile he was in Ed onton marking examination papers, 0 

He began to introduce Social Credit ideas gradually into his 
Sunday broadcasts, and became active in the life of the various 
Social Credit roups which had ©gun to devdop in the city. He 
also begs, met odical instruction in Social Credit principles to a 
small study clas which met in the church base ent two or three 
evenings a week. His efforts at this time appear to have been 
largely eductional; he wished to stimulate the people to demand 
the introduction of Social Credit measures by the government, 

A beginning was made at organization when the Alberta Social 
Credit League, loosely co-ordinated by a Central Advisory Board, 
was set up. This Board operated as a unit under the ch: rter of the 
Calgary Prophetic Bible Institute, and Aberhart became its President. ^ 


7. Taylor, -;p, cit ., 75* 

8. Irving, "The Development of the Movement N , 21-22, 

9. Taylor, op , cit ., 5 6 . 







- 42 - 


In the auroraer of 1 952# Aberhart left the work of education 
In Calgary to a number of hi; . octetec. ost of the e men 
were Dougle itea, who trecced Social Credit doctrine as ouch, and 
not its application to Alberta. 

These early e forts met with great success. Soon Social Credit 
speakers were addressing meetings throughout the city on the first 
four nights of eo.ch wee , and holding Friday night gatherings at the 
Institute. 

Encouraged by the popular response, Aberhart on his return 
began speaking in the rural areas surrounding Calgary, often at 
the i:vit tion of U.F.A. locals interacted in learning more about 
the economic theory. 

The Schism 

Late in 1952# Aberhart published a little pa phlet, entiled 
rt The Douglas System of Economics”, now a collector*s item. 

Kerslake, t e ecretary of the Canadian Douglas Social Credit League 
wrote Aberhart informing him that the London Secretariat - the central 
organization of Douglas*s move ent in England - could not endorse 
the pamphlet, nor Aberh rt*s movement. He requested Aberhart to 
remove t e term “Douglas” from the work. 

As a result of subsequent conflict between Aberhart and the 


10 . Taylor, op» cit ., $ 6 , 

11 . Ibid ., 52 . 







-45- 

Dougla8it©£ in Calg ry, the le der, in Febru ry, 195^» resigned 

ac President of the Advisory Council* He was succeeded by Mr* 

Gilber McGregor, a Douglas follower, who had been aosocited with 

Aberhnrt in his educ tional efforts almost from the beginning*^ 

The growing popular interest in Social Credit caused the 

Agricultural Committee of the Provincial Legislature to hold 

he- rin ;s, at which various spokesmen for the movement testified* 

The first to give evidence was Aberhart, on March 19s 1954# 

He introduced his testimony not as the leader of a rival political 

party, but as one "making an appeal for the introduction of a system 

15 

of Social Credit to solve the present depression". x Attesting to the 

growin public interest in Social Credit, he said: 

We have travelled this province from the north to the south, 
across and b e’ , east and west, meeting the people and disco¬ 
vering the conditions prevailing. . . . Thousands and tens 
of thousands h ve signed their names to petitions urging for 
a full and complete investigation of social credit as remedy 
for the depression* Others are ready to sign. The represen¬ 
tatives from Calgary h ve had 12,000 signatures pieced in 
their hands. any U.F.A. locals as we 1 as various clubs and 
social credit groups Tr ve told ub they were forwarding reso¬ 
lutions to the repre-entalives of this house",* * 

His only aim, he said, was "to present it in such a concise 

manner that th re may be some interest created in it". At the same 

time, however, his remarks that he h d been made to "feel very much 


12. Taylor, op* cit *, 5 2 # 

15. " The Douglas System of Social Credit , 11 
14. Ibid. 







- 44 - 


at home in this house of parliament", and hoped he did not "get the 

idea of wa.tir to come back" may have sent a few, premonitory 

15 

chills down Brownlee's back* y 

Mr. Herbert Boyd of Edgerton, official delegate of the Canadian 
Social Credit League, and hr. Larkham Collins, a Calg: ry Douglasite, 
testified after Aberhart. Boyd was doubtful th: t the plan could 
be introduced provincially, and Collins was certain that it could 
not. Brownlee questioned Collins about Aberh rt's paphlet, eliciting 
the information that "opposition to Mr, Aberhart rise from the fact 
that he does not understand social credit s propounded by Major 
Douglas".^ 

When he was recalled for further questioning, Aberhart said; 

I would like you to know, if you will pardon me bringing in 
a personal matter here, that I have no plan to offer and would 
gl dly retire to the shades of economic oblivion. . . . When I 
heard ... th r t the London Secretariat repudi ted all credit 
to me and gave all the credit for Wester., interest to Mr. 

Kerslake ... I promptly ceased from progressive effort.*7 

He added that he was "in a quandary to understand the whole situation".IS 

On April 6, Major Douglas himself rrived to testify. His 

statements on the central question as to x/hether or not Social 

Credit was fea ible in Alberta were so ambiguous that they x*ere 

subsequently used as ammu itio by followers and opponents of 


15. The Douglas System of Social Credit , 11. 

16. Ibid ., 4l. 

17. Ibid., 64. 


18. Ibid., 72 








Aborhr A alike. Douglas* avoided r. outri hi rejection of Aberhart 1 *! 
panphlet by de- yi • th t he himaolf had read it, and giving berhart 
"the re l« t credit 11 for t r i t h the 

Follow!: - the he: rir s* Collins broader t e eerier known as 
"The Ope? ‘Air'd** stressing t c? following points* th t Douglas 
believed it wno ur • ce to fora a political p r rty; that Douglas had 
no plan for ^Iberta; and that the criticism of Aberhart 1 ® pamphlet 
b the ecrctcriot ha be©: "conde n' tory in the extreme"*^0 

But the victory of i' • .lanit e.- w ifeei t-Xived# By April, 
1924, Abertis rt. h d beer- rescued from his ‘tjuandnry 11 * and restored to 
pre-^rainenoe in the Dovcncni through the Inoietent demands of the 
following*^ Tfacusa? crel letters* 

voted reocluti .. do a di. .y hie return. Kcftregor reoig?-?ed* - 
Aber r rt • 7 in resu ©d the presidency. heC-regor ard the dleeidcnt 

.* 

Th© .F.A, pavernneni nay have felt th t by public!sin • the 
split within the move-ovt. 9 ard by Isolating Aborh©rt ns the only 
Social Credit oro-reman who ro ri usly believed that a plan for 
Alberta was feasible* they had effectively duelled the nascent threat 
of an opposition political mover© t# If so* they were quit© misled. 


19* The Doug le. Gyste. of Social Credit* 124, 

20. Taylor* o p, clt ., p4, 

21. Irving, "The Develops?© ' of the Moves-© t", 2 % Irvtr- does 
not indicate how this collective airy© wee induced* and it 

v f i| n . It quite 

possible i n;-:; aborhart noted for expreealo/.c of popular 
pi ion durlr. his radio broadcasts. 

22. aylor, op, cit ., 58 . 






- 46 - 


The growth of the Aberhart Social Credit Move ent 

These incidents helped to clarify the aims, consolidate the 
leadership, and unify the following of the Alberta Social Credit 
movement. Sust lined and vindicated by the mass membership, Aber- 
hart was in control from this time. Internecine warfare between Aber- 
hart’s adherents and the followers of Douglas no longer threatened 
to check the movement’s growth. The small coterie of Douglasltes 
withdrew to an apolitical wilderness, where they continued their 
efforts to educate the people in pure Social Credit theory. 

Aberhart end his following began an intensive campai n to demand 
that Social Credit be adopted in Alberta s a practical remedy 
for economic distress. 

In July and August of 195^* Aberhart and Manning toured the 
whole province, addressing two meetings a day, five days a week, 
returning to Calgary on the weekend for the Sunday broadcasts. 

Other trained and devoted speakers conducted meetings in every 
city, town, and village.^ 

New means of spreading the word were also devised. The 
Alberts. Social Credit Chronicle began publication in July, 19>4, 
in Calgary. Aberhart wrote another pamphlet, this time without 


25* Irving, "The Development of the movement", 25» 






- 47 - 


the Dou :lac imprimatur, the famous blue "Social Credit Manual". 

It sold in quantities which made the most bl se boo 1 sellers 

quiver.^4 

The most significant features of this stage of development were: 
the insistence that Social Credit could nd must be introduced 
in the province; the strengthening of loyalties around the charis¬ 
matic le der; and the extensive spread of the doctrine, facilitated 
by effective promotional techniques. 

Describing the "bondage of gold" which, like "an octopus whose 
deathly bloodsucking feelers are always extended to grasp us and 
drag us down to despair and misery", Aberhart urged: "Why wait for 
the other fellow, let Alberta do it, let Alberta show them the 
way; let the people of Alberta be the first to t :te of the good 
things of a new life 

A letter published from a U*F. . member who described himself 
as a "lifelong Socialist", demanded that the provincial government 
give Social Credit a "fair and 1 partial trial", and claimed that 
U.F.A. delegates in several constituencies had already adopted 
Social Credit.^ 


24. Taylor, op. cit ., 59. 

25* Chronicle , August 5* 1954. 


26. Ibid ., September 7* 1954. 







- 48 - 


In one of his series of "Educ tional Artlcleo", Aberhart 
3t rkly outlined the alternatives f cln • Albert voters in the 
next election* servile subjection to financial dictatorship; 
revolution and c rnr e; or, application of Social Credit principles 
by constitutional method 

The aim of the movement, introduction of Social Credit in 
Alberta, w r therefore cl rified. But the methods by which it 
was to be achieved remained vague. Was it to be introduced 
through the U,F. or by a specifically Social Credit party? Perhaps 
Aberhart we still uncertain himself at this stage. 

In any case, the groundwork was being laid for the emergence 
of Social Credit as an independent political movement, Aberhart 

P<> 

introduced the famous "straw ballot” to assess the probable 
support Social Credit proposals would receive In the coming 
election, and called for "one hundred honest men” who would work 
unselfishly for the Social Credit cause,^ The Chronicle 
condemned the leaders of the "old-time political groups 11 who were 
allegedly aware that the introduction of Social Credit measures 
would end their "selfish hoarding practices” and "seal their doom" 


27. Chronicle , December 7 S 195^. 

28. Irving, tt The Development of the Movement", 2 % 

29. Ibid , 

50, Chronicle , August 1954* 







- 49 - 


Followers were urged to study Social Credit in order to be finished 
"with the big bluff known as old-time party politics",21 

The "study groups" were the grassroots foundations of the 
movement. They were significant, first of all, in the dissemina¬ 
tion of the doctrine. Recent research on public opinion form tion 
indicates that face-to-f ce contacts are of vital importance in 
moulding political attitudes.22 Throughout the province, the 
members of the study .roups had an op ortunity to extend the in¬ 
fluence of the Social Credit message in the course of their every¬ 
day convers tions ifith friends and neighbors. At the rar e time, 
for study group members themselves, the regular discussions with 
like-minded persons served to re-enforce their own acceptance of 
the doctrine. 

The Chronicle published brief reports of these meetings, 
noting the program provided, the names of the ladies who had 
furnished refreshments, and the future plans of the groups. 

Despite occasional letters of protest demandin'- th t the Chronicle 1 s 
space be devoted to more "import nt" matters, the columns of news 
on study group activities continued to appear. And with good 
reason: members of each study group must have gained self-esteem 


51* Chronicle, August 5i 1954- 

52,Paul F, Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson, and Hazel Gaudet, 
The people 1 s Choice (New York, 1948), chap, xvi, passim . 




















































. 































, 


. 




. 


■ 










































- 50 - 

through this public recognition of the significance of their 
efforts* And the evidence that sirnil r study roups frorr far and 
near were also workin ; for the cause, must h: ve helped to foster 
feelings of unity, and of assurance that success would crown 
their collective efforts. 

Throughout the winter, Aberhart, Manning, and the lesser 
luminaries of the lecture circuit continued speaking to various 
groups, and organised meetings, dr ui: : ever larger crowds. 

Among the means of influencing membership attitudes employed 
by the leader throughout the active phase of the campaign, was mass 
singing, ”0 God Our Help i Ages past” was sung at the beginning 
of most raeetin s, and was called the ”them© song” of the movement,^ 
Warren, in his discussion of Nazi Party songs and Christian 
hymns, notes that both function in arousing the emotions of the 
singers to the point where they are more susceptible to the speaker's 
words, and in influencing the attitudes of the individual after 
he leaves the group. 

The individual, as he repeats the words borne up by the 
compelling urge of the melody, affirms his faith, and that in 
a loud voice. Through singing he can say things which it would 
embarrass him to repeat in his more inhibited moments. And, 
hearing his own uninhibited confession on the lips of those 
surrounding him, he is led to an even deeper affirmation of 
faith in what he is reciting, • • • Common affirmation of 
faith, supported by rhythm and melody, is an important 
factor in ”whippin up a crowd”, as any evangelist will 
testify. 


55# Edmonton Journal , April 1955* 

Roland L. Warren, ’'German parxeilieder and Christian 
Hymns as Instruments of Social Control”, in Ralph H. 
Turner and Lewis M. Killian, Collective Behavior 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1957), 443. 



































r 

* 




« 

- 

. . : 



. 






4 


. 




- 51 - 


The "theme song" with its suggestions of divine assistance, 
of security, and of hope, was supplemented, s we have seen, by 
Social Credit songs expressing admiration of, and devotion to the 

leader.25 

A turning point in the movement's development occurred at 
the U.F,’. Convention, January 17 to 10, 1955* If A be r hart still 
expected or desired his proposals to be introduced through the 
U.F.A., their definitive rejection at this Convention dashed such 
hopes forever* 

A description of Aberhart's appeal to the U,F#'. delegates 
indicates the leader's effective use of dramatic techniques In 
capturi ■. audience attention. During the oubseque t election 
campaign, most Opposition speakers drew pitifully small crowds, 
while Aberhart attracted thousands* One of the reasons for this 
Wfcs the leader's superb showmanship. Even nor.-sympathizers 
prob bly attended just to see the show, and hostile Opposition 
newspapers had to recognize the "news-value" provided by such 
meetings. 

Among the dramatis personae participating in the elucidation 
of the Social Credit system at the U.F. . convention were "The Man 
From Mars", and "Mr. Kant B. Dunn". M The Man From Mars" was the 
famous interplanetary wanderer, who, throughout this period, had 


55. Cf. ante , 22-25 






been taking a sustained, but bewildered intereot in Alberta 1 0 

problems. The Chronicle reported: 

... he could not understand where there were people not 
receivin enough food or nourishment in a land where food 
and clothing were being destroyed. Some people, he said, 
wero drivir. around in big cars, well fed and prosperous 
looking, while others were forced to walk and did not have even 
the necessities of life. 

Mr. Aberhart informed this disciple from the far-away planet 
that he v/ould hear a lot about Social Credit if he could 
stay during the meet in and that it was the only solution. 

The Mars messenger accepted the invitation and took his seat 
on the pi tfor: , although many ladies present cast rather 
suspicious eyes at the strange white-bearded old gentleman 
... with his bare feet and ancient garments. 

"Mr. Eant B. Dunn", the captious farmer who had been 

converted to positive thinking, 

. . . also managed to leave his farm for a while to make his 
appearance . . . although he was forced to leave his turkeys 
and chickens togeV or with his "yaller" dog outside the hall, 
much to his disappointment* Mr. .Dunn ... explained how 
he became an advocate of Social Credit and the gre t amount 
of good it would do all farmers in Alberta if they would only 
give it a trial.57 

Additional features were "a pleasing though sad sketch" by 
two Hi :• School students, "showing the terrible conditions under 
which the less fortunate people of today have to put up v/ith . . . 
which finally drives them to crime"; "several delightful comedy 
numbers"; and a selection of instrumental pieces rendered by the 
Young People* s Social Credit orchestra.^ 


56* Chronicle, January 18, 1955' 






- 53 - 


Aberh rt also spoke* 

Nevertheless, his proposal:.; we re voted down, and a resolution 
adopted inste d to bri Major Douglac boc’. to Albert ’ for further 
co sultation. 

The Chronicle bitterly attacked the procedure at the Conve tion, 

but reflected that the Social Credit movement was "now free and not 

tied down to any U,F*A. -* C*C.F. combination"*-^ ^ questioner who 

wrote to the Chronicle the follow! ; week wonderiv , ”Is Social 

Credit politics yet?” was told: 

Social Credit is nothing whatever to do with politics but 
a straightforward economic question for consideration of the 
people* Should a Social Credit government be elected and 
after a term of office again come to the people for a further 
term of office, then they would no doubt be a political 
party. 0 

In February, the U.F.A. hired Douglas as technical adviser to 
the government on Social Credit. He did not arrive in Edmonton 
until May, and his recommendations were not published until 
June, His preliminary suggestions: that an educational program 
for Social Credit be stepped up, through the ”systematic provision 
of a news circulation system under the unchallengeable control of 
the province”; th t “foreign currency” should be accumulated; and 
that “some credit institution” should be organized - created no 


59* Chronicle, January 25* 1935• 


40. Ibid ., February 8, 1955< 








appreciable stir.^ But the publication, at the same time, of the 
Dougin 3 -Lymburn correspondence,^ caused Aberhnrt to warn that 
"an attempt to divide you" was being made.^ Followers promptly 
voted confidence in the lender despite the "trickery so far tried".^ - 

The Development of the Political Organization 

Douglas*8 proposals, too anaemic to appeal to those who had 
rallied to the sanguine slo ~ans of William Aberhart, came too 
late to assist the U.F. . For by this time, the Aberhart organization 
had swung into high gear* 

The Chronicle had already begun to publish informative aticles 
on the provincial elections, tellin Social Credit supporters how 
to mar . their ballots.^ Conventions were called in all the 
constituencies to nominate delegates to attend the provincial 
conferences to be held at Calgary and Edmonton in April.^ 

The election was expected to occur sometime between proro¬ 
gation on April 25, and the expir tion of the Le islature* c life 
on July 11. During this time, a platform had to be formulated, 
candidates nominated, and organisation perfected. 

41. Edmonton Journal , June 5 5 1955* 

42. Of. ante, 55-56* 

45. Chronicle , June 21, 1955* 

44 . Ibid. 

45. Ibid ., February 8, 1955* 

46. Edmonton Journal , March 22, 1955* 





































































. 











- 




V 






- 55 - 


In e rly M rch, a "Prellmlnar Dralt Organization ar.d lsoussion 
of Platform” went out to the roups, contalnin instructions regar¬ 
ds the constituency conventions to be held about Mr rch 21* 

Each group with 20 or more members s to send three delegates, 
and any gollin division which contained no study group of more 
than 20 members war. entitled to send one deleg te, provided that 
an accredited dele ate approved him as a 100?$ Social Crediter.^ 

The call for each convention was to be issued by the Social 
Credit lc derc of the district, under authority from Central 
Headquarters in Calgary. Wo election candidates were to be 
nomin ted; but constituency officials were to be appointed, and 

sever, dele tes from each constituency nomin ted to attend the 

♦ 

Central Conferences in Calgary and Edmonton. 

The ^1an of the movement must have been stimulated by Aberhart 1 s 
announcement in March, regarding the results of the ”straw vote” 
in Calgary: 20,^76 were willing to vote Social Credit ; 6?2 were 
favorable, but maintaining their party preferences! and 602 were 
opposed.^ 

Study groups continued to form rapidly, and by the end of 
March there were 500 such groups, with adherents in every 
provincial constituency. The city of Edmonton exemplified this 
mushroom growth. At the end of March, there were only 10, 


4?. Taylor, op. cit ., 65 . 

48. :::dmont on Journa 1, March 25* 1955* 



















' 

- 























. 










- 






- 5 ^ - 


loosely co-ordinate groups in the oity*^ By the middle of 
April, ther were 24, co-ordin ted by a Central Council, and 
ready for the Provincial Northern Conference.^ 

The only apparent hindrance to the movements triumphal 
growth appeared to be the leader* s reluctance to become a 
politician. On April 1, Aberhart remarked# "I shall gladly let 
so; cone else seel: the premier's office. I am becoming more deter¬ 
mined than ever not even to run as a provincial candidate** 

This obstacle, however, turned out to be surmountable, if not 
im&gin:ry. 

The Southern Provincial Conference in Calgary unequivocally 

52 

called upon Aberhart to do his duty# 

Whereas the time has come when it is imperative that the 
Social Credit forces of the province be consolidated and 
systc r tically directed for definite ctiorj and 

Whereas this ca only be accomplished by shilled leadership 
and the supervision w ich are essential to the success of the 
Social Credit movement in the coming election; and 

Whereas, William Aberhart, despite the fact that he has 
repeatedly declared his personal aversion to political office, 
is, nevertheless recognised as the one responsible for the 
Social Credit movement in Alberta and the individual best 
qualified tc lead to victory the 100$ Social Creditors whose 
hopes for economic security have been raised through his 
educational campaign i the interests of Social Credit, 


49. drier -1 cs Journal , March 29? 1955* 

50. Ibid ., April 15, 1955. 

51. Ibid ., April 1, 1955. 

52. Taylor, op. cit. , 6>-66 # 













. 

’ 

’ 







, 




. 


- 








- 



















• - • ,. . 














- 57 - 


Be it the ofore resolved that this Convention, as represen- 
t tive of the thousands of Social Creditors in southern 
Alberta, denr d thnt Mr* Aberhart complete the wor' he h n s 
begun, by assuming the active leadership of the Social Credit 
force; of the province, and, furthermore, we insist that he 
regard this resolution as the mandate of southern Alberta 
Social Crediters whose hopes he has aroused. 

The Edmonton Convention issued a similar command, and by the 

end o: April, Aberhart said he ms prepared to accede to their 

55 

request * 

The Calgary Convention adopted a 10-plank platform, covering 
finance, debt, u employ: ei , education, agriculture, public health, 
justice, labor, industry and communication, general reorganisation, 
and plmnir . Dele;:' tea who enthusiastically urged such recommen¬ 
dations as -over ment-oper-ted airplanes for covintry doctors, and 
rec 11 legist'tion for . L. A .’s guilty of "moral laxity” were 
reminded by Manning that the pi'tform should be a declaration of 

- 54 

general policy, a i ' not of specific measures.^ The same platform 
was adopted, with one minor modification, at the Edmonton 


conference. 

The procedures for candidate choice were also arranged, as 
discuss© ■ previously, and the formal organizational structure of 
the party approved. 

Each constituency was subdivided into 4 to 12 "Zones”, 
dependin on the population, area, and natural divisions of the 


55* dmouton Journal , April 27 s 1955* 
54. Ibid ., April 6, 1955. 



















' 

■ 




























, 






















- 58 - 


constituency. Each Zone had a Zone Council, headed by a President, 
who wa. also the Zone Organizer, a Vice-President, and a Secretary. 
The President of each study group in the Zone was a director on 
the Zone Council, and each Zone President was also to be a director 
on the Constituency Directorate. 

The duties of the Zone Organizer (President of the Zone) 
were set forth as follows: 

1. It shall be the duty of the Zone Organizer to render every 
assistance possible in the organization of new groups 
after they are organized. 

2. As far as he is able to do so, the Zone Organizer shall 
be responsible to see that an active group is established 
in each polling subdivision of the Zone. 

5* He shall be responsible to the Zone Council, and shall 

be responsible to render due assistance to the Constituency 
Organizer, and shall assume with him the responsibility of 
maint' ining and improving the activities of the League 
within the Zone, 

4. He shall assist in the preparation of material for study 
and discussion in the Groups. 

Each Group was also headed by a President, Vice-President and 
Secret ry-Treasurer, and, as election day approached, the Zone 
Organiser was to select two members from each Group to act as 
scrutineers. They were to make a thorough canvass of the Polling 
subdivision in order to ascertain the opinion of each voter on 
Soci 1 Credit. The opinions were recorded on a list by the use of 
(/.) for favorable, (-) for unfavorable, and (?) for the hesitant* 
The Zone Organizer was to talk personally with all the uncommitted 
before the election. 

55* Taylor, op. cit. , 69-70. 





- 59 - 


As Irving has noted, the Social Credit organization was 

structurally similar to the U.F.A. organization, which ad been 

functioning for nearly 25 years, 

Aberhart^s study groups corresponded to the U.F.A. locals; 
hie "Zones" were modelled on the U.F.A. districts; there was 
very little difference in the constituency organizations of 
the two movements, and, finally, the Social Credit.League 
was inspired by the U.F.A, provincial convention. 

V/hen we note, in addition to this structural similarity, the 

attractiveness of Social Credit doctrine to the farmers, the 

influence of a charismatic leader unblemished by supposed moral 

lapses as were the U.F. . leaders, and the penetration of the U.F.A, 

locals by Social Credit speakers in the "educational" phase of 

the move lent 1 s career, it in not surprising th t when Social Credit 

became “politics”, U.F.A. members and groups began trasferring 

their allegiance. Following the rejection of Social Credit at the 

U.F.A, convention, various reports of splits in U.F.A. locals 

appeared. 

A report from Clive in February noted: 

A serious split in U.F.A, local activities has developed in 
this district over t'e Aberhsrt Social Credit scheme and the 
treatment accorded r. Aberhart at t e rece t U.F. . Con¬ 
vention in Calgary. As a result, locals in the district 
arc divided and members of the rank and file are at 
loggerheads with their officials. 57 

In March, the Handhills Lake U.F.A. local decided to discontinue as 

advocates of the U.F.A., and came over to the Social Credit Movement. 58 


58. Irving, "An Interpretation of the Movement", 158. 
57 . Edmonton Journal , February 27, 1955 * 


56. Chronicle, March 22, 1955' 






- 60 - 


Sustained efforts were made during tl is time to strengthen 

in-group loyalties and collective solidarity, and to mitigate the 

influence upon the following of external criticism. 

At the end of April, Aberhart in one of his Sunday broadcasts 

st ted that he was cancelling his subscription to the Calgary Herald , 

prob bly the most vociferous journalistic opponent of Social 

Credit, and urged 10,000 of hio followers to do the same.59 Two 

week 1 s 1 ter, he refused the Herald 1 s invitation of free space for 

an exposition of his plan, raying that it was not customary for a 

leader ”to supply the intelligence department of his opponents’* with 

the particulars of the program he had in view.^ 

On May 10, ”My Creed”, previously mentioned in connection 

with the leadership role, was published. A further excerpt from 

this statement of belief will be cited to indicate the mixture of 

appeals utilized to strengthen devotions 

I believe every human being has a Christian duty to get out 
of his or her life all the joy and happiness he can ... 

I believe the economic system under which we exist at present 
has outlived its usefulness and is responsible for the inequa¬ 
lities and intolerance - the economic slavery and tyranny 
which we should no longer submit to. 

I believe the principles of Social Credit as followed and 
explained by many leaders and thinkers of the British people 
are sound in principle and that their adoption in this province 
would be a first and import nt step towards the solution of 
our present and future difficulties . . 


59« Kdmonton Jourr.a 1, April ^0 9 1955# 
60. Ibid., May 10, 195% 


6l. Chronicle, May 10, 1955- 








































• 





. 








* 

















- • • 

* 

. 

























* 


















- 61 - 


The chain letter reveals even more strikingly the effort to 
strengthen the organization by insulating its members from outside 
criticism. 

I pled e myself to discontinue to liter in any way, shape or 
form to propaganda, r dio or newspapers which are poisoning 
our minds and are opposed to Social Credit, and to subscribe 
to the official Social Credit Chronicle as soon as possible . . . 

If I have not suffered enough it is my God-given right to 
suffer some more by supporting the bankers under the veil of the 

U.F.A.*s, Liberals, or Conservatives* 

Every day, in every way, , 

We 1 re gaining ground, all around. 

During July and August, Aberhart and Manning toured the province 
again, and made midweekly broadcasts, as well as the regular Sunday 
programs. These broadc sts were significant not only an a means fo r 
projecting the powerful radio personality of the leader, and for 
promulgating the doctrine. They were also vital in contributing 
to the movement 1 s cohesion. 

At the Sunday broadcasts, the Bible Institute welcomed visiting 
Study Groups. Seating arrangements were made so that all members 
of a visiting group sat in one section* During the introductory 
part of the service, the speaker would announce that members from the 

_Group were present, and ask them to stand. Each group 

was welco ed with applause.® The psychological astuteness of 
this technique is evident. The possibility that rural visitors 


62. Chronicle , May 51, 195% 


65 . Taylor, op. cit ., 75- 









- 62 - 


might feel lost and strange in the large city auditorium was averted 
throu h employing corporate oe ting arrangements* The feeling of 
unity within each study group was thereby stre gthened, At the 
same time, the welco e from the cpea er, and the applause from the 
audience served to strengthen the group*s emotional attachment to 
the movement as a whole. 

Significant, also, were the public announcements of the 
groups which had sponsored the broadcasts, ot only w s the 
"popular" support of Social Credit demonstrably contrasted with the 
"anonymous" baching of the other parties; but the groups were also 
shown their importance i contributing to the movement*s growth* 
Further, Aberhart*s "question period" was a useful means of authori¬ 
tatively reassuring listeners who had been puzzled by opposition 
criticism. 

A report of Social Credit Broadcast #51 reveals these techniques: 


Aberharti Now, ladies and gentlemen, this broadcast is under the 

auspices of three sections of our country* First, there 
is Empress. Thot is a great constituency. The people 
i this district are quite favorable to Social Credit, 
but they must see to it thct they are careful to nomi¬ 
nate three or four of their very best men. ... The 
second group sponsoring this broadcast is the Sunnyside 
group ->/2. This is an aggressive group. They have 
been regular as the clock in their support. ... 

No wonder their district is about 100^ Social Credit* 
... The third group consists of four small sections. 
... Thank you, then, Cranstondale, Ashcroft, Letus and 
Donaldson, and you, Sunnyside #2, and last, but not 
least. Empress. 

Now, Manning, what about the correspondence? 































■ 





. 



Manning! We had letters of support from three individuals. 

Aberhart! That is good. Be sure to reply with thanks at once. 


Manning! I still have a few letters with questions. IIere f s one 
fro Last Lake, Are you advancin; the Major Douglas 
Social Credit system in its entirety? 


Aberhart: Yes, sir, as far as I know. Major Douglas believes in 
dividends, so do I. Major Douglas believes in a Just 
Price, where hu profits and interest char-es are 
removed. [_sicj Major Douglas believes in the necessity 
of the Flow of Credit, so do I. The system has only 
three principles. I have accented all three. So I 
am in perfect accord with him. ^ 


An Edmonton meetin held in July, 1955* the Exhibition 
grounds was attended by people, many of whom had come from 

out aide the city. The colorful proceedings were described in the 
Edmonton Journal : 

Small boys hawked Social Credit manuals. Hot dog vendors 
wore badges proclaiming them "official delegates’*. Hat bands 
sported by hundreds of me: declared "Alberta Needs Social 
Credit". . . There was a present tion of an illuminated 
addre a of welcome to Mr. Aberhart. ... A group of 20 
children from the Jordan school of dancirr provided an exhi¬ 
bition ... in colored costumes. 

A comedy race, run by four horse: carrying political plays, 
delighted Social Credit adherents. The Social Credit stable 
produced the winner, while the Liberal horse came second, with 
the Conservative placin third. The U.F.A. hors© was so 
far in the rear that it was marked as "also ran" . . . 

Scattered about the sawdust walk . . . were the numerous housie- 
housie and ring-toss games, hot-dog stands and soft-drink , 
booths, : igne, rib’ons, and numerous prospective candidates. ^ 


64. Chronicle , May 3* 1955* 

65 . Ednont on J our ns. 1 , July 8, 1955* The election prediction 
dramatized in the "comedy race" was considerably more 
accurate than any made by the Opposition parties. 




















» 




















- 64 - 


The color, entertainment, excitement, and infor al fellowship 
associations provided by ouch meetin b were significant factors 
contributing to the strength of the Social Credit organization. 
Certainly, the acceptance of the movements goals provided a crtimulus 
for membership efforts. But, at the same time, the process of 
working towards these goals was made enjoyable and satisfying. In¬ 
formal membership gratifications helped to give life and spirit to 
the for al structure of the organisation outlined in the Social 
Credit Constitution* 

Less than a month before the election, various organized groups 

66 

began vigorously to oppose the wave of the future* k The Economic 
Safety League was formed and began issuing warnings. The Calgary 
Board of Trade and the Edmonton Chamber of Commerce expressed 
their fe:rs of the catastrophic results that would occur in the 
evert of a Social Credit victory, Larkham Collins, of the Douglas 
Credit League, was given space in the "United Farmer” to express 
his view th t an Aberhart victory would be "disastrous" to the 
Social Credit movement. The Opposition parties intensified their 
criticisms, and in our analysis of doctrine, we shall discuss why 
they were so singularly ineffective,^ 

This eleventh-hour opposition was quite futile. 


66. Cf, post, n4 ff. 

67* Cf, post, 108 ff. 







- 65 - 

For by thic time, a Social Credit victory war inevitable. 

The doctrine h r d been repeatedly, effectively, and often entertain- 
in ly expounded in the newspapers and in pamphlets, on the air, 
and on the stage. The leader was secure in the devotion of his 
thousands of followers. And the organization, effectively co-ordi¬ 
nated from the Prophetic Bible Institute in Calgary, extending into 
every polling subdivision within the province, and staffed by a host 
of hard-working and enthusiastic adherents, was ready to roll on 
to victory. 



CihPTKR 4 


*’" ■ . ! ■ ■ • ■ t: 

In our dicouoolon of th© "doctrine" of the lbertr Socii l 
Credit movement, we shall refer to the explanation8 of the economic 
oriole offered by Aberhcrt, and to the pro, ran of reform which he 
proposed* © call also note 'he definite appeal, which were node 
to various interest roups, and the cl ;nifieanco of th© religious 
nosoa o whic pemcr ted Aberhart'c entire exposition# Thio 
tloct rino wa a of pivot 1 significance in t n dovelopme t of Social 
Credit ir Alberta, althou ;h it did not eland alone# Its success 
van inextricably bound up with the cihectiveneBB of th© leaderchip 
©.■ d or a isation of the movement* 

We -re leee concerned with the validity of Social Credit a® 
an economic or political theory than with the reason© for it® 
enthusiastic acceptance by Albertans# To interpret a- d analyse 
the idea' of a sovernenl of thin sort, solely in terms of empirical 
truth end logic®. 1 consistency,, may serve to minimise their power 
in appealii • to the ©notlor o, interestc, and declreo of men* 

Social Credit doctrine, as expounded in Ibert , m a 
complex mixture of varying and nometise® co tr dictory elements* 

It was presented both-, as a factual ©fid sclent if ic analysis of 
depression, together with Gil godly exact and reliable prescript 
tiono for reforms at the sane time, it was pro ul ted so a 









- 67 - 

religious messa e of regeneration and salvation. The hetero¬ 
geneity of these appeals, one supposedly resting on factual, and 
ore allegedly on trn scende tal rounds, should occasion no surprise. 
Viewed functionally, the appeal of the doctrine was enhanced, and not 
diminished by thi3 dual presentation. Both the insistereo that 
Social Credit was an absolutely scientific doctrine, certain to 
work because founded on verified principles, and the message that Social 
Credit would be successful because it embodied God*s will, served 
the same psychological function. Both appealed to the desires 
for certainty, and for assurance of successful amelioration. 

Before turning to the genuine Alberta product, however, we 
shall briefly outline the significance to the move ent of the 
ori inal rticles that is, the writings of Major Clifford Douglas. 

The most obvious contribution of Douglas’s theory vmc th't it 
provided the indispensable basis for Aberhart's Social Credit 
doctrine, A professional engineer, Douglas began his analysis 
with the conviction th t the existing system had failed to use 
the almost limitless heritage of science and industry in the inte¬ 
rests of humanity. The core of his economic analysis was the 
”A / B Theorem”, which purported to show that through an error 
in the accounting system of industry, there was always an Inevitable 
lag in consumer purch sing power, which meant th t the people could 



- 68 - 


never, as consumers, buy back the oods v' ioh they had produced* 

On this foundation, finance had built its control, first of 
industry, and then of overnments, From the policies of 
finance flowed all the evils of restricted production, un¬ 
employment, the suppression of freedom and individualism, 
the perversion of labor values and war, 1 2 

The remedy was for the people to wrest the control of credit 

from the financiers, and to make the financial system "reflect 

the facto” through two simple monetary d vicesj the issuance of 

national dividends to consumers, and the "just" or "compensated” 

price - a system of prices periodically fixed, in order to ensure 

2 

that everything produced would be bought. 

Untutored in economics himself, but sincerely concerned with 
the social sufferin which he witnessed around hie, Aberhart found 
in Douglas’s writings a plausible explanation of the depression, 
together with an apparently simple and practicable remedy. With 
his own limited intellectual background as a high—scl ool mathematics 
teacher and evangelist, Aberhart could not have formulated ouch a 
theory himself, let his background curiously prepared him for 
the acceptance of such a doctrine. His limitations prevented him 
from seeing the error of transferring the mechanistic concepts of 
engineer! to the complex and interrelated phenomena of the social 
world, Aberhart^ mind looked for certainty, simplicity, and 


1, C.B, KacPherson, Democracy ir: Alberta (Toronto, 1953)? 97* 


2. Ibid ,, 150. 










. 

■ 

- 



















• 






















, 




. 


' 

. 

. . 



























- 69 - 


ethical appeal. The world of social reality was to him like a 

multiple-choice questionnaire in which every iooue could be 

surely and simply decided, once the "key" had beer discovered. 

Aberhart* s "Educational Articles 11 illustrate this mental set very 

well. For example, the economic problems, usually three in number, 

which f' eed some roup of the population were first stted. Then it 

was demonstrated how Social Credit could solve each one, 5 Or, some 

broad social proble , such as the rowing incidence of mental 

illness, was considered. Three explanations were given, two of 

whic 1 were patently ridiculous. The relevance of Social Credit 

h 

to the third was the. established. By such techniques, all 
reality c aid be neatly subsumed in point form. 

The seemingly scientific quality of Donjlasism therefore 
appealed to the high—school mathematics aeecher at the same time 
that the possibilities of social betterment envio. ed by Douglas 
aroused the crusading fervor of the evangelist. 

The "scientific" quality of Douglas*s work undoubtedly appealed 
to many others besides Aberh rt. Modern man tends to look upon 
science iv a respect, ble and up-to-date form of me ic, more certain, 
reliable, and practical than magic, and capable of performln even 
greater miracles. The attractiveness of Douglas* s theory was 
considerably enhanced by ouch populvr conceptions* 


5. Chronicle, January 4, 1955* 


4. Ibid ., December 21, 19^4< 









' 






, 































. 






. 
































. 















- 70 - 


On the one hand, belief in the almost boundless p -were of scientific 
technology made it relatively easy to occept Douglas*s oentral con¬ 
tention that the world had already reacted the s%r e of machine 
development where it wan physically possible for human needs to be 
satisfied "many times over'* without the people h ving to pass 
through the "turnstile of labor" for more than a few hours a day. 

On the other hfnd# the theory itself was supposed to be 
"scientific" - th t is, certain, reliable and practical. In his 
own eyes, and i the opinion of many of his followers, Douglas’s 
background as an engineer was regarded as a qualific tion for 
his forays into the field of economics. Douglas was not reluctant 
to admit that his principles bore the same relation to his scheme 
as "the laws of thermodi&c dynamics do to the design of a steam 
engine".^ As one might expect, this approach led to drastic over- 
simplific tions of social processes, as the followin • exchange 
illustrates: 

Douglas: Laws bearin on the financial system are almost 

entirely for the protection of that system and the 
political system is almost inevitably the tail 
wagged by the financial dog. 

McLeod: Whot have you in mind v/hen you refer to the present 
system? How much would be involved in the necessity 
of governments making regulations? 

Douglas: I do not think that anythin-- would be necessary 

other than a complete reorganization. . . . Price 
and available purchasing power ere the important 
points and are entirely separate fro adminictr tion. 
Neither has the question.of working conditions anything 
to do with distribution. 


5* The Douglas System of Social Credit , 102, 
6. Edmonton Journal , April 6, 195^* 























, 








. 


- 

- 




• 







• 


. 

' 

















- 





- 




















« 



















71 


Douglas's oonviotion th t he had elucidated the means by 

which economic and political affairs could be handled aa preciaely 

and scientifically as engineering problems was shared by Aberhart. 

In his testi ony to the Legislature, Aberh? rt noted that* 

The Social Credit coi cept is not the product of the 
imagination of some hare-brained economist seeking notoriety. 

It bears the marks of strength, stability, and scientific 
accuracy. It comes to us from a genius mind.' 

He urged this point further in the statementi 

I claim that in the days in which we live we have to have the 
progressive engineering or philosophic [ sioj type of mind, 
which examines carefully the principles involved and diffi¬ 
culties entailed. Then it builds the brid e or di s the 
tunnel where none previously existed. 0 

Aberhart, however, was not content to rest, as Douglas did, 
at confusing engineering with science, and both wit' philosophy; 
he carried the process a step further, as we s all see, by identi¬ 
fying all three with the will of God. 

The Chronic b , too, urged the faithful to accept the doctrine 
because of its scientific certainty. In reply to a questioner who 
demanded, "Will it work?" the Chronicle replied: 

Thirty years a o, Wilbur bright climbed into a contraption 
of sticks and wire, with an engine attached - to s chorus 
of ha-ha*s from the scientists of his day. How could a 
machine heavier than air be expected to fly? It couldn't 
work. . . * It did work! ... That is an exact analogy of the 
Social Credit idea. Our principles re sound. ... It is 
quite likely the trial fli ht will show weaknesses. A little ad¬ 
justing here and there will have to be done - but it will work!9 


7* The Dou 1.s System of Social Credit , 11. 
8. Ibid. , 

9• Chronicle, May 17, 1955* 








- 72 - 


Douglas*s theor was functionally significant in other ways. 
His proposals hed been exertin - Done influence on the Canadian 
and Alberta scenes since the e rly 1920*s, Various U.F.A. members 
were interested in the scheme, and William Irvine, an Alberta 
Progressive ,F., had been instrumental in having Douglas testify 
to the federal House of Commons in 1925. Douglas’s ideas had also 
received considerable attention in other parts of the world - 
especially in Britain, Australia, and lew Zealand, and Douglas 
had attracted to his pro grain followers of some distinction, inclu¬ 
ding the ’arquie of Tavistock, Professor F. Soddy of Oxford, Eamon 
de Valera, Ezra Pound, and a number of journalists, artists, 
playwrights, ad actors. 

The Edmonton Jouri-al ,in the e rly days before Social Credit 
became in its eyes a domestic thre t, used to publish reports on 
Douglas’s rowing influence in various parts of the world, and 
occ sional sympathetic expositions of the economic theory, by the 
Marquis of Tavistock, and other supporters. Social Credit doctrine 
did not come from Aberhart’s lips as an entirely new and unfamiliar 
approach to economic and social problems. Social Credit ideas had 
been "in the air" for years, and could not be dismissed immediately 
as the ravin s of an economically unsophisticated evangelist* 

Another feature of the Douglas system which was probably 
useful to the Alberta movement was the complexity and ambiguity of 











L 


. 


















. 













































- 75 - 


Douglas’s writir s. Apparently a m ster of the strategic retret 

to previously prepared intellectual positions, Dougl r s w&j. not an 

easy opponent to refute in a simple, immediate, and convincing 

fashion. As one of his weary critics poi ted out* 

It may seen surprisin'; that a theory which is at once so 
ambiguous and so involved should have found such support. 

But, ap rt from the attractions offered by "the cure", the 
popularity of t e Douglas view is in all probability to be 
explai ed precisely through its ambiguity and complexity. 

For each supporter, there is an interpret tion which suits 
his Intellienee and his knowledge. For the critics, there 
is not one but a collection of heads to cut off. An oppo¬ 
nent may destroy to his own c tisfaction one of the interpre¬ 
tations, but another will appear in its pi; ce. Unless he is 
gifted with exceptional patience and enthusiasm, he will turn 
away in helpless irrit tion long before the complete repertoire 
is exhausted. Other reformers appeal to the same sentiments . . . 
but none have that defensive weapon against r tional criticism - 
the ambiguous statement - so perfectly at hand, so efficiently 
controlled, as the followers of Major Douglas.^ 

Aberhart was quite willin to forego the complexities of the 

economic theory in order to get an understandable, compelling 

doctrine across to the voters. When questioned at the Agricultural 

Committee hearings on "A ^B", he replied, "I say to you again* 

Major Douglas has peculi r r knowledge and goes into it with higher 

mathe sties, but the ordinary man cannot follow th t".-^ 

"A / B" may have appealed to the "ordinary man", however. 

Such an algebraic demonstration could offer assurance that the 


10. H.T, . G-ait skill, Four Monet ary Heretics ; cited in the 
Edmor.to - Journal , April 11, 

11. The Dou 1-c System of Social Credit , 22. 










. 





• 

. 





. 

. 

. 










. 


. 

' 

... 












theory was impregnable, at the Fame ti e thet its unintelli i- 

bility conveyed tl e fcelin of being privy to a mystery. It lent 

itself to use as a cabalistic incantation, acceptance of which 

served to separate the initiate from the unbelievers. It has been 

noted that a certain amount of exclusiveness and myater are useful 

in providing supplement ry prestige gratifications to the members 

12 

of a social move ent. The doctrine co.rried co vlction partly 

because of its esoteric complexity. As MacPhercon has noted: 

Its very intricacy became an asset, for the mere knowledge of 
its existence ve the adherents of Soci 1 Credit a sustaining 
feeling that all the mysteries of economics had b en probed 
ever; if they could not understand them.13 

Despite the lasting and basic impact which Douglas 1 © theories 

exerted on t e Alberta movement, it was the Social Credit doctrine 

expounded by Williai Aberhart which aroused ard sustained the mass 

following. A cortempor ry assessed the relative influence of the 

two me 1 c expositions in the following ways 

Up to the ti e of r. Aberhart 1 o appearance ... Douglas 1 s 
followers ... were mostly gentle hi hbrows who enjoyed 
believin in a theory which was reputedly the 1 test thing in 
economics, very hard to understand a. d consequently esoteric. 
They believed in Dou las in the same spirit that people collect 
Chinese j de or practice veget rianism. Douglasism was a 
quiet cult for intellectuals. ... Mr. berhart changed all 
that. Out of the obscure jun le of ajor Douglas’s economic 
writings ... he made a brief but effective slogans |25 
a month for everybody. This simplific tion of the Einstein 
of economics horrified the Major’s dilettante followers in 
Alberta, It also alarmed t e Alberta government.^ 


12. Ralph H. Turner and Lewis M. Killian, Collective Behavior 
(Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1957 ), 44^. 

15. MacPherson, op. cit 119- 

14. Edmonton Journal , June 8, 1955* quoted from an editorial 
in the VJinnipc-- Free Press . 





























■; 









' 


















. 






















. . . . 

















• 



. 




■ 







. 

... 

- 








- 75 - 


It wa3 Aberhart who transformed Social Credit from a "quiet cult 
for intellectuals" into a militant people*s crusade. 

The Explanation 

The significance to a movement of a body of explanations which 
meaningfully Interpret the socio-economic distresses of the people 
has been stressed by social psychologists*^ The "desire for meaning" 
in moot keenly experienced in "critical situations" which ariae 
whet' the individual is confronted by a chaotic external environment 
which he cannot interpret, but which he wants to interpret because 
it involves actual or potential fruotr tion of his needs arid drives. 
The depression obviously created such a situ ton for many Albertans, 
Not only were the basic needs for food, clothing and shelter being 
inadequately met, but such "derived drives" as the desire for 
social status were frustrated among lar e sections of the population. 
Under these circumstances, the people were particularly susceptible 
to a doctrine which "explained" their plight in simple and under¬ 
standable terms. 

What, then, was the nature of Aberhnrt * s explanation of 
underconsumption, unemployment, and "poverty In the midst of plenty"? 

"Social Credit", he explained, "involves the claim that every 
citizen ha: a ri :ht to share in t e unearned increment of real 

credit that comes from the inventive genius and pro :ress of mankind 
made possible by association under one government",^ 0 

15* Hadley Oantril, The Psycholo y of Social , ove e:- t s 
(New York and London, 1941 ), ff, 

16, The Don las System o:. Socirl Credit , l4. 







- 76 - 


The term ‘'Credit" itself meant the ability of the individual 
or corpor tion to secure goods-or cervices, without immediately 
givi g ar equivalent value for them. Credit, in other words, rested 
on faith, or belief, th?t the individual or group would ultimately 
honor its obli 'cions. Thus, t e mo ct baric concept in the doctrine 
was susceptible to religious and et ical interpretation. Certainly, 
the e connotations were not stres ed by Dou las. But in Alberta, 
faith in the potential nbunda ce of ‘lbert , and belief that the 
people would ultimately get the benefit of their Social Credit, 
were of great significance* 

The elaboration of the doctrine customarily took the form of 
distinguishing between three types of credit.^ 

“Real Credit" rested on the capacity of the individual to 
deliver goods or serves, as, when, and where required. Thus, the 
man who owned whe~t could secure credit on this basis. 

"Financial Credit" was the financial appraisal of Real Credit, 
established through banks or credit houses* As we shall see, it 
was the va ries of this type of credit which x?ere responsible for 
the assorted evils to w ich twentieth-century man had fallen heir. 

"Social Credit" was that form of credit w ich arose from the 
association of individuals to ether. In Aberhart's exposition, 
Social Credit included the "cultural heritage", and the "unearned 
increment of association". The cultural herit e, in turn, 

17# The Douglas System of Social Credit , 14. 



















































. 






- 


















- 77 - 


comprised both the increa e in productivity created by technolo¬ 
gical development, and the actual and potential wealth of Hberta’s 
resources. Social Credit wes the "inheritance tint comes to the 
individual through the efforts of the forerunners in this province 
and through the general progress that has been made by the inventors 
and men of enius throughout t e ages'®.^ This inheritance of real 
and potential social wealth belonged by right to all the people, 
and not to a few individuals. The right of t e people to this 
social legacy was justified in the following terras: 

As part of the fabric of human society, we have an interest 
in the products of the m: chines of our la d. All machinery 
is the product of man’s geniu and inventive abilities, No 
one person can claim the full credit of having originated 
every idea embodied in any one of our m chines. Such a 
person received many Ideas from the inventions of their 
fellowraen, who in turn built on foundations laid by former 
e er tiOB. ... Furthermore, all such inventors were educated 
by taxes which either we or our forefathers paid.^ 

The second part of the cultural heritage included the natural 

resources and undeveloped wealth of the province. The real credit 

of the people was enhanced by the natural bounty which had been 

bestowed by God upon the people, and yet the Financial system 

refused to grant to the people the credit which vrould accurately 

and fairly reflect this social inherits ce - instead, the selfish 

few were misusir it i: their own interests. 


18. Chronicle , May Jl, 1955* 
19* Ibid ., September 7, 1924* 










- 78 - 


In t e Canada Year Book we are told that the estimated wealth 
of the province is 2 billion, 406 million dollars. ... 

From this immense wealth we have been able annually to produce 
from 150 million to 400 million doll rs worth of raw products. 
... The Financial Capitalist system claims that the produc¬ 
tion of this wealth should belo to anyone who can manipulate 
or control it. ... Under Social Credit philosophy, it is 
claimed that no individual or group of individuals nor the 
fifty big shots has any right to claim the whole of the product 
of the province*^ 

The final basis of Social Credit was the "unear ed increme t 

of association”, the "most potent element” i the value of goods. 

Through their mutual association, and through their collective 

demand s consumers, the citizens of a community increoaed the 

value of goods offered for sale. Thus, the word "incre ent" 

referred to the additional value placed upon economic goods through 

consumer association, while "unearned” referred to the fact that 

this increase did not result from additional efforts on the port 

°1 

of producer or distributer. 

Accordin to Aberhart, the Social Credit of the people w s 
being manipulated by financiers, money barons and capitalists in 
such a way that pure; sing pov/er was restricted, consumers ex¬ 
ploited, and the productive cap';city of the province left undeve¬ 
loped. 


20, Chronicle , September 7# 195^. 


21. Ibid ., February 1, 1955' 






- 79 - 


The lack of oonsumcr purchasing power sufficient to purchase 
the goods produced by industry was attributed to the purposeful 
machinations of the financiers. "Well-entrei ched, it is true, 
vicious, deter i ed, and cold-blooded",^?h© bankers were deliberately 
refusing to issue financial credit in sufficient amounts to 
correspond to the "physical facts", that is, to the actual Social 
Credit of the community. At the same time-, they would not rant 
productive loans that would permit the full exploit tion of the 
natural resources ad technological potential that did exist. So 
long as the:e policies were allowed to continue, the specter of 
" poverty in the mid at of plenty" vjould remain to haunt the people. 

Aberhart*s doctrine largely i nored the "A / B Theorem", which, 
as we have seen, attempted to prove that the lag in consumer 
purchasin power stemmed fundamentally from an impersonal error 
in the pricin system. He concentrated, instead, on the personal 
malevolence of e roup of shadowy and sinister figures: the "50 
Big Shots"; the financiers; the "money barons"; and the "hard¬ 
hearted capitalists". "Our system of credit is concentrated, the 
growth of the nation and therefore all its activities are in the 
hands of a chosen few who lot over the destroying of economic 
freedom". * Their motivation in this heinous work was simply the 
malevolent desire to increase their own power and profits. 


22. Chronicle , October 26, 195^* 
25. Ibid., August 5, 1934. 






>* s ' 



















- 80 - 


The finonciers by international action a d to increase the 
value of the money which they can ere te, set about to make 
and succee ir making money scarce. ... They prefer the 
crash of civilization which inaction will brin. about rether 
than allow the introduction of Social Credit* 21 

In Douglas's writings, the capitalists were viewed more in 

pity thar in anger. A staunch believer in the free enterprise 

system, Dou las held that the capitalists had become helple s 

adjuncts of the financial system, reduced to the status of mere 

administrators,^ They did not escape so 11 htly in the Alberta 

doctrine. 

The capitalist, or rather, the "free enterprise" system as 
such was not ett eked, but the big capitalists, the owners of 
trusts, monopolies, a cartels were pictured as acting somehow 
in concert with the financiers in order to mulct the people of 
their ocial Credit. Particularly ir his discussion of the 
unearned increme t of association, and in the remedial feature of 
the Just Price, Aberhart assailed the "price-fixlr ; " allegedly 
employed by larre corporations, monopolies, ad trusts. A 
federal commission on price spreads at this time had been 
receivi considerable publicity, ad Aberhart 1 s advocacy of 
the Just Price must therefore have met an unusually receptive audience 
among the farming, labor, ai d sisal 1 business segments of the 
Alberta electorate. 


24. Chronicle , August 24, 19>4, 
25* Macpherson, op. cit ., 97. 







- 81 - 


The iniquities of capitalism, however, were not subject to 

profound analysis. A questioner who wondered, "How docs to 

capitalist class maintain themselves in power?" was told* 

This question nearly answers itself by another question - 
"How do the ban s make ouch hu;e profits today?" By the 
overwhelming rip they have on the country* o finances and 
the absolute control over everythin belonging to the State, 
even to the people themselves* . « * The exorbit t profits 
and inters t of t e banners, financiers a d money barons 
received from the exploit tion of the workers.^ 

Evidently, however, this statement exhibits a striking 

departure from Douglas*s belief that "profits have ceased to form 

an out standi feature of business ".^ 

Vieiired in historical perspective, the manipulation of the 

peopled Social Credit by an evil minority was alleged to be the 

cause of popular suffering throughout the ages. A questioner who 

wanted to know did Social Credit first make its appearance in 

the civilized world? "was informed that the ay stem could be traced 

back "many thousands of years", but, unrortui: tely, h:d been 

"crushed by the capitalistic system, Confucius, it was noted, 

had evidently advocated placin purchasing; power i the hands of the 

peorl when he decreed* "First enrich your people, a d hnvi - en- 

2Q 

riched them, teach them". 

In Biblical times, "the moguls of usury" had lived on the 

26. Chronicle, September 7, 195^* 

27* MacPherron, op. cit ., 11^* 


28. Chronicle , July 2 g 195*1 
























. 






■ 




. 








. 
















. 













- G2 - 


•heavy interout o' nr ea# hi$i tnx<?o a d imposition m pi cod on 
oo 

, » • 

The historic i vit bllit of this new at c ecu© out ole rly in 
a speech wish had a stro ly Marxist flavor# while at the oemo 
tloe# it rt • udlel' the basic 'arxlut cot ter t ion of the olaoo 


Cap it Hsu hi’ ... oolved the probler of c relty# it hoo accomp- 
11 she c • 1 it t me ere-ted for# end# like feudal Ion# rauet 
•:•o-;c way for the ext and alWUsport t atep - the problem 
of the diGtributio> of abut dance* Capitalism could only live 
who-, forei market, a could be found a d when i duotry could 
absorb new capital. W© see the community an produce or 
abundance of' wealth but cannot produce on© oert of purehaeirg 
power* Finance ic the high pod to whom oil must ray tribute* 

* . . Vie hove beer fi- ti muen abut root ani us in the part - 
employer a cinst employee and \rice versa* Hhlle that condition 
I . c fire, cial pov:e v oar sit b ok and tear net hit 1 • 

But today employers and employees are otti * together# 
au re also the producers# retailers, and the re i mass of 
Consumers, They are beoomi • more enlightened ar.d are facing 
l e common e. emy - finance* 3® 

A Marxist explanetio? of the first 'real war was also advanced, 
in the chronicle t 

It uBi a war amo ot the great eorporelior a ©. .a business 
house-o in the different countries for world supreme, eg of 
export 1 forei countries • . « abl, sided ar.d 

abetted by fi a cc, for wi bout int err-et Iona 1 fine nee# the 
war could not have X. at c the first ye r*^l 


29# "hrorjclc # Peptember lA# 19oA, 
50w Ibid* 

pi* ibid, # September 21# 1 















































' 





































































In advanci) r such explanations of war and depression, t' e moot 
devast ti phci o ena of twentieth centur life, the /ilberte 
Social (Credit party had an appeal which must have transcended the 
agrarian community. The meesr e included sufficient denunciation of 
"capltrlism” that the doctrine probably carried considerable weight 
with labor and socialist elements in the populstio , as we 11. The 
explanation was, in fact, so propounded as to have an almost uni¬ 
versal appeal. Obviously, it had little charm for any international 
financiers, money barons, or big capitalists who may have been 
skulkir: around the province. But the party could bear the loss 
of their votes with fortitude. 

The Pure 

Fortunately, t’ is unhappy state of affairs was not goin to 
necessit te ary drastic changes in social institutions. Despite 
the attack on "capit lists”, the system of property relationships 
would be left intact* H Does Social Credit involve socialization, 
n tio alls tion, oonfiseation, or expropriation"" demn. ded a 
follower. 

“There will be no couflocation, no expropri tion, no nationali¬ 
zation of banks, no socialization of lands nor of industries, no 
class wars or revolutions”, replied the C~ ronicle, reassurir ly.^ 


32# Chronicle, July 27, 193^ 












- 84 - 


The point wqc th t "the capitalist eystem did very well 
until o. few clicker a got hold of it ftxkd ran it to 11 V* 

Under Social Credit, private enterprise d individu; 1 initiative 
would remain, but the financiers ai d monopolists would no longer 
be allowed by the t te to rob t e people of their Social Credit, 
through curtailme t of production and credit, and imposition of 
price-3preads. 


• • i the operation of Industry will be subject . * . to a 
policy provided for its guidance by the government* Private 
inductr will flourish more profit bly because it will not 
be subject to the ravages of interest charge;, cut-throat 
compelit ion, the deficiency of purchasing power and many 
other social i justices. ... Under Social Credit with its 
individual enterprise, this incli nation to exploit consumers by 
profit will be removed and replaced by a commi slow on turnover 


54 


The three "principles" of Social Credit which would be 
employed to remedy existing abu es were the B‘ sic Dividends, the 


Just Price, and the Constant Flow of Credit. Derived fro??] Dou las* s 
writings, these principles wh© explained by Aberhart underwent 


st rtling changes, which enhanced the ethical end semi-reli ious 
flavor of the doctrine. 

The most attractive "principle" was undoubtedly the "Basic 
Dividend", a $25 a month non-negoti- ble certificate to be paid to 
every bon fide Alberta, citisen over the age of 21. It was presented 
not simply as a monetary device to equ te consumer purchasing 


55* Chronicle, Au ;u t 24, 195^* 


5^. Ibid ., September 7, 195^ 












- 85 - 

power with the production of industry; it was also desi rd to 
serve the ethical function of correcting the iniquitic of the 
existin^ oyste under which the "50 Bi :i Shots" had error..'ted to 
themselves the people* Social Credit* The voter: were repeatedly 
told th t the dividend w s their "right", both because it was the 
materi 1 embodiment of their cultural heritage, and because it 
wa a inst i od*6 will that t eir basic needs should be 
frustrated. After bein use. for payment purposes, there certifi¬ 
cate were to be turned in to the St te Credit House. It was 
termed "basic" bee. u e it would be sufficient ”to supply the bare 
necessitie of food, clothing and shelter".^ Provided that bills 
for these basic items were paid, no re ul&tion as to the expendi¬ 
ture of the dividends was to be m de - but Aber art indicated that 
they would have to be spe, t in or e way or another - an element of 
compulsion which prob bly did not unduly disturb his followers. 

The proposed figure of $25 was only an estimate, based, according 
to the Chronicle, on Aberhart*s 

,, , careful delvin into the- financial receipts and resources 
of the province, . . • He knows th t i all probability it 
may be hi her, but it is far better to quote a possible figure 
thar, somethin improbable. It ju t comes down to this, whe 
Mr. Aberhurt su ests $25 a month as a basic di id end, then you 
can nearly rely o; th t amount as a minimum dividend.5° 

It was stressed that the dividends v/ould not be new currency. 


55* The jjou Ian System of Social Credit, 16. 
56. Chronicle , March 8, 1955* 





. 

. 


: 

. 


. 

. 




.... 
















66 - 


for thi.3 would cor.tr vc e the Ba: Act. "hey would be "m rely 
ac!: orled emc ts of debt, ' d would ot be used a;: substitutes for 
iso ey M ?7 To the people, however, the ivide; rau3t have sounded 
like a., excelle t approxinr Lion of i substitute. 

The second principle s the Just Price, or autom tic price 
control. It, too, would ©rve both ar. economic a d a. ethical 
functio . Ii would prevent infl lion, by c suri th t the Increase 
i: consumer demand c used by the issua; ce of dividends would not 
cause a co ii ually risin price level - ad, at the same time, 
it would stop the exploit tior. of the consumer. Profits would be 
reduced from 20^ to 5$; In fact, profits, in the tt custom:ry" sense, 
would be abolished altogether and replaced by a "commission on 
turnover".^ 

Prices would be fired by the st te, instead of being manipulated 
by flna. ciers r d capit li ts* Under the exist i.. system, it was 
argued, prices doper ed lar ely upos the flow of credit allowed 
by fine cier , the cornering of markets by world trusts end va t 

corpor tio s combining to obt i exorbitant profits, and on stock 

39 

msr :ct fluctu tions. Thus, primary producers got low prices for 
their products, at the sane time that, as consumers, they were 
at the mercy of high, manipulated prices for the oods they 
purch ed* 


37* Edmonton Jourual, April 17# 1935* 

58. The Douglvs System of So cl: 1 Credit , 18. 
59* Chronicle , August 5# 193^* 



















- 87 - 


The Just Price x^ould be fixe! by a comnineion consist in 
of "expert members from every tnde, cnllir , or profession", who 
would "investigate the price spread in the province", and fix the 
Just Price for ;oods a d ervices.^ The computation of the Just 
Price would be carried out by addin to the costs of raw material, 
huv^an and machine labor costs, depreci tion on plo t and equipment. 
Insurance and overhead, a "comrai: sion on turnover" to o to the 
private accounts of producers and distributers, and an "unearned 
increment levy", which would o to the government, to equ te the 
amount issued to the consumers as dividends*^ 

Under this scheme "fair and just commissions" would be given 
to producers and distributers, but they would no Ion er be able 
to exploit the public by realizir: exorbitant profits a d by 
payin huge dividends on watered stock. The products of primary 
producers, previously sold below cost, would be sold at hi her 
prices to assure a fair retur over a d above the actual cost of 
production, while the cost of many consumers * articles would be 
reduced. 

Thus, the Just Price would be "just to the producer, just to 
the distributer, just to the consumer." (Too just, in fact, to be 
true, as the Opposition was quick to point out.) 

40. Edmonton Journal , December 27» 19^4 

41, Chronicle , February 8, 1955* 







nn 




- 88 - 


lo producer would be required to sell the oods below the cost 
of production, no distributer would be required to cell the 
oods below the cost of ecurin them* . . . The consumer 
would not be exploited of his purch sin power by very high 
prices.*2 

This principle bore a strikin' similarity to the Just Price 
of medieval economic theory, but very little to the Compensated 
Frira which Douglas advocated. Douglas's Price was to serve the 
purely economic function of periodically lowering prices in order 
that the cortlnuin decreases in production costs shoul not cause 
a lo lr co sumer purchasing power; no strictures or "excess 
profits* were embodied in his principle. Aberhart's Just Price 
rested on an ethical conviction sirail r to that of the Schoolmen: 
"To leave the prices of goods at the discretion of the sellers is 
to give rein to the cupidity which oods almost all of them to 
seek excessive :ain".42 

Economic relationships were to Aberhnrt simply a species of 
ethical relrtions to w ich the same principles could ad should 
be applied. e could not see that the imposition of Just Prices, 
icludi prices on labor, would have far-re c in soc'al, economic 
and political ramifications. His repented assurances th't Social 
Credit principles would work if the people were educated in 
"Christian" and "co-oper* tive" ways of behavin illustrate the 

42, Edmonton Journal, June 8, 1955* 

Richard H, Tawney, "Medieval Economic Thought", in 
The Developraeit of Economic Thou ht , e , H. . Spie el 
(New York and Londo , 19gh), 26. 






- 09 - 


extent to which he failed to understa d the complex and ofte 
impersonal social forces mouldii and limitin individual behavior. 
His expls tior; of the "Just Price" was condemned by Douglas, who 
ar ued that the "une r ed increme t levy" was in fact a form of 
taxation which would : erve to riecre- e purchasir po r er. Aberhort 
w t indignant. 

Am I to suppose that under Social Credit Mejor Doubles is 
oir to allow the large companies to herd together a d 
fix prices to suit t emcelves? ... I am convinced that 
whether I have used the proper, orthocox. Social Credit term 
or not, the idea I have tried to express must become a p rt 
of our solution,^ 

This statement exemplifies Aberhari^s approach. High prices 
were wro . It was only right and practical to clean up price 
spreads, aloiv with the whole financial system. If this did 
violation to mere theory, so much the worse for the theory. 

The third principle, the operation of which embraced the 
first two, was the Constant Flow of Credit, which, like the 
operation of the human blood stream would make possible the con¬ 
tinual health of the economic system. This feature was co monly 
illustrated by Aberhnrt with a chart, and dis rams of "The Perfect 
Cycle System of Social Credit: The Bloodstream of the State", 
together vrith the injunction, "Tr ce the Perfect Cycle", ;*ere 
promir.er.tly fe tured in the Chronicle . 

The "fount inhead" of this system was the St te Credit House. 

44. Edmonton Journal , June 12, 1955* 

















. 











. . . 







, . 

. 












. 







• , 










. 





- 90 - 


It would "st rt the buoi ess * oinr* by rantIn interest-free 

credit loans to producers. The proucer would pay out this credit 

i wa es, salaries a d commissions. But this amount would not 

be sufficie t to purchase all the oodc produced, , therefore, 

dividends would be issued to fill in the op. The co suraers would 

buy goods from the retaler with his certificates# 

The retailer in turn pays the wholesaler similarly, and he 
settles with the producer. Finally, the producer repays the 
loans to the credit home and the circuit is complete. Thus, 
the blood stream of the St te continues, over a d over r ain. 

Hoardin , price manipulation, and inflation, Aberhart recognized, 

might possibly interfere with the "flow”; but a compulsory spending 

act, and the Just Price would take c re of there details. 

As to the question of where the credit (not money) would 

come from, Aberhart explained* 

If you consider where all the blood comes from, you will get 
your answer. Does not t e food we eat supply the ne d of the 
bloodstream which co tinuously flov/3 through our bodies? Does 
not our increme t on the natural resources supply the necessary 
credit to keep up the flow of credit? ^ 

From a cognitive point of view, the comparison between the 
unbroke , "perfect" quality of the circle, the continuously 
renewing tresia of blood within the human body, and the Social 
Credit economic system was fant stically mislead!:: . The economic 
fallacies of this "principle" were poi ted out by the opposition. 


45 . The Dou In: System of Docirl Credit , 17. 

46. Ibid., 18. 





- 91 - 


but belief in the "Bloodstream of the St te" was emotional, not 

intellectual. The ttempt to underot d aid control the world 

through mo ical formulas end ii c' t tiers h e not disappeared in 

modern societies, although "a acie, ce-orierNed people do ..ot 

always differentiate mo. ic with a pseudo-scientific wrappii , 

47 

from scie ce n , Aa in "primitive" societies, such attempts 

occur whe me. feels po .erless to exert control by other means. 

‘ ( 

Appeal of the .act ri:.e 

The explanation offered was a powerfully attractive one to 
an Albert udie ce. It was not too difficult to be understood, nor 
di it violate any wi ely-held cultural norms. The abstract ess 
a d complexity of economic and ociol proce . se were re- dered 
coraprehe sible through "perco: elization". The economic crisis 
was explained 1 terms of human- motiv tioi , a t . aspect oi reality 
with which all men are famili r. The insti tor:, were identified 
with the came roup of figures who had al ays bee. regarded in 
the West as exploiters: the bankers and fina ciers who had bestowed 
ample Credit during prosperous times, but were now exhibit in the 
grasping hand and the cloven hoof; the "manipulators of credit", 
who prevented the farmers fro* etti fair prices for their whe t 5 
the ©aster nia. ufccturers who reaped exorbitant profits for the goods 
which the Wester farmers had to buy. 


47# J. hhlto Yi; er. Re ligion, Society and the Individual 

(New York, 1957 )9 44* 






- 92 - 


In castig tin the "old-time political roups" who had made 
com on cau:e with the financiers a d capit li ts, Social Credit 
played up to the ir i ©nous distru t of political parties. Just s 
the U,F, r , victory hrd represented the revolt of Albert farmers 
again~t a two-party system which it was believe was directed from 

i 

and in the interests of industrial Easter Canada, so the Social 

Credit movement repudiated a U.F.A, rover ment which was alle ed 

to have grown con ervative and "political” in office. 

But the scheme was not a revolutionary one, and this fact 

contributed to its success. It has been noted that: 

In order to retain access to legitim te means of cresting 
a favorable public, a movement must justify its values by 
the sacred values of the society and must avoid infringing 
the sacred values. The Townsend Plan, the Hew Deal, the 
America Federation of Labor all sou ht changes in our 
eoo omic system which were c refully justified as a means 
of preservin the free enterprise system.48 

Canadian farmers have not traditionally been enamoured of 

proposals i volvi nationalization, confiscation, or appropriation. 

Social Credit promised to remove the abuses "which have f stewed 

themselves, leech-like, upo capitalism's body", ^ while retain-* 

in : private enterpri e and individual initiative. As such it was 

calculated to appeal not only to farmers, but also to E-mail 

businessme , whose interest in a system of "Just Prices" which 

would put them o a par with 1 re scale enterprise, was obvious, 

48, Tur er and Killian, op, cit ., 55^* 

49, Edmonton Journal, April 6, 19^4o 






That these a reeoble changes would be introduced constitutionally, 
"revolution and c rna e" beiv: both unnecessary and undesirable, 
was also stressed. As we shall see, Social Credit was also iden¬ 
tified with Christianity, and invested with divine support. 

Whether or not it was true, as one speaker contended, that 
"all the beet people in Edmonton" were Social Creditors, it was 
evident that a movement which emphasized individual initiative, 
constitutionalism, and Christianity, could not readily be accused 
of being foreign or revolutionary. 

The explanation also served to enhance self-reg rd. This 
feature of the doctrine was of particular importance in view of the 
fact that most persons tend to evaluate themselves in terms of the 
norms of their society. In North America society, the gospel of 
material success may have detrimental effects on those who do not 
achieve this goal, since social, ranking depends to a considerable 
extent, on income,*^ Further, the superstition persists that 
material success is the outward and vis5_ble sign of an inward, 
invisible grace, so that individuals who fail to achieve success 
tend to regard their economic failures as personal, moral failures,^ 
As Nottingham has noted: 


50, The economic dimension of social stratification and its 
relation to status are discussed in Kurt B. Mayer, 

Glass and Society (New York, 1 955)> 25-26, 


51# Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism (London, 1951 ), chap, ii, passim . 







\ 





- 94 - 


Today, impersonal economic and polfcical rorces, often 
beyond the individual's control, are in part responsible for 
his failure or success. Yet . . . during the mass unemploy¬ 
ment of the ' 50 *s, the majority of one group of both employed 
and unemployed when interviewed explained their respective 
economic situations almost entirely in individual moral terms. 
Most of those employed attributed their success to their own 
superior efforts, implying that anyone could have done as 
much with comparable effort. It is significant that the 
unemployed and those on relief accepted this evaluation, re¬ 
garding their failure as somehow their own fault .52 

Thus, a doctrine which assured the people that their 

poverty was not due to any fault of theirs, but the result of the 

chicanery of the Big Shots”, was assured a receptive hearing. 

At the same time, the doctrine constantly emphasized the importance 

of the people. The consumer - and a more all-embracing class 

could not be devised - was the most important element in the state. 

It was through their association, through the inventive genius of 

their ancestors, that tremendous increases in the value of the 

social product had come about. It was to them, therefore, that 

Social Credit, in the form of basic dividends, rightfully belonged. 

One assessment of Social Credit stated that its appeal was 

addressed "largely, though perhaps unwittingly to that natural 

cupidity of mankind which is most marked among those whose desires 

for ease and comfort exceed their fondness for industry and effort2^5 


52. Elizabeth K. Nottingham, Religion and Society (New York, 195^-) 3 

75. 

55» Report of the National Bank of Australia, monthly bulletin; 
cited in Edmonton Journal , May 14, 1954. 







I 






' 

















mi 



r» 



o 











- 95 - 


This opinio , like the frequent charge of the Opposition parties in 
Alberta that Social Crediters wanted "somethin for nothing, 
expresses only a half-truth. Acceptance of Social Credit stemmed 
partly from the desire to find a way out of a situation in which 
" industry and effort” had been unrewarded. Aberhart's psychological 
insight, his awareness that people wish to think well of themselves, 
was clearly shown by his constant affirmation that the people were 
justly entitled to the fruits of their cultural heritage* 


The Religious Component in Social Credit Doctrine 


The most striking exposition of Social Credit in reli ious 
terms was an editorial in the Chronicle entitled "Social Credit 
Fundamentals”. It is worth quoting from at length because it 
contains many of the themes which recur in Social Credit speeches 
and writings* 

One of t e finest and greatest exponents of Social Credit was 
Jesus Christ himself. His o e mission in life was to feed aid 
clothe His people, to love His neighbor, to care for the children, 
to look after the old, infirm, and sick. He had no use whatever 
for the money grabber, the pharasee, the money lenders, the 
tax collectors, and His one constant thought was the care of 
the poor and needy, . , . The usurers and money-lenders he 
drove out of the temple because he realized their business was 
a nefarious one, unjust and cruel. . . . The hard-hearted 
capitalists began to worry. Who was this man vl o had the auda¬ 
city to upset their capitalistic plans, who was this man who 
was trying to educate t e people? Who was this man the people 
were listenin' to? What did they finally do with Him? The Old 
Cross tells the story. ... Although the \forld today is more 
enlightened, and they cannot brutally murder an innocent 
advocate of the people, yet they can and do crucify every 





- 96 - 


scheme that is propounded to help, • • , The people today 
are followin t e cry of salvation, . . . Social Credit o 
founded by William /berhart is accepting religion i its 
triumphant inarch to victory in Alberta; in spite of the few 
who would deride God's name as a hindrance to its cause, ^ 

Thus, the aims, the enemies, the Savior, and the popular 
acceptance of Social Credit and Christianity ware closely asoo- 
ci ted - and those who criticized the mixture of reli ion and 
politics were accused of "deriding God's name". 

This transmogrification of Social Credit had several important 
consequences. First of all, the doctrine was made both comprehen¬ 
sible and emotionally compelling to an Alberta audio ce which was 
largely Christian in religious affiliation. The purposes of 
Social Credit and Christianity were equated: to feed and clothe the 
poor, to help the unfortunate, and to love mankind. The enemies 
opposing these goals were identical: the "hard-hearted, capit? lists 8 
and the "money-lenders". Implicitly, also, 'berhart, the "innocent 
advocate" of the people, who dared to upset the capitalists' plans, 
was identified with Christ, Thus, in language so simple that the 
least educated could understand, with analogies th t touched the 
core of the deepest religious beliefs, were "Social Credit Funda- 
me tals" expounded. The doctrine was thus tra sformed from a 
program for secular institutional reform, 1 to a plan for salvation 
an awesome struggle, unchanged in its essential aspects since the 
time of Christ, was revealed. 


54. Chronicle , October 5* 1954. 





- 97 - 


Secondly, this interpret tion served to hei liter the charis¬ 
matic relationship between Aberhart and his followers: the people, 
it was implied, were lister! to his plan for salvation, were 
respondi: to his attempts to educ' te them, as the people had 

responded to Christ. 

Thirdly, the religious emphasis served to enhance the signifi¬ 
cance of the movement to the following. Their struggle was presen¬ 
ted not as an isolated and restricted attempt to redress economic 
grievances through the ballot box; rather, it was viewed as part 
of an age-long, universal stru ;le betwee- the forces of Good and 
Evil. The forces of Evil were very strong ad powerful - as 
evidenced by the fact th t they were still in control after 
centuries of conflict. And the si kes involved were of the highest 
order of importance: human happiness and freedom. In rallying to 
the message and its bearer, the people were contributing to a 
victor;/ of the utmost importance. 

Further, assurance of success was heightened by the su esiion 
that God was on the side of the Social Credit movement. Aberhcrt 
told his followers that their plight was against hod’s will: 

It is not the plan ... of an all-wise Creitor th t 95%o 
of his creatures . . . should st.rve in the midst of abundance 
and plenty . . • Surely He whp^cares for the sparrow . . . 
can and will take care of us ^ 


55• Chronicle , September 7, 195^ 







- 93 - 


Comparing Alberta conditions to tho e existin' "when the 
Master drove the money changero from the temple", Aberhart 
prophesied t t God would "work a mir cle e ain to brln his 
people into the place of joy and prosperity".^ And at the 
Edmonton Provincial convention, he claimed that "Someone Else is 
leading besides Aberhart".^ 

The religious element in Social Credit doctrine was si ificant 
not only because the movement ws identified with prevailing 
reli ious norms, but primarily because such a message is particul¬ 
arly potent in times of stress. 

... there are . . . crucial situations of stress in the 
life of all societies when the means available to their 
members are insufficient to enable them to attain t eir 
most cherished goals.5& 

Religious faith is one of the met ode of adjuotIng to such 
situatio: s, by reinforcing "self-confidence in the face of situations 
of strain".59 

One of the most troublesome problems for w ich religion 
seeks to provide an answer concerns the existence of suffering and 
evil in the world. As vie h ve seen, one aspect of Social Credit 
doctrine provided a secular explanation: it was the wicked few who 
were responsible for the people’s misery. But the religious element 

56 . Chronicle , April 2 6 , 1955- 

57. Edmonton Journal , April 26, 1955- 


58. Nottingham, op. cit ., 29 

59. Ibid ., 54. 









- 99 - 


of the Alberta theory revealed another way "to justify the ways 
of Cod to man"* This was the appeal to the cense of sin. As Mann 
has remarked* 

Homilectical emphasis upon the notion th t personal crises 
and their attendant strains constituted justifiable divine 
punishment for sin , . . furnished lower-class people with a 
simple, acceptable explanation of their sufferin .6° 

The guilt, weakness, and stupidity of the people are noted 

in many Chronicle editorials. In part, the people themselves 

were held to blame for their miserable conditions. 

The people of today, as long as they have a nice, comfortable 
job, and the espit list p:rty ere feeding them on sweetened 
sop, you hear no complaints, but when the e Molochs of health 
begin to cut off their supply of sop, then it is the whimpering 
begins, . . . They refuse to think for themselves, and only 
too well the Big Money Barons realize this, . . . Why not get 
out and do somethin , show your manline os, 63- 

Does it all come down to a point of selfishness? Are we not 
to blame for this terrible state of affairs? Did not the 
people themselves place t ooe in authority over us, was it 
not their vote that is responsible? The answer comes cle rly 
echoing back, "IT IS YOU", 52 

Unless t e people became "100 fo Social Crediters", as selfless 

as "Our Leader", they were just as bad as the money barons. 

Cannot you see Old Ma; self again, every bit as bed as the 
millionaire who wants another million just for the fun of 
etting it. o thought for their fellow men. . . . just 
their own small, insignificant selves.^9 


60. Mann, op. cit. , 155* 

61. Chronicle , October 19» 195^. 

62. Ibid ., Nov. 25, 1954. 


65 , Ibid ., Dec. 14, 19>4 


























. 







- 100 - 


The people, "just mere bnbeo in the wood in the relentless 

grip of the financial mo.uls ir. the background",^ must not allow 

themselves to be fooled &gai , as they have been. 1 the past. 

A little spending of money at the ri ht time, a few honeyed 
phrases prior to elections, and the people in the same 
simple, sheepish manner, have gone to the polls and allowed 
their votes to be recorded for the retaining of the capita¬ 
listic power* 

As individuals, the people re helpless, weak, an menaced by 
powerful, malevolent figures: "Big, -grasping o re:: of finance 
don*t want you out of the forest, 

Such notions were more common in Social Credit writin s than 
in the public speeche , although one address did contain: the 
following thought: "Ordinary people of sovereign states have 
no intelligence, but trouble., disappear with the introduction of 
Social Credit", The speaker then went on to predict that 95f of 
the people would vote Social Credit .^ 

At the same time, however, the people were flattered, their 
importance emphasized, and their tremendous Intent powers for 
effect! change pointed out. 


64. Chronicle , August 5* 19 >4. 

65 . Ibid ., August 24, 1954, 

66. Ibid., 'arch 8, 1955. 


67* fdmontor. Jonrn.nl , March 26, 1955' 








. 






\ 





' 




101 


Whatever the people want, they can h. ve, if they demand it - 
always ranted it is physically possible.. . . In this demo¬ 
cratic country, we h ve universal ouffre e. By men o of it, 
we elect represent tives to o to Parliament. _' ,ey are 

there, they car exercise supreme power, for it is Parliament, 
through the Government elected by a majority of the people, 
that orders the armed forces of the Crown. ... Anyone, or 
any oectio: of the people that tries to oppose the majority can 
therefore be suppressed by force. Thus, the people can wield 
the greatest power in the land. 

Parliamentary institutions are viewed as tools for carrying 
out the "will of the people". 

As soon as Parliament is made to know beyond the shadow of 
a doubt what the will of the people is, IT IS LEGALLY BOUND 
BY THE L S OF THE COUNTRY TO GARRY IT OUT, dismissing such 
experts as are obstinate or incompetent and replacing them 
by others. IT 1- PARLIAMENT TO DECIDE WHAT IS ’COD 

FOR THE PEOPLE BUT TO CARRY INTO EFFECT WHAT THE PEOPLE 
WISH. 

The logical contr diction involved in portrayin the people 
simultaneously as helpless - and powerful - should not obscure the 
emotional appeal of the argument. Individual feelings of guilt 
and failure, as we have remarked, are widespread in times of crisis. 
The doctrine raised these emotions to the level of consciousness, 
and offered a way out. In effect, the individual was told: "You 
are weak and culpable; but by joinin ; with others in the cause, you 
can change your life. Only with others have you the power to grasp 
the heritage which is yours". 

This feature of the doctrine increased the significance of 


68. Chroi.lcle , Hay 10, 1955* 


69. Ibid ., July 5, 1955 











. 


. 




102 - 


the organization to the individual; for it was only through the 
collective body that the failures of the individual could be erased, 
and the powers inheri in the people exercised to effect chcr e. 

At the sane time, the statue and significance of the leader was 
magnified by contrast with his "simple, sheepish” followers. He 
alone could peroo ify "the certitude of the creed and the defiance 
and grandeur of power".70 

No faith is potent unless It is also faith in the future; 
unless it has a millenial compone t. So, too, an effective 
doctrine; as well as being a source of power, it must also 
claim to be a key to the book of the future*71 

The millenial element in Social Credit teachin: was a part of 

the religious message. Social Credit was depicted as the only 

hope for an im ediate, or indeed, for any solution of Alberta*s 

economic problems. In his address to the A ricultural Committee, 

Aberhart claimed that prosperity would result wi hin three months: 

"Retailers and wholesalers would boom, so would the labor market. 

There would be leisure for the arts of life"72 

Nor would the present ener tion be the sole beneficiariest 

a glorious herit e would be left for future enerations: "If we 

wished, we could leave them full granaries, well-kept lands and 

garde s, peace and good-will amongst men”.75 

The Utopian implications of Social Credit were glowingly 

detailed in an editorial, "The Great lory That kas Athens”, which 


70. Eric Hoffer, The True Believer , (New York, 1958), 105* 

71. Ibid ., 18. 

72. Edmontor Journa1, March 19, 195^• 


75• Chronicle, July 27, 195^ 



































■ 






























. 














- 105 - 


described the age of leisure and ere tive achievement which would 

result under Social Credit, By putting purchasin power in the 

ham s of the people, a d by hnviir politics conducted by w construc- 

tive administrators”, rather than "the loud-voice demago ue", the 

evils of 20th century society would all be wiped out: war, world 

trade competition, vice, crime, drudgery, unhappy marriages, and 

urban a lomeration would disappear*^ 

The alternatives were pictured as disastrous: dictatorship 

and/or war. The people were warned that unless they “voted right" 

this tine* they would never vote again. The twentieth century 

trends towards centralisation, in socio-politica 1 contexts as 

different as Britain, Italy, n n the U*S. *R., were cite" me proof 

that attempts were being made to enslave the people. 

The endeavour is being mode to change over from a tyranny 
of finance to a tyranny of administration. In Great Britain, 
it is called rationalisation, in Italy, the Fascist", or 
corpor te state. In Russia, it is the dictatorship of the 
proletariat*^ 

Aberhart saw the same portents: perman ent economic slavery* 

where the people "will be compelled to relinquish all claims to 

individual rig' ts a: d freedom and to subject themselves to 

permanent privation and bondage, or war and revolution." 

Already the ominous rumble of war and rebellion can be hear , 
... When the carnage is over, the people themselves re the 
only ones who have suffered*, a: • the Financier h c a ain 
profited at their expense*^ 


74. Chronicle , April 5* 1955* 

75. Edmonton Journal , April 15» 19^4# 

76 . Chronicle, "December 1, 19y4. 







- 104 - 


Appeal to Socio-Economic roup^ 

If the explanation and the cure had not bee accepted on faith, 
and emotionally sustained, despite the adverse criticisms advanced 
again t then, appeals to ;elf-interest would have had less signi¬ 
ficance, The b sic premises of the doctrine had to be accepted 
before the derivative benefits flowin from them could be believed 
in. 

Aberhart*s shrewdness as a propagandist re clearly revealed 

by the way in which he phrased the doctri. e so as to appeal to the 

interests of variou. socio-economic groupings. Ii brin win ■ the 

“subject matter down to the detail of every-day life”, as he put it, 

Aberhart marshalled increased support for his movement. The dual 

sly: ifieanee of this type of appeal has been noted as follows: 

The appeal to the self-interest of an eot blishec segment 
of society not only insures a vigorous rather that lip-service 
support from a roup of people, but it also gives the movement 
access to the pre-established organizational and communication 
networks of a group with some pre-exist inhomogeneity, 77 

We have noted in another connection the penetration of 

th organisation by the Social Credit movement,' 0 and 

agriculture was undoubtedly the most important group to which the 

movement appe; le . Aberh rt cle rly spelled out the coni r~ : buttons 

which Social Credit would make to the solution of the farmers* problems. 


77. Turner and Killian, Op, cit ., 

78. Of. a 7 c, 42, 59. 







- 105 - 

The Just Price, he clr-imcr, would be efit t! c former coming and 
noil';;* It would uar tee im a price for hie heat t t would 
cover hi: production costs and ive him a fair conuniooion. Just 
Prices on farm mac' inery, on the other hand, would reduce t eir 
cost to the f nner. T e Constant Flow of Credit v/ould entail 
"interest-free production loans” to the farmer, which v/ould 
enable hi to avoid incurrin; further debt, while the revenues 
accruin to him from the Dividends and the Just Price would allow 
him to liquid: to his pact indebtedness*79 Aberhart pointed up 
the appeal of the Social Credit “road" by speaki, i the following 
terns: 

4 •' ’ > J 

Your own U.F.A* members introduced it but they failed to 
carry on with it and just dropped it or passed it by; the road 
needs a scraper to smooth out the bumps; it needs modernist: , 
implement!zing, Douglasisir and systematising; we have put 
a new blade into the scraper and are determined to make this 
road fit to travel on in comfort, peace, and prosperity. . * . 

It*s funny in this province of ours there is a law that pre¬ 
vents you starving or ill-treating a dog, cow, or any ai imal, 
and yet they allow people to go bun ry, ill-clothed, and suffer*^ 

The advantages to the "businessman" of Social Credit were 

also detailed. In his "Educational Article", entitled, "Social 

Credit and the Grocery Man", Aberhart argued that regardless of 

t e individual 1 a "business ability or individual enterprise", he was 

unable to prosper because of decreasing turnover, outstardin accounts. 


79* Chronicle , January 4, 1955* 


30. Ibi ., January 18, 1955< 












. 












- 106 - 


and manipulated prices. "Huge trusts ad combines aid chain ftores 

are able to manipulate prices to t eir own advents e a d are in a 

position to undersell the small individual merchait".^ 

Under Social Credit, profits would be inorea ed, because of 

t e reater turnover that would result from increased effective 

demo d. At the same time, there would be no inflation* and since the 

“Just Price would be the same wherever you bought the goods 1 *, the 

small merchant would have a fighting chance. 

The competition would not be in price, but in service - in 
the delicacy with which he exposes the goods to the public 
gaze, for the neatness and cleanliness and sanit tion of 
his store and so forth.®^ 

In the original theory, the appeal to Labor was problematical; 
Douglas insisted thot labor was constantly decreasing in importance 
because of the miracle-working machines, and held that unemployment 
was an inescapable feature of modern, industrial society. Aberhari, 
however, underplayed Douglas* s denunciation of the **work fetish”, 
substituting in its place some socialist phrases. In a broadcast 
sponsored by Burns* employees, he outlined Social Credit from a 
Labor poi t of view, i phraseology borrowed from the workers* 
traditional ideology. Ke said that the dividends were the "fair¬ 
est and most expedient method of allotting a fair sir re io everyone"; 
he noted that "t e bane raa: ipul tio of prices in the ope :, cut¬ 
throat market ultim tely falls or. the workmenj? who are " economic 


81. Chronicle, January 11, 1955 * 

82. Ednotton Journal, June 8, 1955* 











„ 35 


- 107 - 

slaves under the prere. t capit- llctic ystem" ,' 

Last and least, Social Credit w advanced as a bleosin ; to 
the female sex. "We hear a reat deal about divorce and unharpy 
marri ;es, of white slave traffic and what not", Aberhart noted,' 

It was ar ;ued that wome would be "uplifted" by hr.vin ar independent 
source of income, the Dividend, and would no Ion :er be constrained 
by pecuniary exi encies. Thus, unhappy marriages, divorce, "and 
what not", would be less prevalent. 


84 


84, Edmonton Journal, December 27, 1924* (Italics mine,) 







CHAPTER ^ 


OITvSI IQ . 0 , anl L Ch. ;JT 

The success or failure of a political protect movement is 
related to the nature and extent of the opposition directed against 
it by other organized social roupir s. In Alberta, t e various 
or r ized political, economic, and reli ious roups offered only 
a divided and partial opposition to the Social Credit moveme t. 

None of the political parties was successful i: combating the 
Social Crcit forces. Amo t e economic roups, the U.F.A. had 
been weakened by its venture i to politics, a d so disunited that 
larne parts of it we t over to Social Cre it. Business organizations 
failed to mobilise their forces until shortly before the election, 
and In ary ca e, could not command the de otion of the rural populace. 
The Labor movement was also divided - while its leaders, and the 
Labor newspaper, the Alberta Labor ews , vociferously opposed Social 
credit, many workers were undoubtedly attracted by Aberhart*s 
de unciations of capitalists, and by his proposals for reform* As 
noted previously, the fundamentalist religious groups within the 
province v/ere attracted to the doctrine, and to the leader, and 
some ministers of the established churches as well v/ere drawn by 
the ethical appeal of Social Credit, and by Aberhart’s apparently 
sincere desire to alleviate popular suffering. 






- 109 - 


Neither the "old-line" parties, nor any compctin refor 
movement advanced a compellin - alternative to the Social Credit 
program. By way of contrast, in the st' te of California, where 
Social Credit octrines achieved considerable aupport in t e 1950*s, 
the movement^ appeal war undercut by the presence of previously 
established reform movements: Upton Sinclair 1 2 s "End Poverty in 
California group, and the Townsend movement, which had captivate^ 
many of the st te’s elderly people with its promise of 0200 a 
month for people over the age of sixty-five. The Social Credit 
panacaea, therefore, w s only one on a competitive market,* 

We shall consider the opposition to Social Credit under 
two headings: the organized groups which confronted the movement; 
and t e arguments advanced against the Social Credit proposals. 


Organised C roup Opposition 

240 candidates contested the 65 seats in the 1955 elections,^ 


The political parties running included: 


Liberals 
Social Credit 

U.P. . 

Conservative 
Labor 
Communist 

Independent 

Single Tax 

Econ, Reconstruction 
Independent Liberal 


61 

65 


44 

4o 


12 

9 

8 

1 

1 

1 


(A branch of the C.C.F,) 


1. Malcolm G. Taylor, The Social Credit Movement in A lberta 
(unpublished Masters thesis. University of California, 
Berkeley, 1942), 17 ff. 

2, Edmonton Bulletin , August 1;5, 1955» 







- 110 - 


It was record number of nominationa, aid the proliferation 
of parties indie tec t e social unrest, and weak corise oua of the 
times* 

As the governs*] t In office, the 0*1 . . rly 

weal: position to counter the Social Credit challenge* It was 
burdened with the odium ’which was popul rly attached to all political 
parties caught in power duri the expression years. It had been 
unable to fulfill the high hopes of its early days, and neither its 
economic end financial policies, nor its political practices had 
differed very mud. from those of its predecessors; hence, it had 
become tagged with the dreadful label, "orthodox 11 . 

H*W. Wood, the uidi: spirit of the movement’s early years, 
had resigned In 1921* the U.F.A. organization had become rent by 
conflict among its leaders, and between the leaders and followers; 
one sig , among others, that its former unity and strength of 
purpo e hrd become dissipated. 

Membership in the organization had declined spectacularly. 

From 51, 508 in 1921, it had dropped to 4,098 i. 1952* In ore year 
alone, from 1951 “1° 1952, the membership was cut in half. The 
combined membership of U.F.*., U.F.V. the junior organization, 
and life members was 14,486 in 1951, and 7,856 in 1952*^ 

At the 1955 provincial conve tion, the U.F.A. voted to affiliate 
with the G.C.F*,^ but no appreciable increase in 4lan or popular 

5* Edmont 01 Bu 11 ct f , January 25, 1955* 


4. Ibid., January 18, 1955' 






- Ill - 


support resulted from this move. At the same time, ai interest 
was expressed in Socicl Credit proposals. As we h vc seen, the 
Agricultural Committee of the Le iol ture held extensive he ri s on 
the subject in 195^, Aberhart also addressed the U.F.A. Co vention 
in January of 1955? but his program wn„ rejected in favor of a 
public ownership and C,C,F. platform,5 However, it was decided 
not to run on the h.C.F, pro ram in the provincial election. In 
March, 1955? Premier Reid hired Douglas as technical adviser on 
Social Credit for the U.F.A. government. Unable either to embrace 
or to forswear the radical alternatives offered by ocial Credit and 
C.O.F. doctrines, the U.F.A. met the eleotorcte in a weak and 
defensive posture. 

The part *3 ineffectiveness was increased by the loss, through 
scandal, of two of its most capable ministers. Premier Brownlee, 
and Q.L. MacPherson, shortly before the election. Brownlee* 
successor, Reid, appeared to be an uninspirin • leader, an it was 
the ex-premier who led the U.F.A. attack on the Social Gredit 
proposals. But the U.F.A, criticisms, however valid, could not 
conceal the lack of any positive alternative - a fact which the 
Social Crediters constantly pointed out. 

The Liberals, who had nominated nearly a full slate of 
candidates, appeared to themselves to have an excellent chance of 


5. Edmonton Bulleti: , January 17, 1955' 




. 
























' 






. . 










, 











* 










i 





- 










- 112 - 


being returned to office, Liberal go emine ts had reec tly been 
retur ed to Ott' ra, and in all of the provinces. The Alberta party 
developer a 16-planl: platform v/hich was sufficiently va ue to hold 
out simultaneously the lures of incroased services c. d reduced 
taxation,^ The Liberals also attacked "sound money 1 ’, and promised 
to hire three experts to invest! at# Social Credit, and "to evolve 
and submit a plr of Social Credit for the province, which the 
Liberal party pled es itself to submit to the Legislature for its 
consideration”. A vague nod was also Ic: to "monetary reform", 
which would provide for "raising the stand rd of livi ad (for) 
eopno curity". Mayor ferry Mckeer of Vancouver, a B.C. Liber 1 

with Social Credit inclinatio: c, toured Alberta by air for the party, 
ai d war. severely heckled by Social Credit supporters for his pains, 1 
As the election returns proved, this partial embrace of Social 
Credit did the Liberals no ood. But it may have strengthened 
Aberhart*s followers in their beliefs, since it appeared to indi¬ 
cate th t ever. an orthodox, "old-line 11 party was bei ; slowly 
forced to see the Social Credit light. 

Neither the Conservatives, nor the smaller Labor party made 
any sacrifice of principle on the altar of expediency. This 
stand they eould well afford to take, since neither had any hope 
of formin the next over me t. 


6, Edmonton Bulletin- , July 1 $, 1955* 

7, Ibid ., August 19, 1955. 







- 115 - 


Unabashedly the p rty of orthodoxy, the Conservatives derided 
the "follow-the mob" tactics of the "parasites" and "fanatics" in 
the Social Credit movement,^ offering as a shining contr st, the 
activities of "business" for which they were the spoke erne . 

"In business", t e Conservative leader remarked clernly, "men 
always wa t to know where their money is going, and whether it 
is a reasonably safe proposition ".9 The Conservative platform 

waa a general one, promising, among other things, "unequivocal 
opposition to Social Credit". The appeal of a pro ram advoc ting 
retrenchment, refunding, retention, reduction, reorganization, 
readjustment, restoration, and relief was not remarkable.^ 

The C.C.F, id not run as such in the election, but the 
Alberta Federation of Labor ran some candidates, and announced a 
platform whose main planks involved socialisation of banking, 
credit, finance, and economic planning*^ When the election 
was over, the Alberta Labor news opined that an examination of 
the electio returns revealed th t much of the labor and U.F.A. 
vote had gone Social Credit - 


8 . Edmorto Bulletin, July 26, 1955* 
9 * Edmonton Journal , April 19* 1955* 

10. Ibid ., July 25, 1955. 

11. Edmor.ton Bulletin , July 18, 1955* 









- 114 


because the people were seekii to find a more immediately 
effective means of void a protect a air.ct thin s as they 
are. . . • The fact of the matter is that the C.C.F. in 
Alberta misced the boat. Due to the circumstances of the case, 
we were prove; ted from formlr - a kind of C.C.F. orgonizatio 
that exists i. B.C., where the prote.t and e thusiap , like 
that which has bee expressed through Social Credit in Alberta, 
has bee enlisted ir; the cause of a more fundame: tally sound 

program, 

Business organizations appeared reluctant to oppose the move- 
me t ope ly. This may have been because sraall-bu sine some; feared 
economic reprisals fro s Social Credit customers. One report 
stated! 

Unquestionably men in business in many parts of Alberta, 
while disagreeing with the Social Credit theory, are afraid 
to raise their voices against it for fear that they will 
lose customers. ... It has come to our knowledge that 
mercha ts i small towns have closed their mouths entirely 
. * .because they have bee threate ed with a loss of busi¬ 
ness* ^ 

But by election month, when this policy of silent suffers- ce 
appeared not to be paying dividends, organized business could 
no Ion er co tain its feelin ;s. John Blue, the Secretary of the 
Edmonton Chamber of Commerce, stated in a radio broadcast th t 
despite the non—partisan policy of the Chamber, the verdict must 
be given: Social Credit was "already affecting the available 
credit "5 it was a "colossal scheme of free’ taxation" which. 

In attempt! to tax consumers anc fix Just Prices for everything, 
would paralyze business in the province, a d cause dangerous 


12. Alberta Labor ews , August 24, 1955* 
15. Edinorto J ou r r. a 1, Au ust 12, 193 % 











.... 

. . . 

. . 












' 














.... 

.* 

. 















. 

. 




- U5 - 

inflation. He gave Aberhart credit, however, for food fait and 
sincerity.^ 

The Calgary Board of Trade also issued a st temcwt which 

cautiously begem 

It havi beer' represented ... th't people we re looki to 
it for so e statement regarding Social Credit, the Council 
of the Board after prolo cd aid careful consider tion of 
the arguments adva ced for and against the proposals, has 
decided to submit the follow! as its considered conclusion 
of the subjeot . . . *9 

Its conclusions resembled those of the Edmonton Chamber of Commerce. 

The Economic Safety League", an "educational" and "strictly 
non-partisan" organization was formed in late July to place 
before the electorate its reaso s for th© co victim that economic 
disaster would result should the elections place in power "a group 
of men pledged to put into execution the curious ideas of Social 
Credit devised by Aberh rt". Its Preside,! announced that member¬ 
ship would be anonymous, because "some business opponents of Social 
Credit he bee boycotted".^ 

A Calgary Social Credit candidate promptly charged that 
financial interests i Britain had sent money to aid the Economic 
Safety League in its fight a ainst Social Credit, and renamed the 
organization "The Elevated Society of Lunatics"} and when 


14. Ednonto Balloti , August 7, 1925* 
15* Albert- Labor .dews , August 17, 1955* 
16. Edmonton Journal, July 25, 1955* 


17. Ibid ., July 25, 1955- 















* 





















, „ . 











































■ . . ' 




.... 










. 

. 





- 116 - 


Professor Angus, from the University of British Columbia* waa 

hired as a consultant* he was dubbed by Aberhnrt as an "old, worn-out 

1A 

professor who could not gain a heart In hi3 own province". 0 
Angus 1 s exposition of the fallacies embodied in the economic 
theory likely c rried little weight with Aberhart*s following. 

Reli ious Support for the Doctrine 

The influence of Social Credit on organised religious 
groups was not confined to the sects with which the move e t had 
the closest affinity. Considerable moral support was giver by 
ministers of the est blished churches who approved Social Credit 
on ethical grounds. 

An early public meeting of Social Crediters in Edmonton 
\ms held at McDougal 1 United Church, and was chaired by Rev. 

.H. Villett of the United Church ministry.*^ 

Dr. Osborn, the minister of Edmonton*s First Presbyterian 
Church, also became a vocal supporter. He admitted that he did 
not know whether the scheme could be operated, but favored trying 
it anyway.^ His support was based on very eneral rounds: 
that the social assets, "the inventions, di:coveries, ircreme to, 
and other thi s belonging to the community" should "serve the 

18. Cairn ry Herald , August 6, 1955* 

19. Edmonton Journal , December 27, 195^* 


20. Ibid. , April 15, 1955- 























' 












. .. ' 


. 


. 





- 117 


common good"; that a law of higher obligation required "that those 
in f vorable circunsta ces economically, mentally and ii other 


°1 

serve a; d direct the lower cl^ sees" and that the 



Social Credit moverae t was "entering with the only ri ht point of 
view, that of God, and with the realization that the principle of 


righteousness betwee man and ma is the question of the a-e". 22 


Rev. R. Taylor of Colemai: decried the inhumanity of the 
existing system, arguin that the form of the social and economic 
structure ought to provide for the fulfillment of the basic 
principle, "From each accordin to his ability, to each acoordi g 
to hie need". He said that the Social Credit party was the o ly 
ore trying ’’intelligently and sincerely to strike at the roots of 
the evils in our province. 

The Arglice Bishop of Edmonton 1 3 Pro Cathedral, observed 
before ar: address entitled "Thou Shalt ot Lend on Usury", that the 
church had the right Ho ive moral direction to changes ir. social 
processes" 

Support also accrued to the movement because of the crusading 
fervor the leader exhibited. Rev. G. Hutchinson of Chauvir, 
speaking at the Edmorrton Provincial Convention, said that he saw 


21. Edmonton Jour; a 1 , May 1, 1955* 

22. Ibid ., April 26, 1955. 

25. Chronicle , Tecember 14, 1954* 


24. Ibid ., Februry 1, 1955< 











L i 

. 

. 

■ 

. 














. 

■ 









. 













■■ .... 

■ 




■ 

. 

















- 118 - 


in Aberh rt “God callin to the front the Moser: of the ew Deal." 2 5 

Suoh expressions of support from the churches stemmed more 
from the conviction th t the exist in order woo unju.t, thnn from 
intellectual acceptance of Social Credit monet ry theories* 

Probrbly any other crusading and idealistic reform movement 
would have received a dmilar response* The depression years had 
witnessed the development of the "social gospel" among orth 
American Protestant churches. In Saskatchewan, the C.C.F., with 
a different analysis and program, but a similar ethical appeal, 
had received considerable support in the 1950 f s from the churches - 

p/r 

particularly the United Church. 

Objections to Social Credit 

The most frequent objection brou ht a ainst the system concerned 
its economic unvjorkability. Eve those who felt that some form of 
Social Credit might be possible for the nation, argued th t sinco 
Alberta exported most of her a ricultural products, and imported 
most of her capital and consumer goods, the scheme could not 
possibly be adopted within the province, Alberta could not force 
the exter al consumers of Alberta wheat, for example, to pay the 
"unearv.ec increment levy®, nor could imports be paid for in Alberta 


2 % Edmonton Journa 1 , April 25s 1955* 

26. Seymour Marti- Lipset, A :rarian Socialism , (Berkeley and 
Los Angeles, 1950)» 155# 175. 






. 






4 





. 

* 

. 

' 

- 

. 





- 119 - 


credit, Secondly, how could the government recall e ou h credit 
to prevent a hopeless inflation? 

Aberhart, of course, believed that the "une r ed increment 
levy” embodied in the Just Price would recover the credit e d 
preve t inflation. As Dou-las, Brow lee, and others pointed out, 
the "levy” was actually a tax, which would prob? bly have the 
effect of decreasing purchasi power. Aberhart evide tly 
believed that the levy \fould simply minimize the "exorbitant 
profits" of the capitalists, but, ac Brownlee pointed out, in 
a province where only eighty companies mode annual profits above 

27 

1^,000, the bulk of the levy would h ; ve to come from the farmers, 4 "' 

It was also ar^ed that the attempt to introduce Social 
Credit would impair the province*s credit, and frighten a^ay 
outside investors and importers. The attempt to fix prices and 
wo es would entail drastic reflation of economic activities, and 
would leod to chaos and paralysis of the economic life of the 
province. Labor was warned that the fixing of "Just Wages" by 
experts, as envisa ed by Aberhnrt, would not allow any remonstrance 
by trade unions, and that Aberhart had nowhere stated his belief 
in collective bargaining. 


27* Edmoi-ton Journal, March 28, 1955* 
28, Calgary Herald, August 20, 1955* 















' 









: 



. 










, 


■ 

* 

' 

« 




- 120 


The unconstitutionality of the proposals woo rc;o tedly 
stressed. V/ith the control over bankin , curre cy and inter- 
provincial trade vested in the Domii io by the B. .A. Act f 
Aberhart*s scheme v;ould be ultra vires of the province, however 
careful he wa3 to insist that it was ar "internal" pla , involving 
"credit", not "currency". 

Ot or objectors cited the dictatorial quality of Aberhart*s 
leadership, the demoralization th t would result from iving 
the people "something for nothing", and the inundotioi of the 
province by crecit—seekinr; Irani rants that would occur if the 
dividends were introduced* 

Of these arguments, the most intellectually compelling were 
those which outlined the economic and political unfeasibility 
of the scheme. These were not convincing, either to Aberhart, or 
to his followers. To have recognized that Alberta, as a, agricul¬ 
tural province dependent on the world market and or: external 
manufacturing industries could not work Social Credit as an 
"Internal" scheme; to have admitted that the "constant flow of 
credit" would involve either ruinous inflation, or a burden of 
taxation th t coul not possibly be borne; to have foresee that, 
as a junior member in the Canadian federal system the province 
would not even be allowed to implement the drastic economic 
controls over mo ey, banking, and prices which the scheme envisaged, 
would have bee to accept the hopelessness of the existing situation. 








* 







' 


* 







j 






. 



* 




. 









. 


















' 

- 





























- 121 - 


In 1955p the voice of reason was the voice of despair. The 
causes of the crisis could not, in fact, be removed by provincial 
action. Some of them - ouch as closed markets abroad, and low 
wheat prices - could scarcely have been remedied by federal action. 
Social Credit was ai: affirmation of faith, borne of hopelessness 
and misery. The people continued to believe because they war ted to 
believe. Their faith w s not vulnerable to logical argument, 
because reason could not satisfy their needs, nor show an alter¬ 
native way out. Credo quia impossibile. 

The strength of the Social Credit doctrine rested on two 
supports: on the one hand, it sprang from an intense collective 
desire for a better life; and on the other, its proposals were 
not so ludicrous as to be unacceptable to those who lacked the 
knowledge and tools of theoretical thinking to understand the 
merits of the criticisms advanced against them. 

Apparently unable to comprehend the reasoning upon which 
the Opposition based its arguments, Aberhart assumed that they were 
simply ”far-fetched”, "strange objections",^ M Some ask , Whnt 
would you do if the Dominion Government said that they would not 
allow us to go ahead? 1 My answer must be , , , we should have to 
do the same as we mi ht do now,*^ 


29. Alberta, Legislative Assembly of Alberta, The Dou-las 

System of Social Credit (Evidence taken by the Agricultural 
Committee of the Alberta Legislature, Session 19^> 
Edmonton, 193^0 9 15« 


50, Ibid 












. 


. 

- 

. 




• 




. 



. 




















« 





' 
































' 








- 122 - 


Regardin'- the au - estion th t the money markets of the world 
would be closed if hio proposals were tried, Aberhsrt replied: 
"Now, isn*t that a real excuse. They even tell me that since 
Social Credit got goin - the hens h- ve gone on strike and will not 
lay any more e s' 1 .^ 1 

Althou h constantly put on the defensive by Opposition criti¬ 
cism, berhart had eneral lines of defence which were practically 
invulnerable. One was the question; "Have they anythin better 
to offer?" This query was not intellectually compelling, but it 
carried emotional con' ictio . Aberh rt told his audie ce about a 
mo who had advanced the "chaos and confusion" argument, and his 
own squelching reply; "I just remarked that it was curious that 
the man didn*t think chaos and confusion existed row"*^ Speakers 
continually reminded the people that at least nothing could be 
lost, and much might be gained by givin Social Credit a trial* 
Secondly, it w s argued that the human will, if exerted for 
a just cause, must ultimately triumph. 

But add your Will to that of other Alberta voters and 
together we shall gain power that will move mountains - 
that most assuredly will abolish poverty - EASILY - for it 
is just a bad dream.22 


51. Chronicle , May 24, 1955* 

52. Edmonton Journal , April 6, 1955» 


55* Chronicle, August ly, 1955< 




















































. 

































- 










' 












- 125 - 

With this approach, Aberhart could supplement his other 
replies to the constitutional objections by r sertir th t the 
people of Alberta "... have the ri ht to possess the constitu¬ 
tion they de ire, and if you want it, you must have it, and the 
powers that be hove to get out if you don*t :et it," ^ 

Given the fact th t Social Crediterc could not understand 
tie Opposition arguments, it followed that they came to suspect 
the motiveo of those who continued to advance them. 

The critics, it was charged, could offer nothing "better, 
more feasible, or t n ible".^5 Both the U.F.A. and the Liberals 
admitted that Social Credit merited further investigation and 
offered a possible solution. Yet they persisted ir. attacking 
Aberhart*s proposals. The leader therefore expressed his strong 
disapproval of those who stood "on the bitter edge, pelting mud 
at those tryir to find a way out". 

The immunity of Social Crediters to criticism cannot be under¬ 
stood solely in terms of the "rebuttals" offered by Aberhart and 
other speakers. Faith was also maintained by devotion to the 
charismatic leader, and through membership in a closely-lc it 
organ!zatio: w : ich encouraged in-group loyalties in a variety of 
ways. 

But the doctrr e itself was of central importance in sustai¬ 
ning the believers in a hostile world. As Hoffer has noted: 

54. Edmo: to: Jours: 1 , May 25, 1935* 

55. Chronicle , May 17, 19?5» 

56 . Edmonton Journal, April 25, 1935« 











. 


. 












■ 

■ 





























- 
























■ 






■ 






« 

' 






. . .. • 


■ 












It is the true believer's ability to "shut his eyes and stop 
his ears" to fecte thrt do not deserve to be either seen or 
heard, which io the source of his unequalled fortitude ana 
constancy. He cannot be fri hte c by da er nor dishearte ed 
by obstacle nor baffled by contradictio ;a because he denies 
their existence. Strength of faith, as Ber son pointed out, 
manifesto itself not in movir. mountsi s but i not veein 
mountains to move. And it is the certitude of his infallible 
doctrine that renders the true believer impervious to the 
uncertainties, surprises ad the unpleana t realities of the 
world around him. 27 

Elect io Retur :s2 8 

A brief review of the Alberta election retur s i 1926, 1920* 
and 1925 helps to i dicate the nature and extent of the popular sup¬ 
port received by the Social Credit party In 1925* 



1926 

1920 

1925 

U.F. A. 

71,967 

74,187 

55,065 

Liberal 

47,450 

46,275 

69,345 

Conservative 

40,091 

25,449 

19,558 

Labor 

14,125 

14,554 

5,086 

Independent 

1,254 

27,954 

4,177 

Liberol-Pro ressive 

252 



Social Credit 



165,700 

Communist 



5,771 

Others 



752 

Total Vote 

175,157 

188,219 

501,752 


The first noteworthy feature of the election vras the strikingly 


heavy vote polled, an indie tion of the keen popular interest in 
the political contests. More than 110,000 more voters cast their 
ballots i 1925 than in 1920. Support for the U.F. A., which had 
decreased only very sli htly from 1926 to 192 % despite the onset 


57. Eric Hoffer, The 'Arue Believer (hew York, 1958% 76. 

58. Alberta, -oserai Flectio . etn.r . s of the Province of 
Alberta (Edmonton, 1926, 192% 1925). 












- 125 - 

of depression, was more than halved in 1955* The Labor vote was 
out by nearly 2/5, or by nearly 1/5, if '© assume that the 5*711 
votes received by the Communists in 1955 would otherwise have gore 
to Labor can'idateo. Independent stren th was drastically reduced: 
we car speculate that the voters felt more strongly about the 
issues i 1 1955* ;n - '-d wished to cast their ballots either for or 
a airst the ocial Credit party. The Liberals, who waged the 
stro, est campai . -ext to the Social Creditors, increased their 
vote by re-rly 1/5, while the Conservatives lost support. The most 
striki: feature of the election, however, wr. the exceptionally 

he'.'vy vote polle by Social Credit candidates. A< absolute majority 
of 5^*^ went to the Social Credit party. By contrast, i’ 1926, 
ad i 195°* the U.F.A. won by pluralities of 4l.O^ and 59*9^ 
respectively. 

The only seat not won by ocial Credit candidates outside the 
two urba. centres of Edmonton a d Calgary, was i '"rouard, which 
voted Liberal, as it had co siste tly done since its creation as 
a constituency ir 1915* 

Outside the two lar e cities, the shifts of party support 
from the elections of 1950 to 1955 were as follows: Social Credit 
wo 59 seats from the U.r..; 7 from the Liberals; 2 from Labor; 


and 5 from Independent 


- 










. 

. 







. 

■ 







1 • 




. 

. 

. 










. 




- 126 - 


In Calgary, which had 6 cents, 1 Conservative and 1 Liberal 
were elected; and the Social Credit party pic e' up 4 seats which had 
been won in 1950 by 1 Liberal, 1 Labor, and 2 Conservativec. 

In Edmonton, also with 6 3 ents, ^ Liberals, 2 Social Creditors 
and 1 Conservative were eleoted. The Liberal and Sooial Credit 
parties each picked up 2 seats which had been won in 1950 by 
1 .F.A., 2 Conservative, and 1 Labor candidate. 

These data confirm the stnteme: t th t Social Credit had a 
stro appeal to the agrarian element in the provi ce: every U.F.A. 
defeat wf at the hands of a Social Credit opponent. 

The appeal to the scattered Labor ctrer: th withi Alberta 
is also si nificant - outside the cities. Labor had never elected 
candidates, except in 5 constituencies. 


Ed son 

Lethbrid e 
City 

Rocky Mountain 
House 

Edmonton 


1921 

1926 

1930 

1955 

Lib. 

Lab. 

Lab. 

s.c. 

Con. 

Lab. 

Lab. 

S.C, 

Lab. 

Lab. 

Ind. 

s.c. 

5 Libs. 

1 U.F.A. 

2 Cons. 

1 Lab. 

1 Lib. 

1 U.F.A. 

5 Cons. 

1 Lab. 

1 Lib. 

1 Con. 

5 Lib. 

2 S.C. 

2 Lab. 

1 Lib. 

2 Ind. 

1 Lab. 

1 Ind. Lab. 

1 Lib. 

2 Cons. 

1 Lab. 

2 Lib. 

5 Cons. 

1 Lib. 
1 Cons, 
4 s.c. 


Calgary 



/ 










- 127 - 


Social Credit re nrd for the ethnic composition of the 
electorate was exhibited in ouch constitue cies ac Grouard, Lee 
Ste. Anno, and 3t, Paul, where French-*Canadia ca idi Rlea we re 
nominated by the party, n d i Whitford, v;here a Ukrainia -Oa adian 
0 the So i l Credit *ai 1 ~c. I ic wrlUi 

co' stitue cics, ho ever, o -Ukrai ia Social Credit ca: i tea 
were victorious over Ukrairda -Canadia candidate® ru; by other 
part it . This seems to i iicate that the Social Credit appeal 
tra see let eth ic an- cultural dii’fere ceo withi- the votir - 
populatio . 



CHAPTER 6 


CO'PLUSIONS 


The analysis of the Social Credit movement in Alberta which 
we have adva ced has been a pluralistic one. The movement^ 
strength has bee interpreted as a resultant of the dynamic inter¬ 
play betwee exter al forces oper-ti. upon the Alberta see e, and 
internal elements ■•operated within the movement itself. 

The main oxternal forces which fostered the growth of Social 
Credit ii Alberta were the economic depression, which had reduced 
a lar e part of the population to a low level of material insecurity 
and wa t; a political system which was neither internally stabilized, 
nor tied by firm bonds of interest and sentiment with the rest of 
Cs ada; and a religious background which was hospitable to a 
movement which could present proposals for reform in quasi-religious 
terms. At the same time, there were no powerful organized groups 
within the province which could command sufficient support to 
counter the Social Credit proposals, while there were several - 
notably the U.F.',, and various religious groups - for which Social 
Credit had a very strong positive appeal. 

The Social Credit movement has been regarded as the inevitable 
respo se to the imperso al socio-economic forces affecti Alberta: 





- 129 - 


"Social Credit i Alberta was little more thr a projection of 
forcer d Ida 8 1 here t for ft c cr tion i WStim I r rie In”* 
Thio view co fere by implic tion upon "forces and ideas" an autonomy 
which they do not, in fact, have. Social proce:oes and inotitu- 
tions limit, co strai , a d direct Individual thou; ;ht, feeli 
ad actio , but they possess o independe t life. How me respond 
to then depe do i; part on the nature of sues variable factors 
as we h ve discuose', and in part, perhaps, o factors so elusive 
that they must till be subsumed under the term "chance". Since 
political behavior is ultimately rooted in the i finitely varied and 
complex thoughts and feeli s of individuals, there is no direct 
and automatic correspond© ce betwee the social forces that condi¬ 
tio political activity, and the responses which actually occur* 

An alternative view of the movement’s emerge ce wa expressed 
by political opponents durin the election campaign* Social Credit 
was see a. an outburst of "mass hysteria", stimulated by the 
hypnotically compelling aid demoniacally clever propaganda of a 
reli ioue "demagogue". This Interpretation hi hli hts the fact 
that the movement was rooted in a background of human will and 
feeli , an' that acceptance of Social Credit did not stem primarily 
from rational awarene s of the relationship betwee socio-economic 


1. J. . 'f-llory. Social Credit and the Federal Fower in Canada 
(Toronto, 195^1,' 5. 









■ 




- 150 - 


foroeo q d individual livec. It also underlines the "accide t" of 
personality! the fact that a charismatic leader war. prese t to 
kindle mille: ial visions. But this view obscures the point that 
"mass hysteria" is in lar e part induced by specific socio-hictorical 
circuv.sta cea, that emotions mu t be char 1 ellei a directed, and 
that a leader ca: not dimply impose his will upon at; indifferent 
followi *. 

It is impossible to calculate precisely the effects which 
the "internal mechanisms" we have discussed had upon the election 
results. But it is, after all, remarkable th r t 165*700 electors 
or August 22, 1955* turned out to cast their votes for a party 
which had never before contested an election. The "old-line" 
parties had the advanta os which normally accrue from respecta¬ 
bility, popular inertia, established organizational structure, and 
widespread journalistic support. 

As our discussion has shown, the burgeoning of the Alberta 
moveme t was rot entirely "automatic". The widespread individual 
feeli ;s of unrest and discontent en rendered by the depression 
were, perhaps, inevitable responses, iven the nature of popular 
norms and expectations. Le dership, organizatio , ad doctrine 
directed the e diffuse dissatisfactions into collective political 
activity. The operatio. of these variables die not, however* 
exhibit a continuous, inexorable progression. 



-151 - 


The leadership of the movement woe only gradually consolidated 
Although his reli ious follov;i - provided him with an initial 
bo:is of support, Aberhrrt's supremacy was not unchallenged within 
the movement, a his stature developed partly an a result of a 
reciprocal, ynomic relationship with hi: supporter . Aberhart*s 
influence was elibemtely fostered by the Chronicle , and extended 
throu h his own strenuous speaking tours throughout the province. 
Nor war his ircre in promine ce passively accepted as inevitable 
by hie opponents* They attempted to undercut his popularity in 
a variety of ways, but Aberhart 1 s choice of effective strategies 
at various crucial points in the movement^ development was able 
to counter these potentially divisive challenges. 

The political organization wa.- developed in an astonishingly 
short time, and part of its effectiveness stemmed from its methodi¬ 
cally thorough covers e of the province, an its effective co¬ 
ordination from the Prophetic Bible I atitute i Cal ary. But a 
formal organizational structure, r tio ally developed to achieve 
the goal of electoral victory is not, in itself, sufficient. For 
the efforts of many i ividual members to be zealously exerted 
towards putting a new political party i power, considerable 
esprit e corps must be erected. The cohesion of the fledgling 
^Social Credit organization was effectively promoted, as we have 





- 1J2 - 


seer, i ina y way si by informal fellovrship associt tiono, countie no 
public meetir , by charisma, creed, and son - a d by common 
accepta ce of a doctri o which promi ed salvation, 

Accepta co of Social Credit doctri e, we have co te-ded, 

\:a ba..ed lar ely o or-r: tio: al -rounds# But to those who 
hcd suffered throu h the rey years of depression, M reason w had 
show its inability to control oocio-eoo.omic processes in such a 
•ay as to fulfill their needs and expectations. Action by Alberta 
voters upo the promi os of Social Credit si rifled the rreater 
value to them of hope over despair, ad of rebellious human desire 
over reel nation to the bli d, inscrutable work! s of impersonal 


social forces, 



- 153 - 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Books 

.’nntrll, : ru’lo", 'Yk? '"ry clmlo y of Po^cl 'cvr;c ' . 'r York r: d 
Lo:>don # 154U 

• ■ Tori , 19J8» 

Jaroo, -*•* • ‘g-tob;:: v ; V of c oLo y * Toro to, 1>^7« 

Ki: , C. Ye dr 11, "o'-jcl ovc c i _ tho United yte.tc,fl » c r..i York, 

Leaser :;ffe Id, Paul P*, Bor cl cor., Per - *;>•*, • •-?. audet, Hr. el. 

The . oo: 1: * s Choice , 2 • cu,. c Yor! , 19^# 

Lazarekeid, Paul F., . die a 4 1 c Pri ted pa e, -e Yor , 19^* 

Lipcet, Soyraour aril: , d r rlc ■ ociolla.« Berkeley r a Los 
A: dec, 1990* 

c or, T v " ■• _ rr 1 do# Toro to# 1932* 

/., c-ocrccy la Alberta , ro • 

Mal?o"--, \ ,, ' * 1 dll ~ R ' ■ "c lev-1 ■& :>.■: 1' P: , 

Toronto, 193^« 

Mr: , ,E», ggt| nit, ■- ■' ’h r" * L Alb ert;-* fomrf >, 1 •.••"'# 

'•ay: r, . u:t B*, 1~ -o ■ P ocieiy # e Yo t ':, 1955• 

8Hi |Ui _ Frey re give Party 1 k _las* 

igy » re m$ ’ . 

Spic cl, . fed#), o-..lo:-c t ol Leonqni Rhor he* en* 

Yor!: ar* La don, I9?2* " 

Taylor, '1 R#, d- a ' " 1 ' oyr- .. 1 1620-ippQ , • York, 1953. 

Turner, *lph H* PUlic. , T edr #, Rolled dvr po’^r .lor* 

Et leifo y #■■;#, 1937* 























h'eber, ' r ’voir <. Tthl,: r. d the Spirit oi apltallanu 

Lo do , 1931. 


We* , , 1. _ o ord _ r ■ Isa lor.* T«o do , 

1&7. 

J* Milt Yin or, Pell io , : •• levy c c the I ivld ral, He- Yorh, 

195% 

Articles 

I la no f T, , •Public It; e * Alberta rise V>5% hr rh .l.~. 

Jour ' l of ' co-on* p. d Political Scle ce, XVIII (Au u t, 1952), 

5^333. 

Ir * , To* *... •Poycliolo; leal Aopocha of xhe Toole] red it hovemrt 

1: Alberta*, Ca rdV> J-r-y cl of Foycholo ■•;;/, I (ftnreh, Ju t, September, 

194 !) « 

Part I :.o,enc- t*g n&* 1, 17~27* 

- 

part III - "An Interpretatio: of the Movement", o. 3, 127-1* * 

HoGoun, . •» "Social Credit Lo iolatto - A Purvey”, Camdtan 
don • - .. ' : ue, IX (.• ave~..Lc19^}* 

512-524. 

McQueen, ,, "Iconooic Aspect, of Federalism a Frairic View", 

Ca la r Q’' r ‘ 1 :c,'g:.. -c p r 1 :oHrlc:^ elc .,c, (h. ust, 1955) » 

W^W. 

Thor.-a a, L* ,, •The Liberal Party 1 Alberta* 1905*21", Cftiediftr. 
j!5. ‘ 0 : 1 - • t ( cconbcr, 1947), 411-427* 


o.cr c I ocr c ■. ■ .ubllections 

Cover no v of Alberta 

Legislative Asoe bly of Alberta, The :ou -lao Syotep, of Social Credit j 
evi c ee he by the? •* r‘c;.; liur'h u-or.i'Ittec of the AlTIcrtK Legis¬ 
lature, heoalo 1954* Edaontor., 1934* 

oral hter. c; i ; .. of i ehrayiyce of Alberta, Edmonton, 

19-d, 105 1555. 



















euopapora 


Alberts Lrbor e’:.: 9 1935* 

Albert r- 1 Crcd.U Chrz 'ale, 1934, 1935* 
nl run.- • cmld, 1935# 

E-:rj' .to Duiicti-, 1909. 1930, 1935# 1935. 

; 9no I r Jour n l t 1926, 1954, 1935. 


ShowJLs 


Tr. ' leol ., a oci' 1 <To •; ■ ovv ;c * i Iberia, unpubllohed 

*•." of 6*l v for iaj BcrlreloV# 1$42* 







































