
Thesis 

l<^$> F 


JalH* Ernest Cheat 








0k 'mm 

ammmm 

msiawiisis 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 













I 























THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


\ Q m\f) 

# A 


ROLE CONFLICT IN THE PRINCIPALSHIP OF THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 

by 

JOHN ERNEST CHEAL 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
AUGUST, 1958 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/roleconflictinprOOchea 




ABSTRACT 


The composite high school in Alberta is comparable 
to the comprehensive high school of the United States, in 
that it is designed to meet the broad educational needs of 
today’s students. It is a large school of some 1200 pupils 
and 60 teachers offering a full range of academic, technic¬ 
al and commercial courses. The principalship of a compos¬ 
ite high school is one of the most responsible administra¬ 
tive posts in a local school system® 

The success of the composite high school depends not 
only on the personal qualiffactions and leadership abilities 
of the principal, but on a common understanding of his role 
and of the school objectives on the part of all associated 
with it® It is the hypothesis of this thesis that in many 
areas such common understandings do not exist. This research 
is therefore concerned with uncovering conflicts in the 
expectations held by major alter groups towards the principal’s 
role® The groups selected for study were superintendents, 
teachers, pupils and parents® 

Brom the literature, from interviews and from personal 
experience, a questionnaire was drawn up which included sixty 
statements dealing with the following aspects of the princip¬ 
al’s role: 



















iv 


1. Student behavior 

2. Extra curricular activities 

3. The instructional program 

4. School organization 

5. Teaching personnel 

6• Public relations. 

Respondents were asked to check for each item one of three 
choices: "Agree”, "Disagree" and "No Preference". After a 
pilot run this instrument was then completed by 123 pupils, 
78 parents, 43 teachers and 4 superintendents representing 
two composite high schools in two different cities. 

Role conflicts were found to be of two kinds, those 
between groups and those within groups. Approximately 63 % 
of the statements produced inter-group conflicts which were 
significant to the .01 level of confidence. Approximately 
90 % produced one or more conflicts within groups which 
indicated a disagreement of 20 % or more. These findings 
substantiate the original hypothesis. 

Questionnaire statements in the sectors dealing with 
the instructional program and school organization resulted 
in the largest percentage of conflicts, while the student 
behavior sector resulted in the smallest. In the inter¬ 
group conflicts there were 16 instances where a single 
group stood in opposition to the other three alter groups. 
There were also an equal number of instances when the four 
groups paired into two factions. In many of these instances 
the subordinates (pupils and teachers) were in opposition to 



* 

* 

- 

. 







, 

. * 

* 














. 



* 






. 

■ 


. 































V 


the superordinates (parents and superintendents). This was 
evident in statements dealing with the principal’s super¬ 
vision of instruction. The other common pairing of groups 
took place when the home opposed the school. This was 
evident when the individual rights of parents and pupils 
were challenged by professional opinion. 

Pupils and teachers, representing the groups in 
closest day-to-day contact with the school, were involved 
in the largest number of inter-group conflicts. No one 
group however appeared more susceptible to intra-group 
conflict than any other, neither did the intensity of con¬ 
flict show any great variation between groups. 

This thesis concluded that a major function of the 
composite high school principal was to achieve support for 
his school by harmonizing the expectations of all signifi¬ 
cant alter groups towards his role. 






. 

. 

* 

. 

, 


C ' 

, 











* 

















ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


It is with much appreciation that the researcher 
acknowledges the many helpful suggestions of his advisor 
Dr, J.H.M. Andrews and the constructive suggestions of 
the other members of the examining committee. 

Appreciation is also expressed to Mr. W. Steckle, 
Principal of Western Canada High School and Mr. 0 o Innis 
Principal of Strathcona Composite High School for the 
cooperation which they and their staffs gave in carrying 
out this study. Special mention must be made of the 
contribution of Mr. H. Bryan, Principal of Viscount 
Bennett Junior-Senior High School in making his school 
available for the pilot study and in providing many 
valuable suggestions for the initial questionnaire. 











* ‘ ■ 

* 

, 

* 

o 




































TABLE OE CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. A DISCUSSION OE THE PROBLEM. 1 

The Composite High School .••..•••••• 1 

The Principalship ......... . . 4 

Bibliography ................. 9 

II. THE THEORY OE SOCIAL ROLE .. 10 

Roles , 10 

Role Conflict ................. 15 

Bibliography ...... . ..... 18 

III. RELATED STUDIES ......... . 19 

Behavioral Descriptions of the Principal’s Role 19 
Leadership Styles and Staff Relations ..... 23 

Role Conflicts .......... . 28 

Bibliography ................. 32 

IV. THE RESEARCH DESIGN ............... 34 

Instrumentation. 35 

The Pilot Study ................ 37 

The Main Study 38 

Processing the Data .... ......... . 39 

Bibliography. . . ........... 43 

V. RESULTS OE THE RESEARCH ... . 44 

Inter-Group Conflicts • .. 44 

Student Behavior Inter-Group Conflicts ... 45 








































viii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued ) 

CHAPTER PAGE 

V. Extra Curricular Inter-Group Conflicts. . . 49 

Instructional Program Inter-Group Conflicts 51 

School Organization Inter-Group Conflicts . 53 

Teaching Personnel Inter-Group Conflicts. • 56 

Public Relations Inter-Group Conflicts. • . 58 

Summary of Inter-Group Conflicts, . • • • • 60 

Intra-Group Conflicts • ••••••••.,. 64 

A Comparison of Inter-Group and Intra-Group 

Conflicts ...s..,...,,,.,,. *70 

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ....... 72 

The Original Hypothesis 72 

Some Detailed Conclusions ••••••••• 75 

Some General Conclusions 77 

Recommendations, 78 


APPENDIX 


80 
















LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Questionnaire Sectional Headings and Number 

of Statements Under Each . . ..39 

II. Questionnaire Returns. ............. 40 

III. Number of Statements Producing Inter-Group 

Conflict ................... 44 

IV. Inter-Group Conflict Percentages ........ 46 

V. Inter-Group Conflicts by Sector and Category . . 60 

VI. Alter Group Conflicts by Inter-Group Category. . 61 
VII. Number and Degree of Inter-Group Conflicts by 

Category.1 62 

VIII. Location of Inter-Group Conflicts by Degree ? 

Sector and Category. ......... ....63 

IX. Degrees of Inter-Group Conflict by Alter Group 

and Sector .................. 64 

X. Extent of Intra-Group Conflicts by Sectors ... 65 

XI. Degrees of Intra-Group Conflict by Alter Group • 67 

XII. Summary of Intra-Group Conflicts by Degrees. . • 67 





























LIST OF FIGURES 

FIGURE PAGE 

1. Principal's Role Definition ••••••••••14 

2. Student Behavior Inter-Group Conflict . 47 

3. Extra Curricular Inter-Group Conflict . • • • . 50 

4. Instructional Program Inter-Group Conflict » . • 52 

5* School Organization Inter-Group Conflict . • . • 54 

6• Teaching Personnel Inter-Group Conflict . • . • 57 

7. Public Relations Inter-Group Conflict » • • , # 59 























CHAPTER I 


A DISCUSSION OF THE PROBLEM 

This study is one of a series dealing with the 
Composite High School in Alberta which has been under - 
taken by graduate students in the Division of Educational 
Administration of the University of Alberta* It is focussed 
on the conflicting expectations of pupils, parents, teachers 
and superintendents towards the role of the key administra¬ 
tor in the school, the principal. 

I. THE COMPOSITE HIGH SCHOOL 

Alberta has nine composite high schools, all located 
in cities, which constitute some of the largest schools in 
the province. Each school has a staff ranging from 30 to 
60 teachers and a student enrolment from 600 to 1500o 1 In 
program and facilities these schools are comparable with 
the comprehensive schools of the United States, offering 
academic, technical and commercial courses. 

The internal administrative organization of the 
composite high schools usually consists of a full-time 
administrator - the principal, one or two vice-principals 
who are only part-time administrators, and several department 
heads who coordinate instruction in subject-matter fields 























. 

.. • . ....... . 


X,.. •... /: . " 

- 

:. ; •: c-; :XJ • o..X.. \ o, :.X 


- AiJ 


;u 5 








.C. .'A t I. . . * . o. .. 


.-O’ .. - : .. * . oo 


a 

* 

. 

. «o ::o :v~ r ■ .oo. ' o 

. < 

X • ■ : : 

• - 

00 . “ .. . .• .• 

' . -0 :j: ... . : , 00 .... ; . ; L l COOO C I vj JOul 


























2 


such as English® 

The composite high school, as it now functions in 
.Alberta, has evolved over a period of some twenty-five 
years* It is an expression of the democratic tradition in 
education which endeavors to extend equality of educational 
opportunity to all youth* Society 1 s technological advances 
in this century have sharply limited the labor market for 
unskilled youth* As a result more young people, with a 
wider range of attitudes, interests and abilities, are 
attending school for longer periods than ever before* The 
composite high school, working within a program framework 
approved by curriculum committees of the provincial Depart¬ 
ment of education, is endeavoring to meet the varied educa¬ 
tional needs of all these young people* 

During the first decades of Alberta’s history the 
high school, designed to prepare students for university 
entrance, followed the traditional classical pattern* As 
the student population began to change to include those 
who would formerly have left school to take apprenticeships 
at fourteen, the matriculation program was found unsuited to 
their abilities, needs and interests. On the assumption that 
their lack of scholastic ability would be compensated for by 
manual skills, separate technical and commercial high schools 
were opened in the larger cities* During the depression years 








t 

" - ... i 

* 


1 

^ * 

c . < : ■ 

* 

t - 


- 




■ < ■ 

. 

. 

e • ' 

































of the ’thirties, when jobs were scarce, these schools were 
crowded* However as jobs became plentiful again enrolments 
fell* 

It was found that students trained in the technical 
curriculum had little advantage in job opportunities over 
those lacking this training* Employers, familiar only with 
the traditional academic standards, preferred employees with 
these qualifications. The prestige of the traditional high 
school led to decreasing enrolments in the commercial and 
technical schools and left the basic educational problem un¬ 
solved* 

This situation led to the organization of the first 
composite high school in Calgary in 1935. For some years an 
academic high school and a technical high school had existed 
side by side on the same grounds, but in different buildings 
and under separate administrations. They were now united 
under one principal. The staff of a commercial school was 
moved over to become a department in the new institution, 
and the first composite high school was founded. 

-An immediate result was the enrichment of educational 
opportunities for the academic student by an increased range 
of course offerings. It was also hoped that the lower status 
of the vocational courses would disappear and they would share 
the prestige of the academic program. In the early stages the 



* 

. 

. t =1 > . ... 

M 































4 


opposite was the case. The parents of academically inclined 

students, fearing that the academic program in the composite 

high school would be weakened by the presence of vocational 

courses, preferred to send their children to the remaining 

academic high schools. As a result the majority of non- 

academic students in the composite school began to set the 

tone of the school, and thereby made it still less desirable 

t 

for academic students. 

Although the three departments had been placed under 
one administrative head, their previous independence resulted 
initially in inter-staff conflict. Under the patient guidance 
of a strong administrative staff, wholesome attitudes were 
established among the student body, an integration took place 
within the staff and the academic department regained its 
prestige. As the composite high school functions today it 
offers a wide range of high school courses and provides for 
the full achievement of the provincial high school curriculum. 

II. THE PRINCIPALSHIP 

Educational progress in Alberta has usually followed, 
by several years, patterns already established in the United 

+ The information in this and the following paragraph 
has been gained from discussions with the present and past 
principals of Western Canada High School and personal exper¬ 
ience. 




. 

■" V - ' ' ' . «. ' 


, 







* 

? ■ ... 

t 


, 

. 


. 

■C ' 

« •• 































5 


States® Perhaps this is partly due to the fact that leading 
educators in this Province have often done their graduate 
work in education in that country, and have also been depend¬ 
ent largely upon American sources for their textbooks® The 
present expanding role of the principal in Alberta is an 
example of this trend® 

Until comparatively recently the principal was only a 
part-time administrator® His major functions were therefore 
limited to such routines as preparing timetables, organizing 
classes, requisitioning supplies and keeping records. He 
was the chief disciplinarian in the school and responsible 
for the supervision of pupils around the halls and playgrounds® 
Superintendents, principals, teachers, pupils and parents 
shared a common understanding of his legally-defined position® 

As the functions of the school had to change to meet 
the demands of a changing society, so the functions of the 
principal had to change to meet the new demands upon Ms 
school® They could no longer be neatly classified in legal 
terms. His teachers, though fully qualified in their subject 
matter fields, needed expert leadership in adjusting to the 
new order® Only through cooperative effort involving all the 
staff could the school take advantage of its expanding oppor¬ 
tunities and meet successfully its greater responsibilities® 
Guidance services were needed if pupils were to take advantage 





■ 

* . 

t, . ■"* 

t 

V i. - • t - 

- • .. i v.. . ’.■ : .... .. 

( 5 . ■ c C - '• • ‘ ■ 

.. ... ... . ... • . •; . .v. 

. . . ■ ■ ■ 

< - •• 

* 

• ..' .. , ,■ ..• ' ,-j .r ; CU-IC*.. ■ £ i* ‘ - 0 X 

r 







































6 


of their opportunities. Public relations became more signif¬ 
icant. These, and other developments in the broad field of 
education, greatly increased the time and leadership demands 
upon the principal. His position soon became a full-time job. 
There was now added to his previous functions a number of 
others, all related to the instructional program and the teach¬ 
ing personnel. The whole emphasis in the principals role 
changed from concern with office routine to responsibility for 
supervision of the teaching and learning situation® 

The change in emphasis in the principal’s role brought 
changing demands on the kind of leadership behavior he exhib¬ 
ited. The human relations aspect of his role was underlined. 
The authoritarian type of leadership, which had managed well 
enough before, was entirely inadequate to meet the new demands® 
While the principal still had all his legal authority, a change 
had to take place in the way in which it was exercised® The 
new position is summed up by K.G. Collier (3, p.284) as follows: 

Anyone in a position of command bears the responsibility 

for maintaining discipline in that part of a community 
which comes in his province .... For that purpose the 
man in charge must have some coercive or autocratic powers 

® • • . 

But in the new situation the person in authority bears 
also a second responsibility-for winning the active co¬ 
operation of those under him.. ... This is won by exer¬ 
cising the powers of discipline in accordance with certain, 
principles. 

Collier then proceeds to explain the principles which 



t . 






t 




> 

:: .. ? jI . ■ 

- 

- . . t :o’.:. 






. 




* 

- - . » 

















































7 


may be stated as follows: 

1* Use of power must be subject to rules and regula¬ 
tions which are clear to everyone concerned* 

2* The principal must exercise and demonstrate a genu¬ 
ine concern for the welfare of those under him. 

3. He must create an, atmosphere of trust by winning 
the confidence and approval of subordinates* 

Because of the nature and size of the composite high 
school, the role of its principal is of major importance in 
determining the efficiency with which the school operates, 
and the extent to which it achieves its educational goals* 

The highest professional qualifications, combined with the 
highest leadership qualities, are demanded* However, these 
attainments on the part of the principal are not alone suf¬ 
ficient to ensure a successful school* It is necessary that 
all others directly concerned with the school—superintendents, 
teachers, pupils and parents—have a common understanding of 
the objectives and functions of the composite high school and 
of the role of its principal. It is the hypothesis of this 
thesis that, with respect to many important matters, such 
common expectations do not exist* If this is so, the result¬ 
ing conflict creates a dilemma which the principal and others 
must recognize and solve if the composite high school is to 
achieve its objective. 












~ .1 

« . 

* 


-• 

* 

* 







_ : .. -: f 



t '• 


* 


. ; , 


? * * 


- - ^i-c , t... . . w ii\:. 

■V . . ■ ;Jj 

* 



I 

■>. i: : r •• — 

< 

: 

- 

* 

. \ 


. t. • »ii. , ..••• o J 


? * 




X ' 



. 






















8 . 

It is the purpose of this thesis to investigate both 
the extent and degree of conflict in the views of superin¬ 
tendents, teachers, pupils and parents regarding the princi¬ 
pal^ role in the composite high school* The sociological 
approach of the role theorists will be the means used to 
examine the stated hypothesis* 










































9 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Byrne, T.C. "Alberta,” The Canadian Survey of Composite 
High Schools . University of Alberta Monograph, 1958, 

Z* Chandler, W. "The Teacher in the Authority System," 

Journal of Educational Sociology, XXX no, 9, pp.590-394. 

3. Collier, K*G. "Authority, Society and Education," 

Journal of Educational Sociology , XXX no. 6, p. 285. 

4. Cornell, F.G. "Socially Perceptive Administration," 

Phi Delta Kappan , XXXVI pp. 219-223. 

5. Lautenschlager, H. "The Role of the Principal as a Morale 

Builder,” Peabody Journal of Education , XXXIV, no. 5, 
pp. 258-262. 

j6. Smith, D.M. and Sprowles, L. "What it Takes to be and 

Effective Principal," Nation’s Schools, XXXIV, no. 3, 
pp. 63-64. 

2* Wiles, K. and Grobman, H.G. "Principals as Leaders," 

Nation’s Schools , LVI, no. 4, p.75. 































< • 

c « 




c 




























































CHAPTER II 


THE THEORY OF SOCIAL ROLE 

Social role theory, as applied to school administra¬ 
tion, is largely a development of the present decade* In 
1951 Parsons and Shils 10 used it as a basic concept in de¬ 
veloping a unified conceptual scheme for theory and research 
in the social sciences® Richard Conrad wrote In 1952: 

Knowledge of sociological principles derived from 
systematic research is as practical for the educational 
personnel administrator as is knowledge derived from 
experience and from common sense judgments (p.385) 0 

That social role theory and related research tools 

are increasingly being used in research on the positions and 

behavior of teachers and administrators is attested by W.B* 

Brookover in his introduction to a review of this subject in 

2 

the Journal of Educational Sociology of September, 1955 * 

As recently as the spring of 1958 Gross, Mason and McEachern 
reported the Harvard studies of -the superintendency under the 
title Explorations in Role Analysis * As on© of their goals 
they endeavored to "forge a closer link between theoretical 
and empirical analyses concerned with the study of roles”(p*3)® 

I. ROLES 

The approach to the subject of roles from the socio¬ 
logical viewpoint begins with the social system which is an 












;. . . ■ : •: ; ,v.’ * - . . 

: •• . ' 

. 

, , 

* j'-'-Vi 

* . • . . . ■ 

- 

■ •• L ■ . •: 1 } Ov fU" ■ \ ' - 







































11 


expression of the culture patterns of the community, "Ideal 
culture patterns represent the consensus of opinion on the 
part of society*s members as to how people should behave in 
particular situations." (7, p*26) These culture patterns 
are expressed by people as individuals and as members of 
institutions* 

Institutions are the agencies which carry out the 
essential functions of a social system in a patterned manner* 
G-etzels and Guba (6, p.425 ) describe institutions as purpos¬ 
ive, peopled, structural, normative and sanction-bearing* 
-Analysing the school as an institution, lensen (9,p*39) dis¬ 
covers six phases to its structural aspect which he categor¬ 
izes as (1) the formal work structure, (2) the authority 
structure, (3) the communications structure, (4) the power 
structure, (5) the status and privilege structure, and (6) 
the informal clique structure. 

Within each structure of an institution, whether 
formal or informal, there are a number of positions* A 
position is defined as "the location of an actor or class of 

t» 

actors in a system of social relationships* (7, p®67) When 
these positions are arranged in a hierarchial order, as for 
instance in the authority structure, they are termed statuses. 
A status is defined as all the normative rights and duties 
which the culture patterns of society have attached to a 
particular position. A status exists independently of the 




♦ 

. . . 

. 

■ 




* 

: 









t 






t 

, * " c. •*' 

v ; < 









■ 











, . .. 






, 




V •• , c ' 





e : 



c 






1 •• • / 

* ■ 





* 

- 


■ ■ 















* - ■ 









* 
















■ 




. « 




















e 

. 






















































12 


particular actor who may occupy it* 

Accompanying each status is a set of appropriate 

behaviors for carrying out the rights and duties associated 

with it* It is this expected behavior which is termed a 

"role". As defined by Turner^ 2 , a role is 

. . • made up of all those norms which are thought to 
apply to a person occupying a given position ... a 
collection of patterns of behavior which are thought to 
constitute a meaningful unit and deemed appropriate to a 
person occupying a particular status in society, (p.316) 

-An institution includes a number of inter-related 
roles which exist, as do statuses, independently of the par¬ 
ticular persons who occupy them. "Role performance" is the 
actual behavior of an actor, which may or may not satisfy 
the requirements of his role. 

Parsons and Shils 10 write of roles: 

For most analytical purposes, the most significant 
unit of social structures is not the person but the role. 
The role is that organized sector of an actor’s orienta¬ 
tion which constitutes and defines his participation in 
an interactive process. It involves a set of complemen¬ 
tary expectations concerning both his own actions and 
others with whom he interacts. (p.£3) 

The word "expectations" is of particular significance 
in role theory. It is defined as "an evaluative standard 
applied to an incumbent of a position." (7, p.67) Every 
individual and group associated with a role have expectations 
towards it. These expectations are not random, but are to 
some extent organized. The pattern of all behavioral expecta¬ 
tions focussed on a status defines the role. 



























13 

The groups which have a legitimate right to hold 
expectations towards a role may be termed ”alter groups”. 

Those particular alter groups which are of special signific¬ 
ance to the role incumbent, and to whom he looks for guidance 
and approval, are termed ’’reference groups”. In order to 
define adequately any particular role, the behavioral expecta¬ 
tions of all significant alter groups must be described. 

Q 

Expectations have been classified by Brookover into 
three categories which may be termed ”general”,"particular”, 
and ’’personal”. A ’’general expectation” applies to any 
person who occupies a certain position in all situations. 

A ’’particular expectation” applies to any person who occupies 
a particular position in a particular institution. A ’’person¬ 
al expectation” applies only to the one individual person who 
is known to occupy a particular position in a particular 
institution. 

In Figure 1 these levels of expectation are illustra¬ 
ted as they apply to the role of the principal. Outer circle 
A represents the general expectations of all alter groups to 
any principalship. Circle B shows the expectations of these 
groups to the principalship of a particular school whose size, 
type, educational level and other characteristics are known. 
Circle C illustrates the more specific expectations of these 
groups when a particular incumbent is considered in the role 
of principal of a specified school. 



, • . 

* < 

* . 

» 

* 



*■ 

* 


. 

* t 


■ 







• ■-•■ 

















14 



Concentric Circles: Sectors: 


A 0 General expectations 

B. Particular expectations 

C. Personal expectations 

D. Area of interaction 

E. Incumbent’s expectations- 


Pupil group 
Parent group 
Teacher group 
Sup 1 t• group 
Other groups 


Polygon VW2TZ: Resultant role defintion 


FIGURE X 


PRINCIPAL’S ROLE DEFINITION 








































































































: 






* 


. 

* 

* ' 

* 



























































15 


The inner circle E, represents the expectations of 
the role incumbent himself* His expectations are a compos¬ 
ite of his training, experience, personality, and the way in 
which he perceives the alter groups define his role* The 
resultant of all expectations towards the position is the 
polygon TOJCTZ, the role itself* This definition is not 
static, for the actual role behavior of the actor and the 
constant interaction of all groups result in continual mod¬ 
ifications of their expectations, and consequently of the 
role configuration* Circle D in the paradigm represents 
this area of interaction* 

Once an organized system of interaction between ego 
and alter becomes stabilized they build up reciprocal 
expectations of each other’s actions and attitudes which 
are the nucleus of what may be called role-expectations* 
The pattern of expectations of many alters constitutes, 
in a social system, the institutionalized definition of 
ego’s roles* (10, p.19) 

II. ROLE CONFLICT 

In Figure 1 we have an illustration of an individual 
actor with his own definition of the principal’s role sur¬ 
rounded by many alter groups who also have a right to define 
it* It is out of this situation that role conflicts arise* 
Each group may have a different set of expectations. Even 
within a group there may be inconsistent, incompatible, or 
mutually exclusive expectations. While feeling an obliga¬ 
tion to satisfy all expectations, the role incumbent will be 




















































16 


forced to choose between them and face the threat of sanc¬ 
tions from the unsatisfied groups and subgroups. This ex¬ 
posure of an individual in a given position to incompatible 

behavioral expectations is "role conflict". 

4 

Cuber lists three kinds of role conflict. The 
first is a conflict between two roles which an individual 
occupies simultaneously. A teacher in the school system 
may occupy one role in the authority structure and another 
in the informal clique structure. The expectations consti¬ 
tuting the two roles may be mutually exclusive and the 
individual occupying them is faced with a role conflict. 

A closely related type of conflict is that created by the 
necessity to change roles. 

It is however, Cuber’s third class of conflict with 
which this research is concerned. It is the conflict aris¬ 
ing from inconsistent role requirements. This inconsist¬ 
ency may be within a particular reference group, between 
two or more reference groups, or between alter group expect¬ 
ations and the principal’s own definition of the role. 

Two aspects of role conflict are described by Getzels 

5 

and Guba : 1. the situational—"the extent to which the sit¬ 
uation causes conflict", and 8. the personalistic—"the 
extent to which actors in a given situation are personally 
troubled by the conflict". In this thesis role conflicts of 

























17 


the situational category only will be investigated* It 
will not be concerned with the principal’s perception of 
role conflicts or with his own definition of his role* 

Circle B in Figure 1 illustrates the area of this research— 
"situational” conflicts at the "particular" level of expect¬ 
ations. 

Role expectations are on a continuum from required to 
prohibited. Usually they are sufficiently broad that differ¬ 
ent actors with different expectations and personalities 

could successfully fulfill them. The severity of role con- 

5 

flict according to Cetzels and Cuba is dependent upon two 
factors: 

1. the relative incompatibility of expectations between 
roles. 

2. the rigor with which expectations are defined within 
a given situation. 

To investigate "situational"eonflicts at the "partic¬ 
ular" level of expectations the study will be focussed on the 
incompatibility of role expectations. Attention also will 
be given to the rigor with which expectations are defined. 






. 

? 

. 

. 

. ' . • . : • . 

« 

, 


. 

* 




. 




* 

, 










1 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


18 


1. Austin and Collins. "A Study of Attitudes Toward the 

High School Principalship ,, , The Bulletin of the 
National Association of Secondary-School Principals , 

XL no. 216, pp. 104-140. 

2. Brookover, W.B. "Research on Teacher and Administrator 

Roles", Journal of Educational Sociology , XXIX no. 1, 

p.2. 

5. Conrad, Richard. "A Sociological Approach to Public 

School Administration", Educational Administration 
and Supervision XXXVIII, no. 7, pp.385-892. 

4. Cuber, J.F. "The Self, Social Roles and Role Conflict", 

Sociology : A Synopsis of Principles . Appleton- 
Century-Crofts, 1955. P. 299. 

5. Getaels and Guba. "Role, Role Conflict, and Effective- 

ness", American Sociological Review XIX, p. 164. 

6. Getzels and Guba, "Social Behavior and the Administra¬ 

tive Process", School Review , LXV, no. 4, pp. 423-441. 

£. Gross, Mason and McEachern. Explorations in Role Analysis 
John Wiley and Sons, 1958. 

8. Gullahorn, J.T. "Measuring Role Conflict", American 
Journal of Sociology LX, pp. 299-303. 

£. Jensen, G. "The School as a Social System", Educational 
Research Bulletin XXXIII, pp. 38-46. 

10 . Parsons and Shils. Toward a General Theory of Action . 

Harvard University Press, 1951. 

11 . Seeman, Melvin. "Role Conflict and Ambivalence in 

Leadership", American Sociological Review XVTII, 
pp. 373-380. 

12. Turner, R.H. "Role-taking, Role-standpoint and Reference- 

group Behavior", American Journal of Sociology LXI, 
pp. 316-328. 































































CHAPTER III 


RELATED STUDIES 

Research in educational administration has usually- 
followed the patterns of research in business administra¬ 
tion. Early studies were related to the structure, organ¬ 
ization, functions and related aspects of the formal organ- 
ization. As the importance of the human relations aspect 
of administration was realized, the research began to take 
a sociological approach. Such topics as leadership, morale, 
job-satisfaction, and role expectations came in for study. 
Today an increasing body of educational research is to be 
found in these fields. 

The related research pertinent to this study will be 
considered under three classifications: 

1. Behavioral descriptions of the principal’s role. 

3. Leadership styles and staff relations. 

3. Role conflicts. 

I. BEHAVIORAL DESCRIPTIONS OF THE PRINCIPAL’S ROLE 

Early studies of the principalship were based on the 
trait theory of leadership which endeavored to produce lists 
of leadership qualities desired for the role. As this theory 
gave way to the situational theory, research turned to the 
















-- \ 

c ' ' ■ * 

, '• ■ •' • - -• 5 - ■■ '■ 

* 

< • t. . 


* ? 


- 




* 


, 


* ' 

* 

. 



























20 


discovery of actual situations in which the principal’s 
behavior had been critical for his success or failure, and 
endeavored to analyze his behavior® 

From Stanford University come three investigations 
which set out describe in behavioral terms what major alter 
groups consider to be effective and ineffective leadership 
on the part of a principal® Buffington 4 made a study of 
the job of the elementary school principal as viewed by 
parents, and Medsker 10 did a companion study from the stand- 

i ft 

point of teachers® Walters investigated the job of the 
high school principal as perceived by California city super¬ 
intendents. All three used the ’’critical incident technique” 
as their means of research. Buffington describes the method 
as follows: 

The technique is used in an attempt to arrive at 
those aspects of the job which are critical for success 
or failure. It involves securing reports from persons 
associated with the subject concerning actual important 
happenings in which, in the judgment of the interviewee, 
the behavior of the subject was either effective or in¬ 
effective. These reports are then subjected to a pro¬ 
cess known as category formulation ... to arrive at 
critical requirements for the job. 

As a subject population Buffington and Medsker used 
three randomly selected teachers and three similarly select¬ 
ed parents from each of thirty of the sixty-three schools in 
the Oakland, California school system. Walters interviewed 
twenty-five city superintendents of the Los Angeles and 











t 




... 

. • : \ ‘ " ' - 

, 










; 



•x... .. f : 

i , . . .. . 

i; 

- , * 

* 

. 


- i.•. • - / 









- 




















21 


San Francisco metropolitan areas* From his research Buf¬ 
fington accumulated 294 incidents which he developed into 
436 behaviors. Medsker recorded 402 incidents which pro¬ 
duced 569 behaviors. The results were then categorized as 
described above. 

Walters took his study one step further. The des¬ 
criptive statements obtained from the twenty-five superin¬ 
tendents were printed in two check lists and submitted to 
all California city superintendents. After receiving a 
90 per cent response, Walters presented those behaviors 
obtaining more than chance support in four tables categor¬ 
ized as follows: 

most critical effective behavior 
most critical ineffective behavior 
least critical effective behavior 
least critical ineffective behavior. 

These were then analyzed for dominant superintendent percep¬ 
tions of critical principal behavior. A highly consistent 
pattern of response was found with five of the seven most 
critically effective behaviors having counterparts in the 
most critically ineffective category. 

Another, and very important study aimed at developing 
a behavioral description of the principal’s role, is Austin 
and Collin’s, ,f A Study of Attitudes Toward the High School 

Principalship*’ as reported in The Bulletin of the National 
Association of Secondary-School Principals for November, 1956 









* 

♦ 

. 

- . . . ... : 

* 

< ■ 








. 


, 

* 
















< '' 


■ C ; ' r ' 




























22 


Each study of the Stanford group had recommended that the 
principals position be studied from the point of view of 
other alter groups* This Collins attempted to do by using 
five alter groups: teachers, lay citizens, senior students, 
principals and superintendents* 

Using the same critical incident technique, Collins 
held 125 interviews* From 25 communities within a 75-mile 
radius of New York City, he selected 25 members from each 
of the five alter groups* They were asked one general 
question: 

Thinking back over your observations and experience 
in connection with the high school, what do you be¬ 
lieve the high school principal must do or avoid 
doing to meet your expectations? (p*l09) 

It is significant that the question brought the subject of 
expectations directly into the picture* Collins’ subsequent 
analysis identified common elements and transformed them 
into statements of acceptable and unacceptable practice. 

These were compiled separately for each alter group and then 
combined* This resulted in 90 acceptable and 60 unacceptable 
practices categorized in eleven areas of job performance* 

For the purposes of the present study the previous 
research related in this section produced valuable descrip¬ 
tions of critical principal behavior* While all aspects 
and situations related to his job could not be covered, from 
the standpoint of role conflict, significant areas had been 








, 

1 , • 

, 

* 

■ 4 

• . 

- ' • ; ■ . 

► 













































23 


underlined suggesting a starting point for further research* 
Both Walters and Collins produced lists of abilities 
or attributes which the principal should possess* More use¬ 
ful for the present study were the major categories and sub¬ 
categories into which Buffington, Medsker and Collins 
divided the principal’s job* The lists of Buffington and 
Medsker, reflecting the experiences of two different alter 
groups, were not identical. However there was some over¬ 
lapping and the combined major categories of job performance 
were as follows: 

1* Developing relations with parent groups and the commun¬ 
ity. 

2. Working with and caring for children. 

3* Knowing and helping parents. 

4* Providing leadership for teachers* 

5. Administering the school. 

A comparison of this list with the eleven areas of 
job performance compiled by Collins reveals the following 
additional areas of responsibility: 

1. Making and executing policies and decisions. 

2. Delegating authority and responsibility. 

3. Improving the curriculum and teaching. 

4. Working with higher administration. 

5. Increasing his professional competence. 


II. LEADERSHIP STYLES AND STATE RELATIONS 


Another group of studies which were useful in carry¬ 
ing out the research reported in this thesis dealt in various 
ways with principal leadership styles in staff relations. 



... .. ... .. - 






* 

* f 

- 

: , 

* 

* 

0 * 

< 

, 

» . « J 











. 

* 

. 

. 

. 

, . 






. 

















24 


i 


They were concerned with the manner in which the principal 
carried out the human relations aspects of his job. Indir¬ 
ectly they served to point out areas of potential conflict. 

G-robman and Hines 7 report studies of the public 
school principalship carried out at the Gollege of Education 
of the University of Florida. For eighty principals in a 
metropolitan county school system they developed a "Princip¬ 
al Behavior Check List" which contained 86 situations common 
to the principalship wherever it exists. The respondents 
indicated their behavior in each situation by marking a 
five-point scale on a democratic—undemocratic continuum. 

The teachers 1 perceptions and expectations of the 

democratic behavior of principals and superintendents was 

2 

the concern of Bidwell in the first part of his study of 
the administrative role and teaching satisfaction. The 
population of 568 teachers which he used was presented with 
thirteen items describing situations where interaction be¬ 
tween teacher and principal or superintendent was essential. 
The alternatives to be selected for each were categorized as 
three leadership styles: democratic, autocratic, and laissez- 
faire. The respondent was asked to check what he thought 
the behavior would be in the situation, and what he thought 
it should be. 

Two other studies related teacher satisfaction to 



. 

* 

. 

. 

, 

. 

. . 

4 ■ - 

T .. •; . r ' ’ . 




. 


♦ 

<• • • • e . ' 


* 

4 ■ . J L 










. 

















25 


decision-making* As reported in the Administrator* s Note ¬ 
book under the title, "Who Should Make What Decisions", 
Sharma 14r developed a four-part questionnaire and distributed 
it to 568 teachers in twenty school systems of eighteen 
states. The first two parts were concerned with who actually 
made decisions and who the respondents thought should make 
them. Thirty-five activities were listed in twelve areas of 
school operation. The response was made by marking a key 
indicating whether decisions were (or should be) made by the 
board of education, superintendent, principal, individual 
teacher, group of teachers, citizens committees, pupils, or 
none of these. 

Moyer 11 was also interested in teacher satisfaction 
and related it to the kind of leadership teachers want. In 
his study he analyzed teacher attitudes towards authority. 

The ^-sort technique was applied to 80 statements which had 
been classified as either "leader-centered" or "group-cent¬ 
ered" leadership behavior. His basic assumption was that 
teachers satisfied their needs either by dependence upon the 
principal or by independence from the principal and depend¬ 
ence on the faculty group. This study was conducted in four 
different school systems of Illinois. 

One other study dealing with leadership styles and 
staff relations wqs conducted by Congreve^. In examining 















. ' ' ■ • ■ - t 








, ... . t - 






, 

¥ , 













. 


. 




















26 


tlie social organization of the school and its effects on 
leadership styles he used two matched schools operating 
under different leadership styles* Interview and question¬ 
naire techniques were used in the case study* Congreve 
observed the social system of the school operating at three 
different levels—highly general, highly personal, and in 
between—which he termed "universalistic", "particularistic", 
and "discretionalistic". 

From these studies we can derive some useful conclu¬ 
sions concerning principal leadership styles and their 
effect on staff relations* We can also infer the expecta¬ 
tions of the staff towards the kind of leadership they assoc¬ 
iate with the principal’s role* 

7 

Several studies agree with Grobman and Hines that 
principals cannot be easily categorized* They report no 
behavior patterns in terms of principal personality, educa¬ 
tional level, or size of school* They did find however that 
on the Grobman-Hines five-point scale the average principal 
scored slightly above the midpoint in the democratic continu¬ 
um. They reported that "generally speaking democratic and 
situational behaviors obtain better results in the school 
situation than do the converse types of actions."(p. 16 ) 

They found that the principal’s leadership style clearly 
influenced pupil reactions to the school. Pupils, in general, 
favored a relatively democratically administered school and 



. 

g 

; t t 


- 

„ s 


. 

~ -j: . 

. • c 

• ••• 
































27 


parents participated more actively under such conditions* 

The Sharma 14 findings also support the democratic 
style of leadership. Teachers, he reports, want to assume 
professional responsibility for all activities that concern 
instruction. They also want more autonomy for their indiv¬ 
idual school. It is professional, rather than personal, 

ft 

consideration that teachers expect, according to Congreve. 
The effective administrator must initiate structure in the 
interaction of the staff and show consideration. However 
he must maintain perspective and not become involved In the 
personal feelings of staff members. ”The more formal, 
impersonal, but friendly administrative style appears to b© 
the most effective,” Congreve suggests. 

The findings of the teacher-satisfaction studies are 

2 

summarized in the conclusions of Bidwell , "Convergence of 
teacher role expectations towards the administrator and 
their perceptions of his behavior will be accompanied by an 
expression by these teachers of satisfaction with the teach¬ 
ing situation.” (p.42) This underlines the importance of 
the principal knowing what these expectations are. 

Since both observation and experience make it evident 
that the success of the school leader depends heavily on 
his ability to meet the expectations of those with whom 
he works and associates, a survey of such expectations 
could contribute specifically to a clearer definition of 
the actual position itself. (1, p.107) 





.... ' - 

« • • ■ , * 








•/ • . * - 







c 














28 


i 


Three main conclusions may be drawn from the research 
discussed in this section: 

1. The members of the teacher group have a concept of the 
ideal principal and their satisfaction in the teaching 
situation depends on the extent to which they see it 
fulfilled. 

2. The principals role, as well as being classified into 
areas of job performance, has also a leadership dimen¬ 
sion on which administrative behavior can be placed on 
a democratic-—undemocratic continuum. 

5. The present failure to define the principal "type” 

underlines the significance of studying the situational 
aspects of the role. 

III. ROLE CONFLICTS 

In a report entitled "Individual Values and Adminis- 

1 2 

trative Effectiveness", Prince discovered that value dif¬ 
ferences between teachers and principals affect teacher 
confidence in principals and their rating of principal effect¬ 
iveness. This is an important finding. It suggests that the 
value differences found in our society are reflected by 
teachers, and consequently will be expressed in role expect- 

17 

ation differences. Wispe also attributed conflicting 

expectations to conflicting social norms in society. Mother 

15 

reference to this fact is found in the Seeman study where 
attitudes towards school leadership are attributed to the 
conflicting values and ideologies of society. He found four 
dimensions to role conflict which he defines as follows: 
















t 

f 

. 

, 

■w . 








y 


... 





• 






* 





















? 














> 


> 

- 







- . « 

' 

* 

* 






. 




















29 




1. The status dimension with its conflict between the 
success and equality ideologies*. 

2. The authority dimension which is expressed in the 
conflict between the values of dependence and inde¬ 
pendence o 

3. The institutional dimension or institutional obliga¬ 
tions vs. personal obligations. 

4. The means-end dimension—the conflict between emphasis 
on processes of achievement as opposed to emphasis on 
the accomplishment of the task itself* 

These value-derived conflicts will be reflected to 

some extent by all alter groups concerned with the role* 

However, in a study of the attitudes of teachers and admin- 

15 

istrators, Valenti found that the school situation itself 
is more significant in shaping attitudes than are personal 
characteristics. Therefore the school, and particularly the 
school administration, has some influence which can be 
brought to bear and help reduce these conflicts* 

A significant study related to role conflict was under¬ 
taken by the National Association of Secondary-School Prin¬ 
cipals.^" The Collins study, reported in the first section of 
this chapter, was the first step in this national study of 
the American public high school principalship. The findings 
of the Collins study were combined with sources from the 
professional literature to produce a list of sixty types of 
specific activities of imperative concern to the principal. 
After examination by a jury of fifty principals the list was 






























30 


reduced to thirty* A nation-wide sample of superintendents, 
principals, high school teachers, students and citizens re¬ 
ceived similar questionnaires. All except the principals 
were asked to check agreement; disagreement; or lack of 
opinion on each item* The three choices for principals 
were: of greater or lesser importance; considered important 
or unimportant by the community; part of his regular practice. 

After gross percentages had been used to select crit¬ 
ical concepts and conflict, the findings were listed under 
these headings: high agreement; favorable; general agreement; 
wide variation; considerable difference; of lesser importance. 
The general conclusion was that the most important area of 
the principal’s role is leading in the instructional program® 
His job includes responsibility for improving the educational 
program, counselling with pupils and parents, and understand¬ 
ing and helping the teaching staff. This coincides with the 
findings reported earlier. There was found to be disagree¬ 
ment on the degree of formality in the principal’s behavior; 
the attention he should give to improvement of the instruc¬ 
tional program; his accessibility to pupils, teachers and 
parents; and his participation in community activities. 

A thorough review of role theory and role conflict 

analysis and its application to research on administrative 
roles is contained in a recent publication, Explorations in 







- 





• 



.. 1 . 



■ 

: 



- 







' 

- 

- c ■ ' ■- , : . -v t 

, . 

. 


: • . ? 




* . 


*' 

: 



■ : ' 


. , t 

• 






































31 


o 

Role Analysis , by Gross, Mason and McEachern • This book is 
a report of the Harvard University School Executive Studies. 
School superintendents and school board members in Massachus 
sets form the alter groups for study of consensus on the 
school superintendency role. While the study itself is in 
no way related to the principalship, the text is valuable 
from the standpoint of theory and methodology. 

It was our assumption that the extent to which there 
is consensus on role definition may be an important 
dimension affecting the functioning of social systems, 
whether they are total societies or sub-systems within 
them. In addition, the degree of consensus among signif 
icant role definers as perceived by an actor may be an 
important variable affecting his behavior, (p.5) 

A survey of the related studies reviewed in this chap 
ter brings out the following conclusions: 

1. Studies using the critical incident technique have pro¬ 
duced lists of desired principal competencies, and 
analyzed the role into useful job categories. 

2. Satisfaction studies brought out the desire of teachers 
for a democratic leadership style. 

3. Conflict studies pointed to the fact that expectations 
are affected by conflicting social norms. 

4. Few expectation and conflict studies deal with a total 
role as defined by all major alter groups. 

5. The relationship between harmony of expectations and 
satisfaction implies the fact that the understanding 
and resolution of role conflicts is one of the major 
tasks of the administrator. 

















, 











. 

£ 


- 




* 

' 

* 



. 













' 


» 


* 

* 


* 

. 

















32 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Austin and Collins* T, A Study of Attitudes Toward the 

High School Principalship", The Bulletin of the 
National Association of Secondary-School Principals * 
XL, No. 210, pp.104-140." 

2 . Bidwell, C.E. "The Administrative Role and Teaching 

Satisfaction", Journal of Educational Sociology 
XXIX, No.l, pp.41-47. 

3. Brookover, W.B. "Research on Teacher and Administrator 

Roles", Journal of Educational Sociology , XXIX, 

No.l, p.2. 

4. Buffington, R.L. "The Job of the Elementary School 

Principal as Viewed by Parents", Dissertation 
.abstracts , XIV, p. 943. 

5. Chase and Guba. "Administrative Roles and Behavior", 

Review of Educational Research , XXV, No.4, p.279. 

i 6. Congreve, W.J. "Administrative Behavior and Staff 

Relations" The Administrator*s Notebook , III, No.2. 

7.. Grobman and Hines. "What Makes a Good Principal?" 

The Bulletin of the National Association of Secondary 
School Principals . XL, No.23, pp.5-16. 

8. Gross, Mason and McEachern. Explorations in Role Analysis 
John Wiley and Sons, 1958. 

_9. Gross and Mason. "Some Methodological Problems of Eight- 
Hour Interviews", American Journal of Sociology , 

LIX, No.3, ppl97-204. 

10 . Medsker, L.L. "The Job of the Elementary School Principal 

as Viewed by Teachers", Dissertation Abstracts, XIV 
pp.946-947. 

11 . Moyer, D.C. "Leadership That Teachers Want", The Admin ¬ 

istrator 1 s Notebook , III, No,7. 

12 . Prince, R. "Individual Values and Administrative Effect¬ 

iveness", The Administrator 1 s Notebook , VI, No.4. 

13 . Seeman, M. "Role Conflict and Ambivalence in Leadership", 

American Sociological Review . XVIII, pp.373-380. 



































































ft 


33. 


14 . Sharma, "Who Should Make What Decisions", The Admin ¬ 

istrator 1 s Notebook . Ill, No.8. 

15 . Valenti. "Attitudes of Teachers and Administrators", 

The Administrator 1 s Notebook , III, No. 1. 

16 . Walters, T.W. "The Job of the High School Principal as 

Perceived by California City Superintendents", 
Dissertation Abstracts , XV, p.1018. 

17 . Wispe, L.G-. "A Sociometric Analysis of Conflicting Role 

Expectations", American Journal of Sociology , IXI, 
pp.134-137. 




















1 


CHAPTER IV 
THE RESEARCH DESIGN 

The research objective is to uncover major conflicts 
in the expectations of alter groups towards the principal- 
ship of the composite high school. The conflicts investig¬ 
ated are situational, not necessarily those perceived by 
the principal. 

A case study method was necessary because of the 
number of alter groups included. Two composite high schools 
were invited to participate:. Western Canada High School in 
Calgary, and Strathcona Composite School in Edmonton. At 
the time of this study (May, 1958) the Calgary school had 
an enrolment of 1227 pupils and a staff of 62 teachers, 
while the Edmonton school had an enrolment of 1287 pupils 
and a staff of 57 teachers. Two schools were used in order 
to remove some of the personality factor and keep the study 
on the "particular” level of expectations described in Chap¬ 
ter II. At the same time it was assumed that findings from 
two schools provided a better basis for prediction to other 
composite high schools In the province. It was not intended 
to make comparison between the two schools, but to consider 
them as one population. 

The alter groups selected for the investigation were 
superintendents, teachers, pupils and parents, corresponding 













.. • i, 












« . . 









, 

.. 0 . . ■. .. . 

' -V- : .. . . .. " . ... •' ‘ . .. . •. , . ■ - . 

. 

? . ■ . ; : .. 

, 

< - . t ' { ..... 


































35 


I 


to the main alter groups used in the Collins study. 1 The 
superintendent population included the Superintendents of 
Public Schools for Calgary and Edmonton, and one Assistant 
Superintendent from each city who had some responsibility 
for high school supervision. The teacher population included 
interested teachers from the two high schools. Partly for 
administrative reasons it was decided to select the student 
sample from the Grade X classes. Without disrupting the 
teaching schedule it would be possible to obtain their 
responses during a Health and Personal Development period. 
There was also the advantage that the 52 Grade Ten classes 
included 40 per cent of the total student population and 
the widest range of attitudes and interests. The principals 
would no doubt be interested in their expectations as these 
students would be spending two or three more years in the 
high school. 

Differences between socio-economic status and cultural 
backgrounds of the pupil group and parent group were avoided 
by using the parents of the Grade X pupil sample as the pop¬ 
ulation of the parent group. 

I * INSTRUMENTATION 

The first step was to limit the study of the prin¬ 
cipal * s role to those sectors dealing with instructional 
leadership and human relations. Omitted were such 






, 




■ . 6 ; . ■ v. • V .... o . 

. 




* 










. 




p 

. 


















. 


















36 


1 


administrative responsibilities as records and reports, 
requisitions and supplies, cafeteria management, and the 
supervision of non-teaching personnel. The following six 
sectors of the role were finally selected on the basis of 
experience and findings in the literature: 

I* General school organization, including timetables, 
classes, and pupils programs® 

2. General staff relations, including appointment, place¬ 
ment and promotion of staff members. 

3© The instructional program, its organization, coordina¬ 
tion and supervision® 

4<> The extra curricular program, its policies and manage¬ 
ment. 

5. Student behavior, particularly major discipline problems. 

6. Public relations, particularly with individual parents 
and home and school associations® 

The second step was to hold focussed, but unstructured 
interviews with two high school principals, two assistant 
principals, a department head, a student and several teachers® 
The interviewees were associated either with the pilot school 
or one of the two schools used in the study® The procedure 
was somewhat similar to the critical incident technique used 
in the first group of studies referred to in Chapter III. 

.After a brief explanation of the study, and of the role theory 
on which it is based, the interviewees were invited to suggest 
areas in which they had experienced or observed conflicting 
expectations. Each of the six sectors of the principal’s role 
















■ 









' ■.’• c - 

; < ... 

\ 

• , 

* 

4 


) 


























































37 


was presented for consideration. Approximately forty situ¬ 
ations were suggested during the interviews* These were 
later expanded into eighty statements associated with school 
policy and principal behavior. 

From a study of the literature dealing with the prin- 
cipalship, another list of eighty statements was prepared. 

The two lists were then compared and combined into a pilot 
questionnaire containing a final selection of eighty-three 
statements. For each statement questionnaire respondents 
had three choices: "Agree", "Disagree", or "No Preference". 
The last choice was designed to discourage indiscriminate 
checking of the first two where no definite opinion existed. 

The questionnaire statements covered both policies 
and procedures. Included were decisions related to: 

1. rights and duties 

2. delegation of authority 

3. sharing responsibilities 

4. individual preferences 

5. evaluative standards 

6. rewards and punishments. 

II. THS PILOT STUDY 

Arrangements were made to conduct a pilot study in 
Viscount Bennett Junior-Senior High School, Calgary. Part¬ 
icipating in the study were 26 Grade X students, 15 parents, 
and 12 teachers. The results were examined to eliminate 
from the instrument those statements involving no significant 



















tOOiifji 



r: .ij .... o ? x xj* < ;xt . o*x » 

* 

. . ' 1 . K 

' > :: . - . C - . •' - o 

» 

. . * ' 

■ 

* 

, 


« : .. t . 


. ■ ■■ •: , : .' 

■ 




. 








































I 


conflict as indicated by a large percentage of responses 
from all groups in the "No Preference" column, or a high 
degree of concensus on the "Agree" or "Disagree" choices. 

As a result the original questionnaire was reduced to sixty 
items involving evident conflict either between or within 
groupso 


III. THE MAIN STUDY 

Since this study was concerned with finding the ex¬ 
pectations of all major alter groups to each behavior, a 
single questionnaire instrument to be completed by all 
groups was required. This method was used with only slight 
variation in the study made by the National Association of 
Secondary-School Principals’ 3 ". The six role categories devel¬ 
oped for the pilot study were retained and placed in such an 
order that the categories thought to be of widest interest 
to all groups appeared first in the instrument. This arrange¬ 
ment and the inclusion of sectional headings were designed 
to encourage response. A copy of this questionnaire instru¬ 
ment is to be found in Appendix A. Table I lists the sec¬ 
tional headings and the number of statements included under 
each. 

The questionnaires were distributed and collected un¬ 
signed through the principal’s office. A sample of four 
Grade X classes, of an average achievement level, completed 



* 


. 

C ' 

♦ 


. J . 

. 

. 


. 

* 

- 

* 



















1 


39 

the questionnaire during a supervised period. At the same 
time each pupil was given an envelope containing another 
copy of the instrument to be taken home, completed by a 
parent, and returned to the school. Superintendents were 
contacted by mail or in person, 

TABLE I 

QUESTIONNAIRE SECTIONAL HEADINGS AND 
NUMBER OF STATEMENTS UNDER EACH 


No. of 
Sector 

Sector Title 

No. of 
Questions 

I. 

Student Behavior 

12 

II. 

Extra Curricular Activities 

9 

III. 

The Instructional Program 

13 

IV. 

School Organization 

10 

Y. 

Teaching Personnel 

9 

VI. 

Public Relations 

7 

TOTAL 


60 


The response to the Questionnaire is shown in Table II, 
The returns represented 100% of the superintendent popula¬ 
tion, 36% of the teacher population, 12% of the Grade X 
student population and 8% of the Grade X parent population. 


IV. PROCESSING THE DATA 

After tabulating the results, the data were first 
processed to discover statistically significant differences 
in intergroup responses. The chi square test, as described 











: , . ... ■ .. . - ' ■ ‘ . ‘ x . 0„ ' 

c ; . 

* 










. 








' 




w 


r 

; . 






t . . , ,- 

* 

V,,.. 

* 

























w 


40 

2 

by Garrett was used to eliminate chance differences between 
groups, a method employed in the Harvard superintendency 
studies . The 1% level of confidence was adopted as indicat¬ 
ing sufficient lack of concensus to constitute a conflict 
for the purposes of this study. The frequency scores for 
each item were then converted to percentages of the total 
population to determine the sources of conflict. 

TABLE II 

QUESTIONNAIRE RETURNS 


School 

Pupils 

Parents 

Teachers 

Sup f ts, 

Western Canada 

65 

48 

25 

2 

Strathcona 

58 

30 

18 

2 

TOTAL 

123 

78 

43 

4 


The following method was used to indicate the degree 
of conflict. The frequencies of the groups on each side of 
the conflict were added together and expressed as a percent 
of the total population of those groups. The percentage 
disagreement between the two factions was then graded accord¬ 
ing to the following table: 

1. Major conflicts: 

First degree (most severe) conflict: 56$ to 70$ dis¬ 
agreement . 

Second degree conflict: 41$ to 55$ 

2. Minor conflicts: 

Third degree conflict: 26$ to 40$ 

Fourth degree (least severe) conflict:10$ to 25$ dis¬ 
agreement. 












« 

* 

, 















* 






* 





. 








, 

* 








. 










































41 


To illustrate this procedure, in Questionnaire state¬ 
ment no* 3, the percentage agreeing was: pupils—85, parents 
—92, teachers--91, and superintendents—25. The superin¬ 
tendent group is obviously the source of the conflict. Now 
to determine the degree of conflict the frequencies of 
pupils, parents and teachers, who represent one faction in 
the conflict, are added together. This total frequency of 
213 is then expressed as 87% of the total population of the 
faction, 244. The percentage of the other faction, repre¬ 
sented by the superintendents, was 25. Therefore the differ¬ 
ence is 87 - 25 or 62%. As this disagreement of 62% falls 
between 56% and 70% it is classed as a first degree conflict. 

Intra-group conflicts were determined by disregard¬ 
ing the "No Preference ff scores and converting the "Agree” 
and "Disagree" frequencies to percentages of those showing 
a preference. A significant conflict for the purposes of 
this study was defined as a difference of 20% or more with¬ 
in a reference group between the "Agree" percentage and the 
"Disagree" percentage. 

A four-step scale was again established to define the 
degree of conflict. Four conflict ratios were determined to 
be 50/50; 40/60; 30/70 and 20/80. Based on the majority 
opinion within a group, the degree of conflict was set as 
follows: 
































42 


i 


First degree: 

50$ - 

55$ 

(most severe 

conflict) 

Second degree: 

56$ - 

65$ 



Third degree: 

66$ - 

75$ 



Fourth degree: 

76$ - 

80$ 

(least severe conflict) 

In checking 

statement 19, 

for example, 

46 pupils 


agreed, 64 disagreed, and 13 indicated no preference. The 
majority opinion of those showing a preference was 58% in 
disagreement with the statement. As 58% falls between 56% 
and 65% the conflict within the pupil group over this state- 
ment was classed as a second degree conflict* 

An examination of the data of the pilot and main 
studies revealed that a large percentage of "No Preference" 
choices in any item usually resulted in the remainder of the 
group dividing fairly evenly between "Agree" and "Disagree". 
It was decided that in such instances there was really no 
strong preference either for or against the statement. On 
the basis of this, all items on which a third or more of a 
group had responded "No Preference" were discounted® 

Prom the point of view of the principal the superin¬ 
tendents, who hold a superordinate position in their ovm 
school systems, hardly constitute a group in the sense that 
parents, pupils and teachers do. In consideration of this, 
and because the superintendent population is so small, only 
50%, first degree conflicts were considered of significance 
for this group. 



- . ; . 

~ 

■ 

c t 

* ■ : ' ' -C { .« 

. 

, 






■ 

, 

C 



* 

■ 

• ■ - t 

t • 


; « • 

r 
















43 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1* Austin and Collins. "A Study of Attitudes Toward tJie 
High School Principalship", The Bulletin of the 
National Association of Secondary School Principals, 

XL, no. 216, p.108 

2. Garrett, H.E. Statistics in Psychology and Education . 

Longmans, Green and Co., 1953, p.254. 

3. Gross, Mason and McEachern, Explorations in Role Analysis. 

John Wiley and Sons, 1958, p.lll. 















































44 


CHAPTER V 

RESULTS OF THE RESEARCH 

The evidence of conflict in the role of the principal 
will be reported in three sections: evidence of significant 
conflict between alter groups; evidence of major conflict 
within alter groups; and evidence of both inter-group and 
intra-group conflicts in the same situation* 

I* INTER-GROUP C ONFLICTS 

Appendix II records the results obtained by the 
Questionnaire after the chi square test has eliminated 
those statements in which differences might be attributed 
to chance. Thirty-eight of the sixty statements, or 63% 
produced conflicts between groups beyond the 1% level of 
confidence* The results by sector are shown in Table III* 

TABLE III 

NUMBER OF STATEMENTS PRODUCING INTER-GROUP CONFLICT 


Sector 

Observed 

Conflict 

Expected 

Conflict 

Percent 

Conflict 

Student Behavior 

5 

IS 

4S 

Extra Curricular 

7 

9 

78 

Instructional 

8 

13 

62 

Organization 

8 

10 

80 

Personnel 

5 

9 

56 

Public Relations 

5 

7 

71 

TOTAL 

38 

60 

— 63 











■ * *. . 1 "V c: ■_*. v.. 



. 

■ 


. - 





, :*J ; .1,, .:r. ?■* .. .... * .0. ; • .' v. : ' ■■-■a . 

* 

, 

' 

\ ■ , ' 


. 


lv : .: 


-. .. .. .. 








. 



















. 



































































45 


The highest percentage of inter-group conflict is 
found in the sector dealing with school organization, 
closely followed by the extra curricular sector. The 
least conflict is evident in the student behavior sector. 

In Table IV are found the results recorded in Appen¬ 
dix II expressed as percentages of the total population. 

An analysis of this table reveals three patterns into which 
the inter-group conflicts fall. The first is a 1-3 pattern 
in which a single reference group differs from the majority 
opinion expressed by the other three groups. For conven¬ 
ience it will be termed a single-group category. In the 
second, or 2-2 pattern, the majority in two groups opposes 
the majority in the other two. This will be termed a 
paired-group category. In the third pattern the difference 
is one of degree between all groups with no particular one 
expressing an outstanding difference. This third pattern 
will be termed a four-step category. 

The results in Table IV are analyzed according to 
these three categories, considering each sector of the 
principal’s role in turn. At the same time the degree of 
conflict is described according to the four-point scale 
explained in the previous chapter. 

Student Behavior Inter-Group Conflict 

Figure 2 illustrates the inter-group conflicts found 







* 


. 

, 

< • ' - t 

. 









* 






















46 


TABLE IV 


INTER-GROUP CONFLICT PERCENTAGES 


' 


f Percentage 

Percentage 


Percentage 




e Agreeing 


Disagreeing 


No : 

Preference 

1 " 

£ co 


« - - ■ 

J 


02 




oi 




01 


j! ft 


02 

F^ 

# 


W 

u 

o 


W 

U 

• 

1 o 

4 

1 GQ 

-P 

0 

02 

0 

-P 

0 

01 

oi 

•p 

0 

01 



1 ft 

d 

X) 

ft 

ft 

d 

ft 

-P 

ft 

d 

ft 

-p 

$ o 

0X$ 

i ft 

0 

O 

»• 

ft 

0 

o 


•H 

0 

o 

«. 


■P Ef 

1 ft 

u 

cd 

ft 

ft 

u 

0 

ft 

Ph 

u 

0 

ft 

J CQ 

Hx! 


d 

0 

d 

d 

cd 

0 

d 

d 

0 

0 

d 

| 

d| 

1 ^ 

ft 

Eh 

CO 

ft 

ft 

EH 

m 

ft 

ft 

EH 

CQ 

l-P Fh 
t a o 
I 0 »H 

3: 

5 

83 

61 

92 

88 

91 

51 

25 

50 

14 

24 

8 

6 

7 

19 

50 

25 

3 

15 

0 

5 

2 

30 

25 

25 

| Td > 
| d 0 

6 

1 73 

87 

56 

50 

5 

10 

42 

0 

22 

3 

2 

50 

f +3 x} 

7! 

10 

26 

35 

0 

69 

69 

51 

50 

21 

5 

14 

50 

v IQ 0 

1 -fia 

101 

1 69 

90 

93 

100 

21 

12 

0 

0 

10 

1 

7 

0 


13 1 

I 57 

23 

5 

0 

29 

64 

93 

100 

14 

13 

2 

0 

i u 

i d 

ft 

14 

1 7 

14 

26 

75 

85 

65 

47 

0 

7 

21 

28 

25 

15! 

18 

12 

28 

0 

63 

79 

84 

100 

18 

9 

14 

0 

rj 

if: cd o 

16 

171 

t 28 

f 33 

62 

63 

75 

49 

27 

30 

25 

23 

12 

7 

0 

| Fh ‘H 
k -P Fh 
1 M U 

19 

2 

0 

54 

77 

91 

100 

12 

4 

7 

0 

181 

f 8 

9 

35 

0 

85 

72 

42 

50 

7 

19 

23 

50 

1 pq d 

i n 

19 : 

1 37 

77 

79 

100 

52 

21 

12 

0 

11 

3 

9 

0 

N 

i ^ 

231 

| 52 

72 

56 

50 

16 

21 

28 

25 

32 

8 

16 

25 

25! 

| 44 

74 

37 

75 

31 

19 

42 

0 

25 

6 

21 

25 

I.Sg 

261 

f 34 

78 

33 

100 

24 

8 

44 

0 

41 

14 

23 

0 

% -p 8 
1 o u 

| d CiO 

27 1 

28 i 

1 68 

92 

40 

100 

13 

4 

30 

0 

19 

4 

30 

0 

' 37 

37 

53 

25 

35 

53 

28 

25 

28 

10 

18 

50 

1 -P £ 

31 

72 

88 

65 

25 

9 

12 

21 

75 

20 

8 

14 

0 

. gPH 

32 1 

f 37 

71 

23 

75 

42 

23 

53 

25 

21 

6 

12 

0 

•H 

34 

i 74 

92 

42 

75 

12 

5 

47 

25 

14 

3 

12 

0 

1 d 

361 

:• 46 

47 

12 

0 

36 

37 

74 

100 

19 

15 

14 

0 

I 

37:' 

I 69 

88 

65 

75 

23 

6 

16 

0 

8 

5 

19 

25 

% 

1 

38 1 

1 46 

60 

86 

100 

46 

35 

2 

0 

8 

5 

12 

0 

1 0 
r N 

39 

I 54 

73 

79 

100 

31 

21 

12 

0 

15 

6 

9 

0 

12 

401 

1 40 

58 

26 

50 

40 

32 

70 

50 

20 

10 

5 

0 

| § 

1 ^ 

I J-i 

42 1 

1 11 

22 

5 

50 

54 

49 

84 

25 

36 

29 

12 

25 

43 i 

I 29 

46 

60 

75 

33 

33 

19 

25 

37 

21 

21 

0 

1° 

44 i 

1 21 

42 

51 

50 

68 

29 

19 

0 

11 

28 

30 

50 

1 * 

48 

* 63 

73 

44 

75 

6 

13 

28 

25 

32 

14 

28 

0 

1 d 

3 O 

§9 1 

1 20 

41 

23 

50 

41 

38 

26 

25 

39 

21 

51 

25 

| 0 ft 
| F-4 0 

i ® d 

50 1 

| 67 

87 

67 

100 

7 

5 

26 

0 

25 

8 

7 

0 

511 

■ 16 

42 

40 

100 

32 

24 

40 

0 

52 

33 

21 

0 

gift 

53? 

1 50 

73 

58 

0 

22 

15 

33 

100 

28 

12 

9 

0 

i d 

i o 

55? 

1 37 

21 

49 

50 

42 

72 

28 

50 

21 

8 

23 

0 

! O .H 

56 1 

1 43 

81 

84 

50 

41 

15 

2 

50 

15 

4 

14 

0 

j ft -P 
lift cd 

57 i 

| 13 

31 

28 

0 

46 

51 

35 

50 

41 

18 

37 

50 

I £ ft 

1 d 0 
f ft ft 

58l 

S 53 

50 

14 

0 

20 

32 

74 

75 

28 

18 

12 

25 

601 

1 57 

64 

19 

25 

18 

26 

51 

50 

25 

10 

30 

25 








Pupils: 123 Parents: 78 Teachers: 43 Sup’ts*: 



























































47 






Single Group Conflicts 





#10 


To 






#7 


I f Pupils 
m Parents 



Teachers 


Sup 1 ts * 


Vertical axis repre¬ 
sents percent agree¬ 
ment . 


Paired Group Four Step 

Conflict Conflict 


FIGURE 2 


STUDENT BEHAVIOR INTER-GROUP CONFLICT 


























































































































46 


i 


in this sector. Of the five items producing inter-group 
conflict, three may be classified as "single-group” conflicts; 
one as a "paired-group" conflict and one as a "four-step" 
conflict. In the "single-group" category three different 
groups in turn take a dissentient position. Only one member 
of the superintendent group agreed with a high percentage in 
the other groups that teachers should be given authority to 
exclude from classes any pupil whose behavior is objection¬ 
able. This is considered, by our criteria, as a second 
degree conflict. However, as another member of this small 
group checked the "No Preference" choice, it could be taken 
as an indication that the decision, as far as the superinten¬ 
dent group is concerned, would depend on circumstances. In 
this sector the "No Preference" choice was used by several 
respondents in this way, as indicated by their comments. 

Parents felt strongly that the principal should regu¬ 
larly check the classes of teachers weak in discipline, but only 
half of the superintendents and teachers and 60% of the 
pupils supported the practice, creating a third degree con¬ 
flict. Seventy percent of the students agreed that the 
principal should suspend from school those pupils who refuse 
to work in class or complete assignments, compared with a 
percentage of ninety-one who agreed in the other groups. 

This is a minor conflict of the fourth order. 








49 


Two conflicts are concerned with the extent to which 
a principal supports a teacher’s disciplinary actions. One 
is a fourth degree conflict in which parents and pupils feel 
more strongly than school personnel that such support should 
depend on the facts and circumstances. The other shows gen¬ 
eral agreement that such support should not be given under 
all circumstances, but there is a 55$ range in extent of 
agreement creating a ’four-step? 1 conflict of the third degree. 

Extra Curricular Inter-Group Conflict 

An examination of Figure 3 reveals the conflict be¬ 
tween groups in this sector of the questionnaire. Of the 
"single-group” conflicts, three are created by students and 
one each by superintendents and teachers. Second degree 
conflicts are indicated by the feeling of students that they 
should not be limited in the number of extra curricular act¬ 
ivities in which they participate, and that they should be 
free to manage authorized clubs in their own way. The stud¬ 
ent’s other disagreement, of the third order, is that the 
educational value of activities should determine their place 
on the extra curricular program. 

Sports leagues create the conflicts involving teachers 
and superintendents. The suggestion that pupils active in 
community leagues should not be eligible for interscholastic 
teams does not receive much support from any group, but 55$ 



' 

, 

, 

, . . 

. / ... 

* 

5 $ 

, 

f i 'i< ' -- : . ' 

- 

e ; 

* 

* • 

i • 

. 










I 



°7o 



% 



50 


% 





/o o 

lo- 

t>0 

40 

16 


Q Pupils 

[7TI Parents 
a Teachers 

[77 3up r ts. 

Vertical axis represents 
percent agreement 
with statements 


All Single Group Conflicts 


#17 


FIGURE 3 

EXTRA CURRICULAR INTER-GROUP CONFLICT 




































































































































51 


of the teachers create a minor, fourth degree conflict by 
agreeingo The superintendent-centered conflict shows a 
preference on the part of that group for house leagues over 
inter-scholastic leagues. The one "No Preference" vote may 
be a recognition of the present important status of inter¬ 
scholastic sports. The result is a first degree conflict. 

Minor conflicts of the "four-step" category are sug¬ 
gested by responses to statements 15 and 17. No superinten¬ 
dent agrees that athletic activities should be given more 
emphasis than cultural, or that pupils should be allowed to 
participate regardless of marks. Teachers give the most 
support in the first instance, pupils in the second. 

Instructional Program Inter-C-roup Conflicts 

There is an even division between "single-group" and 
"paired-group" conflicts in this sector as revealed by Fig. 4. 
In all four "paired-group" conflicts teachers and pupils are 
aligned against parents and superintendents. The subordin¬ 
ates (the pupils and teachers) appear to be apprehensive 
about principal supervision of classes while the superordin¬ 
ates (the parents and superintendents) show high agreement 
on its desirability. This produces second and third degree 
conflicts in the case of statements 26 and 27. The principal’s 
right to adjust a teacher’s marks when necessary and to set 
a homework policy which they must follow, also result in third 












, c V 

* 

„ ■ - : 

* 

; .. ’ i 

. 

t ■ 


, 

‘ ■ 

.... 

. 

- 







* 






-j 




» 


























52 


% 


% 



% 




Single G-roup Conflicts 






Paired Group Conflicts 

Vertical axis represents percent agreement on statements 
□ Pupils m Teachers 

tm Parents □ Sup* ts. 


FIGURE 4 


INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS 














































































































































55 


I 


degree conflicts between the two pairs of groups. 

Teachers are also involved in half of the "single- 
group" conflicts. These are minor conflicts in which teach¬ 
ers give the most support to having the principal set his 
own examination policy for Grades X and XI, and least sup¬ 
port to reporting to parents at least every two months. 

The other two conflicts in this sector are centered 
around the superintendent and parent groups. When only the 
superintendents feel strongly that percentage gradings should 
not be used, a second degree conflict is created with other 
groups. The parent-centered conflict can be discounted, 
being only of the fourth degree and on a matter not directly 
concerning them - coordination and development of courses. 

School Organization Inter-Group Conflicts 

Figure 5 shows that inter-group conflicts in this sec¬ 
tor of the principal’s role fall into all three categories. 
Pupils and superintendents are involved in "single-group" 
conflicts. In statement 44 pupils give the least support 
to class periods longer than 35 minutes, but the conflict is 
only of the fourth order. The superintendent-centered con¬ 
flict is also of a minor order, giving 50$ agreement to 
having all teachers instruct in at least one academic course. 

"Paired'grou#* conflicts, of which there are three, are 
also of a minor degree. Pupils and parents present a third 







. . 



- . . .• • 





- 









c 

< 

• 




„ - 


- 

. 

. 



V 


< 


c • •• 

* 

5 - - • 


■ 

i..-v '/3t- 




. 

* 













54 



Q Pupils 
[[~[~| Parents 
[EEJ Teachers 
Sup* ts. 


Vertical axis represents 
percent agreement on 
statements. 



Pour Step Conflicts 


% % 





Paired Group Conflicts 
FIGURF 5 


SCHOOL ORGANIZATION INT1R-GR0UP CONFLICT 
























































































































































































































55 


p 


degree conflict with teachers and superintendents through 
their desire to have pupil—parent preferences weighted 
more than staff judgment in approving courses* Pupils and 
teachers pair against parents and superintendents when they 
give least support to ability grouping and to the assignment 
of the most capable teachers to the most challenging classes* 
These are only fourth degree conflicts. 

The most serious conflicts, in degree, which are 
found in this sector are "four-step” conflicts. Here we 
find pupils and superintendents at opposite ends of the 
scale, with parents and teachers closer together in the 
center. The first two are the most significant as they 
deal with two extremes, the treatment of the gifted student 
and the unsuccessful student. The school is more desirous 
than the home to give preferential treatment to the former, 
and to limit the courses of the latter. Teachers and super¬ 
intendents give more support than the other groups to balanc¬ 
ing the teacher-load according to extra curricular respons¬ 
ibilities. These "four-step" conflicts are all of the 
second degree® 

When the number of statements producing conflict is 
expressed as a ratio of the number of statements in the 
sector, the School Organization sector has the highest ratio 
of inter-group conflicts. It also has the same number of 



. . . • ■ v. : •. — . 


»• 


. 

. 

, . ■ • j. ? : ' w *T j 1 * ' ' if. LB*t 'l ■ viv 

. 

. 


{ ' 

- : . . • ....... J .’ 1< • 











56 


p 


conflicts as the sector dealing with the instructional 
program. 

Teaching Personnel Inter-Group Gonflicts 

The lowest percentage of conflicting expectations 
appeared in this sector (see Figure 6). Consideration must 
he given to the fact that every reference group was not 
affected by all statements under this heading. Two conflicts 
however are of the first degree and are superintendent-centered. 
The first, 51, deals with the professional content of staff 
meetings. The superintendents give full support to the state¬ 
ment that most staff meetings should deal with professional 
rather than routine matters. The teachers, who are the only 
other group directly concerned, give only 40 °/o support to the 
statement. Statement 55 which reads, "The principal and his 
administrative assistants should make most decisions regard¬ 
ing school policies”, received no support from the superin¬ 
tendent group although half of the teachers and pupils and 
over 70 % of the parents agreed. 

A third degree conflict exists over confidential annual 
reports on teacher-effectiveness (no.48). It is in the "four- 
step" category with parents and superintendents giving most 
support to the idea and teachers least. 

Although "paired-group" conflicts exist in minor degree 
over statements 49 and 50, the basic conflict is between super¬ 
intendents and teachers, as the other groups are not directly 





. 









. 


, 

. • t c 

* 








*- 





- 

* 






* 

» 

•. ... . .. . ^ . . . ■ : ■- . 


















57 



Single Group Conflicts 






Paired Group Conflicts 
FIGURE 6 

TEACHING PERSONNEL INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS 






































































































































' 


















































58 




concerned* The superintendent group itself is divided over 
statement 49, giving special attention to key personnel, so 
the conflict can be discounted* In replying to statement 50, 
superintendents show more concern than teachers that the lat¬ 
ter should participate in all staff meeting planning* 

Public Relations Inter-Group Conflict 

This final sector produced two second degree and three 
third degree inter-group conflicts* As Figure 7 Illustrates, 
all may be classed in the tf paired-group n category* Parents 
and teachers have similar expectations that the principal 
should reject unsatisfactory notes from parents, and that 
they should exercise direct control over parent organizations* 
The former involves a second degree, and the latter a third 
degree conflict with superintendents and pupils. 

The other second degree conflict involves requiring 
teachers to attend Home and School meetings, which is sup¬ 
ported by pupils and parents more than by the other groups* 
Pupils and parents also give most support to taking complaints 
to the principal before going to the teacher and to having the 
principal write letters to the press in reply to unfavorable 
publicity regarding the school* These are third degree con¬ 
flicts with superintendent and teacher expectations* 



' 

'■ ' ! ' ■ ' < : 

. 

‘ 

, 

- 


* 

* 


■. - 

~ ' . 

■ 


* 




fi ■ 

, 

' ■ 

* 












I 



<K 


% 

loo 


&o\- 

t>o 

X° — 



#57 


All Paired Group Conflicts 


Vertical axis represents 
percent agreement. 


I | Pupils 
OP Parents 
H Teachers 
S3 Sup'ts. 


59 



lOO r 


I O 

lO 

40 

Z* 


#60 


FIGURE 7 

PUBLIC RELATIONS INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS 


xzzx 



















































































1 


60 

Summary of Inter-Proup Conflicts 

At the beginning of this chapter in Table III there 
was a summary of the number and percent of statements which 
produced significant inter-group conflicts in each sector. 
The greatest number of items resulting in conflict were in 
the organizational and instructional sectors. In the fol¬ 
lowing table the results are classified by category. 

TABLE V 

INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS BY SECTOR AND CATEGORY 


Sector Title 

Single-group 

Paired-group 

Four-step 

Total 

Student Behavior 

3 

1 

1 

5 

Extra Curricular 

5 

0 

2 

7 

Instructional 

4 

4 

0 

8 

Organization 

2 

3 

3 

8 

Personnel 

2 

3 

0 

5 

Public Relations 

0 

5 

0 

5 

TOTAL 

16 

16 

6 

38 


It will be noted that the total number of statements 
producing "single-group" conflicts, and the total number pro¬ 
ducing "paired-group" conflicts are equal, accounting for 84% 
of all conflicts. The other category of "four-step" conflicts 
accounts for only 16%. Most "single-group" conflicts are 
found in the extra curricular sector, followed by the sector 
devoted to the instructional program. Public relations pro¬ 
duced the most "paired-group" conflicts, again with the in¬ 
structional program second. Most "four-step" conflicts were 












' 

* 
















' 


. 

■ « 

t, 

. 

* 

* 

- . . « 

, . ■ . 


































61 


found in the school organization sector 0 

The number and category of conflicts in which each 
alter group was involved are shown in Table VI. The totals 

TABLE VI 

.ALTER GROUP CONFLICTS BY INTER-GROUP CATEGORY 


Category 

Pupils 

Parents 

Teachers 

Sup ? ts. 

TOTAL 

Single-group 

5 

2 

3 

6 

16 

Paired-group 

12 

7 

11 

0 

30 

Four-step 

7 

7 

7 

7 

28 

TOTAL 

24 

16 

21 

13 

74 


shown in this table are the number of statements in the 
questionnaire in which the expectations of each group are a 
major cause of conflict. Pupils are most Involved, account¬ 
ing for 34$ of the conflict, teachers next accounting for 
27$ and parents and superintendents following with 22$ and 
17$ respectively. 

A complete summary of conflicting expectations between 
groups is found in Table VII which shows the degree of con¬ 
flict in each category and sector. Table VIII locates these 
conflicts by questionnaire number. From these tables it is 
seen that 13$ of the contentious statements result in con¬ 
flicts of the first degree, 26$ of the second degree, 39$ of 
the third degree and 22$ of the fourth degree. If first and 
second degree conflicts are considered as major conflicts, 








. 


. 


, 

* 

< , .... "10 . 

, 


. 

* . - 

. * 















62 


TABLE VII 

NUMBER AND DEG-REE OF INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS BY CATEGORY 


Degree of Conflict 


Sector 

Category 

First 

Second 

Third 

Fourth 

TOTAL 

Student 

Single 

1 

0 

1 

1 

3 

Behavior 

'Paired 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

Step 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

Extra 

Single 

1 

2 

2 

0 

5 

Paired 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Currie• 

Step 

0 

0 

2 

0 

2 

Instruc¬ 

Single 

0 

1 

1 

2 

4 

Paired 

1 

2 

1 

0 

.4 

tion 

Step 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Organiz¬ 

Single 

Paired 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

3 

ation 

Step 

0 

5 

0 

O' 

3 

Person¬ 

Single 

2 

0 

0 

0 

2 

Paired 

0 

0 

1 

2 

3 

nel 

Step 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Public 

Single 

Paired 

0 

0 

0 

2 

0 

3 

0 

0 

0 

5 

Relation 

Step 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

TOTALS 

5 

10 

15 

8 

38 



























































Fourth Third Second First 


TABLE VIII 


63 


LOCATION OF INTER-GROUP CONFLICTS BY DEGREE,SECTOR 

AND CATEGORY 


Student Extra Instruc- 
Behavior Currie. tion 


Organ- Person- Public 
ization nel Relations 


u 

<D O 
0 bQ 
fn 0 
hQ -P 
0 cd 


1. 

#3 

#14 



# 51 

# 53 


2. 



#26 




3. 







1. 


113 
#19 

#31 




2. 

3. 



#27 

#32 

#38 #39 
#43 


#56 

#58 

1. 

#5 

#3.6 

#18 

#34 

#42 

#48 


2. 

#6 

#25 

#36 


#55 #57 
#60 

3. 

#7 

#17 
- #15 




1. 

#10 


#23 

#28 

#44 




2® 

3. 


#37 

#40 


#49 

#50 


# - statement number 
on questionnaire 


Category 1: Single-group conflict 
2: Paired-group conflict 
3; Four-step conflict 



























64 




and third and fourth degree as minor, the result is 39% major 
conflicts and 61% minor* 

Table IX analyzes the degree of conflict by sector and 
alter group* The figures in the table represent the number 
of statements in which each alter group is involved in con¬ 
flict. 

TABUS IX 

DEGREES OF INTER-GROUP CONFLICT BY ALTER GROUP AND SECTOR 


Sectors 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

VI 



Student 

Behavior 

Extra 

Currie 

Instrue 
* tion 

- Organiz 
at ion 

- Person¬ 
nel 

- Public 
Relations 

Degrees of 
Conflict 

Pupils 
! Parents 

Teachers 
Sup* ts. 

! Pupils 

Parents 
Teachers 
Sup* ts* 

Pupils 
Parents 
Teachers 
Sup*ts. 

Pupils 
Parents 
Teachers 
Sup 1 ts* 

Pupils 
Parents 
Teachers 
Sup*ts. 

Pupils 

Parents 

Teachers 

Sup*ts. 

3 

EH 

EH 

First 


1 



2 ' 


3 

Second 

1 

2 

1 11 

3 3 33 


1 21 

22 

Third 

1 £ 11 

3 2 2 2 

2 4 

111 

2 1 21 

2 3;l 

35 

Fourth 

2 1 

1 

111 

2 21 

1 1 


14 

TOTAL 

3 3 12 

5 2 3 3 

4 16 1 

6 4 6 4 

3 13 3 

3 5 2 0 

74 

Grand Total y 

13 

12 

20 

10 

10 


Percent 

12 

18 

16 

27 

13.5 

13.5 

100 


II. INTRA-GROUP C ONFLICTS 

The second type of conflict with which this study is 
concerned involves expectation inconsistencies within alter 
groups* Such conflicts were determined, as explained in 










































, 

* 

. 











. . 










- i . 








. 

* 

* 










•• 















. 










. V 






- 


- 


. 






























65 


I 


Chapter IV, by eliminating items which differ by less than 
20 % between "Agree” and "Disagree" responses, and also 
those items on which one-third or more of a group elected 
the "No Preference" choice. In the case of superintend¬ 
ents, only a 50—50 division is accepted as a conflict. 
Appendix III gives the results after this screening pro¬ 
cess, indicating the percentage in each group who agreed 
with a statement, the number in the group who showed a 
preference, and the number who showed no preference. 

On the criteria used, 54 of the 60 questionnaire 
statements [ 90 %) exhibited conflicts within one or more 
groups. The total number of all intra-group conflicts on 
the 60 statements is 106. Table X shows the distribution 
of these results by role sector. 

TABLE X 

EXTENT OF INTRA-GROUP CONFLICT BY SECTORS 


Nq. of conflicts 
per statement 

I 

SECTORS 
II III 

IV 

V 

VI 

TOTAL 


One... 

3 

3 

6 

1 

5 

2 

20 

37 

Two.. 

4 

4 

0 

6 

2 

2 

18 

33 

Three.. 

1 

2 

7 

1 

1 

2 

14 

26 

Four. 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

1 

2 

4 

Total statements 
producing conflict 

8 

9 

13 

9 

8 

7 

54 


Total no. conflicts 

14 

17 

27 

20 

12 

16 

106 


Percent conflicts 

per sector 

13 

16 

26 

19 

11 

15 

100 




































66 


On the basis of the statements used in the question¬ 
naire the third sector, dealing with the instructional pro¬ 
gram, had the largest number of statements producing intra¬ 
group conflicts, more than one-quarter of the total for the 
whole instrument* The sector with the lowest incidence of 
conflict dealt with teaching personnel, and the second low¬ 
est with student behavior* 

One-third of the contentious statements resulted in 
significant conflicts within two of the four alter groups, 
and over one-quarter in conflicts within three groups* 

Only two statements produced conflicts within all four 
groups* They were the statements numbered 40 and 55* They 
read, "The most capable teachers should be assigned to the 
most challenging classes, regardless of personal preference, 
mid !, Parents should take complaints to the principal before 
going to the teacher* n 

An analysis of this intra-group conflict by sector, 
alter group and degrees of conflict, will be found in Table 
SI* Twenty-two percent of the conflicts are shown to be 
first degree conflicts, 29% second degree, 52% third degree, 
and 17% fourth degree* Leaving out the superintendent group 
which is involved in only four significant conflicts. Table 
XII shows the distribution of degrees of conflict by alter 
group. If the results are divided Into major and minor 







J>' 

' v ; ' 5 




, 






- 




, 

' 

^ ^ ■ . . 

» 

t ' ■; ..’. ■ ' <;■ . 5 ; . t ~ '' v 

* 


. • . . . < • • ' ... . • 

•. .. 

. . 















67 


TABLE XI 

DEGREES OF INTRA-GROUP CONFLICT BY ALTER GROUP 


Sectors Alter Degrees 

Group First Second Third Fourth TOTAL 


Student 

Behavior 

Pupils 

Parents 

Teachers 

0 

0 

0 

1 

0 

3 

2 

2 

2 


3 

1 

0 

6 

3 

5 


Sup* ts. 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

Extra 

Pupils 

0 

3 

3 


1 

7 

Parents 

0 

2 

2 


2 

6 

Currie. 

Teachers 

2 

1 

1 


0 

4 


Sup 1 ts. 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

Instruc¬ 

Pupils 

2 

2 

3 


1 

8 

Parents 

3 

1 

2 


2 

8 

tional 

Teachers 

2 

2 

6 


1 

11 


Sup*ts. 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

Organiz¬ 

Pupils 

Parents 

2 

0 

2 

6 

1 

1 


1 

1 

6 

8 

ation 

Teachers 

0 

1 

2 


2 

5 


Sup*ts 

1 

0 

0 


0 

& 

Person¬ 

Pupils 

0 

1 

1 


0 

2 

Parents 

2 

0 

1 


0 

3 

nel 

Teachers 

2 

2 

2 


0 

6 


Sup 1 ts. 

1 

0 

0 


0 

1 

Public 

Pupils 

Parents 

3 

0 

0 

3 

1 

1 


1 

1 

5 

5 

Relation 

Teachers 

1 

1 

1 


1 

4 


Sup 1 ts. 

2 

0 

0 


0 

2 


TOTALS 

23 

31 

34 


18 

106 


TABLE XII 


SUMMARY OF INTRA-GROUP CONFLICT BY DEGREES 


Alter 

Group 

First 

Degree of 
Second 

Conflict 

Third 

Fourth 

TOTAL 

Pupils 

7 

9 

11 

7 

34 

Parents 

5 

13 

8 

7 

33 

Teachers 

7 

10 

14 

4 

35 

































































68 


i 


conflict categories, with first and second degree conflicts 
classed as major and third and fourth as minor, there is 
little difference between the groups in the extent and degree 
of their intra-group conflict, 

From Table XI we note that there are no first degree 
conflicts over the principal's handling of student behavior* 
The first degree conflicts in the extra curricular sector 
are found in the teacher group over questions 18 and 20* 

The first deals with the participation of community league 
players on interscholastic teams, and the second with com¬ 
pulsory attendance in extra curricular activities once a 
pupil has enrolled* 

The statements in the instructional program sector 
produced seven first degree conflicts, two in the student 
group, two in the parent group, and three in the teacher 
group. Pupil conflicts concern statements 28 and 32—the 
establishment of the school's own examination policy in 
Grades X and XI, and the principal's right to adjust teacher^' 
marks. The freedom of the principal to develop independent 
school policies (22) resulted in division in the parent group, 
as did the suggestion that the principal should only evaluate 
teachers in his own subject matter field (29). The first 
degree conflicts within the teacher group developed over 
statements 22, 29 and 30. It will be noted that the first 


' t 

( 

* 


















. ■ t e* 

. 

t 

t 

« 

' ... • 

* * 1 t : ' • 

- 

■ ;. I u :,v: , ’ ., 

* 

* 
















69 


two coincide with the parent conflicts* Statement 30 reads, 
"Each department in the school should establish its own 
standards of testing and marking*" 

Within the sector on school organization there are 
four conflicts of the first order* The pupil group are 
evenly divided over question 38, singling out the gifted 
for special attention, and also over statement 40, assigning 
the most capable teachers to the most challenging classes* 
There is a first degree conflict in the teacher group over 
assigning classes according to a teacher’s preference, gov¬ 
erned by seniority rights (41)* The superintendent conflict 
in this sector was concerned also with statement 40* 

There are two parent group, two teacher group, and 
one superintendent group conflicts of the first degree in 
the sector dealing with teaching personnel* All three 
groups are in conflict within themselves over statement 52, 
"Most staff meetings should be for single departments, 
rather than for the whole staff*" The other parent conflict 
of this degree concerns statement,49, preferential treatment 
for key personnel* The other teacher conflict deals again 
with staff meetings* This statement, 51, recommends that 
the meetings deal with professional rather than routine 
matters* 

In the last sector on public relations there are six 








. 

* ■' 

.. - , 

e • • *.*-> . ? • • ■ 

. :■ . . J. 

' 

* 

, 

• ... < t . " :.m. •• - 





* 

. 

. 

. 

. 











































70 


I 


conflicts of the first order. The superintendents are in¬ 
volved in two which also produce intra-group conflicts for 
students. That parents should take complaints to the prin¬ 
cipal before going to the teacher, and that parents 1 notes 
should be rejected by the principal if they do not give 
satisfactory explanations of pupil absences, are the two 
statements concerned. 

Both pupil and teacher groups are divided over the 
right of parents to have access to the principal at all 
times during the day, thus completing the total of six first 
degree intra-group conflicts in this sector and £4 in the 
total questionnaire. 

III. A COMPARISON OF INTER-GROUP AND INTRA-GROUP CONFLICTS 

It has already been noted that of the 60 questionnaire 
statements, 38 (63$) produced significant conflicts between 
alter groups and 54 (90$) produced significant conflicts 
within alter groups. With only one exception every state¬ 
ment which resulted in inter-group conflict resulted also in 
intra-group conflicts. As can readily be seen by the figures 
quoted, there are many instances of conflict within groups 
where there are no significant conflicts between groups. 

A comparison of Tables IX and XI reveals some inter¬ 
esting relationships between the inter-group and intra-group 
conflicts. The school organization sector produced the 


. 

■ 

. 

t 

, 

. 

- 

* 

t ■ 

* 











greatest number of conflicts between groups and the second 
greatest within.groups. Highest in number of intra-group 
conflicts was the instructional program sector which was 
third in inter-group conflicts. The student behavior 
sector resulted in the least number of inter-group conflicts 
and the second lowest number of significant conflicts with- 











- 




. 

. 

■ .... 




. 






























CHAPTER VI 


CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The use of the case study method of research made 
possible in this thesis the investigation of expectations 
towards many aspects of the principal’s role as held by 
four major alter groups• It necessitates, however, limiting 
the conclusions to the two schools and the particular popu¬ 
lations from which the samples were drawn. Because the 
questionnaire might have been composed of many other state¬ 
ments under each sector which could, presumably, have pro¬ 
duced a different set of responses, it is not possible to 
generalize beyond the actual statements used. However, the 
fact that the populations of all alter groups came from two 
different composite high schools in different cities, may 
prove helpful to another investigator in predicting condi¬ 
tions in other schools of this type. However, no attempt 
will be made to do so in this chapter. 

I. THE ORIGINAL HYPOTHESIS 

It was the hypothesis of this thesis that, with respect 
to many matters, common expectations do not exist, either be¬ 
tween or among the major alter groups, as to the role of the 
composite high school principal. The findings of this study 








• : . . ... -• ■■■ ... : . v ■ 

X 


. 



- . . 

< •; •• : . t . 

... •. . rn.a . ■’ 1 t . . : . 

. t 

t 

- 


.. ' . ^ 1 

t .. t 

• . .. < ; ... . \... , ..C ■ ... ' 1 1 ,u'.o .. .:. .o 






















73 


I 


support the hypothesis in the case of Western Canada and 
Strathcona Composite High Schools. Although this research 
has been limited to only six aspects of the principal’s role, 
and has presented for the consideration of four alter groups 
an average of only ten possible behaviors for each aspect, 

144 separate and significant conflicts have been uncovered. 

So far as the two schools are concerned, and for the 
sample populations reported, significant conflicts exist in 
and between all alter groups on the statements presented to 
them. In almost every case, where there is a conflict be¬ 
tween groups there is a significant conflict within one or 
more of the groups concerned. The possibility that such 
intra-group conflict represents a difference of opinion be¬ 
tween the two schools combined in the study was not invest¬ 
igated, but cannot be ruled out., Intra-group conflicts do 
not necessarily imply inter-group conflicts on the same 
issue, though in many cases this was so. 

In a fairly large proportion of the inter-group con¬ 
flicts two of the groups take a position in opposition to 
the other two. We find both teachers and pupils apprehen¬ 
sive of too much supervisory control by the principal al¬ 
though superintendents and parents have common expectations 
towards this function. Where individual, or what might be 
termed Tt democratic tt rights are concerned, pupils and parents 













stand together in defence against professional attitudes 
which would restrict freedom of choice. 

In an dqual number of situations individual groups 
are in conflict with majority opinion in all other groups. 

Many of these also involve individual rights. Teachers 
hold on to professional arid seniority rights and pupils 
desire the right to choose and direct extra curricular 
activities. On several issues there is general concensus 
but the wide spread in extent of agreement creates minor 
conflicts. Superintendents and teachers, in that order, 
are generally more ready to approve the wider definition of 
the principal’s role with its emphasis on a democratic lead- 
ership style than is the home. 

Of the statements which involve intra-group conflicts, 
more than 25$ dealt with some aspect of the instructional 
program, particularly over independent school standards and 
classroom supervision. Conflicts, of significance within as 
many as three groups, developed over one-quarter of the state¬ 
ments. No one reference group seems more susceptible to 
intra-group conflict than any other, either in degree or 
extent. Pupils and teachers however, who are most directly 
affected by the day-to-day operation of the school, are the 
alter groups most often involved in inter-group conflicts. 

The intensity of conflict does not show any great variation 
between groups. 


* 

* 

f : 

* 

= ■ , t 

t • 

~ ' • . • • .. ' e - 

4 •. , '• ' ' 

. • • ■ .. 1 : c *.> - . ~ t V, r J. ' * - '■ 

^ . .. ~: 

. 

, 













75 


II. SOME DETAILED CONCLUSIONS 

A recapitulation of the findings, sector by sector, 
produces some detailed conclusions of interest. The first, 
is that there is a lack of conflicting expectations over the 
principal’s role in relation to student behavior. Not only 
is there a high degree of concensus, but there is strong 
support for both principals and teachers in dealing with 
discipline cases. This may be the result of a current wave 
of public opinion in favor of tightening school discipline, 
or it may be support for a traditional sector of the prin¬ 
cipal’s role. There is the possibility also that the school, 
administration has directed its efforts towards establishing 
a concensus of expectations on this subject. 

The extra curricular conflicts reflect the growing 
independence of high school pupils who desire the right to 
choose and direct their own athletic, cultural and social 
activities® Conflicting values and educational philosophies 
may be at the root of teacher disagreement over sports leagues® 

The statements in the instructional program sector 
of the study reflect the changing emphasis on the principal’s 
role in the modern school. They served to uncover one of the 
most contentious areas confronting the principal. Much of 
the conflict is due to different rates of progress or readi¬ 
ness to understand the new concepts® While superintendents 



. 

<■ - • . 

4 ' . ■. r f ; 

. 

* 

' ' . . ' ■ : ■ 

. 5 ■ 

. 


* 

. . . 

' 

- 











76 


give full support to an established marking policy which 
uses letter gradings based on the normal curve, the other 
groups, including many teachers, indicated a preference for 
the old percentage gradings. Unreadiness to accept the new 
supervisory role of the principal has already been referred 
to# Individual standards set by teachers, departments, or 
schools are still preferred to uniform standards established 
by cooperative effort. 

Democratic rights enter into the conflict situations 
found in the school organization sector. The definition of 
democracy in education as the same opportunity for all, 
rather than equal opportunity for all, seems to be the feasic 
conflict. Conflicts over "streaming” of pupils and special 
consideration for the gifted would be examples of this. 
Superintendents and teachers are more ready than the other 
groups to accept the "equality of opportunity" definition— 
at least in so far as students are concerned. In their own 
relationships teachers still lean towards the same treatment 
for all, governed by seniority rights. Democratic rights in 
the form of individual rights would seem to account for the 
desire of pupils and parents to have their preferences weigh¬ 
ted more than the professional judgment of the staff in de¬ 
termining pupils 1 courses. 

Staff meeting planning and content produced conflicts 
between the teacher group and the superintendent group. Here 







it would seem to be a matter of readiness to accept the pro¬ 
fessional responsibilities which many teachers want and 
which the superintendents feel the teachers should assume# 
Conflict within the teacher group might indicate that some 
have already achieved this state of readiness while others 
have not. A minority in this group also feel unfavorably 
towards confidential annual reports on their effectiveness# 

Superintendents do not support principal direction of 
Home and School activities , but other groups seem to feel a 
necessity for this. Pupils and parents would like to see a 
principal take up active defence of the school against un¬ 
favorable publicity, but the superintendents do not agree 
with the wisdom of this form of action# 

III. SOME GENERAL CONCLUSIONS 

This thesis has examined the highest status position 
of leadership in two of Alberta’s most complex high schools# 
It has proceeded from the statement made earlier that the 
"pattern of all behavioral expectations focussed on a status 
defines a role". It has found that, in large measure, the 
definition of the principal’s role by many alter groups in¬ 
cludes many inconsistent, incompatible, and mutually exclus¬ 
ive expectations. It has also been suggested that these are 
caused by a lack of concensus on the definition of democracy 




, 










. 

« 

, 






n 

, 

S- 

; : . t . ■ • • . - , ■: ■ r.:S.o 


* 















78 


1 


in education and administration, the existence of varying 
degrees of readiness to accept newer concepts of education, 
and the need to balance the rights and preferences of laymen 
against professionally-based opinion. 

In spite of all the expectations of these alter groups, 
the principal’s own conception of his role is the determining 
factor. It is this conception which defines his role behavior 
and it is this behavior which has a strong influence on the 
modification of alter group expectations* However, though 
the role incumbent may change the expectations of the alter 
groups, the definition of his role, according to the role 
theorists, is still the product of all alter group expecta¬ 
tions* It can never be defined by the principal alone* 

This points to the important conclusion that a major 
task of the composite high school principal is to harmonize 
and unify the alter group expectations towards his role. It 
Is possible that through awareness of the underlying conflicts 
a well-conducted personnel and public relations program can 
materially reduce this problem and enable the principal to 
more effectively guide his school towards its goals* 

IV* REC OMMENDM) IONS 

This research has revealed several areas which are 
recommended for further study* These will be stated as 

problems: 







79 


1® To. what extent does a principal influence the expecta¬ 
tions of major alter groups towards his role? 

2. To what extent are teachers and pupils in the high 

school ready for democratic administrative procedures? 

3® What is the effectiveness of the principals supervis¬ 
ory role in the high school? 

4® What is the pattern of public relations in the high 
school? 

5. What type of in-service training program would resolve 

major conflicts involving the teacher group? 

6. In what types of situations are subordinate groups 

(pupils and teachers) in conflict with superordinate 
groups (parents and superintendents) in the school 
situation? 

7. How do principal perceptions of his role approximate 

alter group perceptions? 

8® How does a principal’s role performance as viewed by 
major alter groups compare with their expectations? 









81 


APPENDIX I 
QUESTIONNAIRE 

With the approval of the Superintendent of Schools and your 
Principal, you are invited to assist in a study of Composite 
High School policy and practice. Would you kindly complete 
the following questionnaire and return unsigned to your high 
school principal? Your careful consideration of this form, 
and its prompt return will be greatly appreciated. 


Please check your position: PARENT PUPIL 


TEACHER 


Instructions for marking the Questionnaire 

1. If you AGREE with a statement, place a check in the FIRST column, 

2. If you DISAGREE with it, place a check in the SECOND column. 

3. If you have NO PREFERENCE , place a check in the THIRD column. 


I. STUDENT BEHAVIOR 


DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF 


1. The principal should exclude from gym and 
classes those students who habitually re¬ 
fuse to comply with regulations regarding 

proper dress . ) ( ) { ) 

2. The principal should not expect all teach¬ 
ers to share supervision responsibility in 

halls and grounds .•••«••••••«•( 3 { } { } 

3. Teachers should be given authority to ex¬ 

clude from classes any pupil whose behav¬ 
ior is objectionable • ) ( ) { ) 


4. Teachers should be given authority to ex¬ 
clude from classes any pupil continually 
neglecting assignments.( 


5. The principal should regularly check class¬ 
es of teachers weak in discipline, exerting 
his personal influence { 


( ) ( 


6. Whether or not a principal supports a teach¬ 
er’s disciplinary action should depend on 
facts and circumstances } 


( ) ( ) 


7. A principal should support a teacher’s dis¬ 
ciplinary action under all circumstances .(){){) 

















X 















82 


DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF. 


8. The principal should suspend from school 
any pupil repeatedly put out of classes 

by teachers...( 

9. In classroom discipline matters, the prin¬ 

cipal should serve as a court of appeal 
for pupils . ( 


( ) ( ) 

( ) ( ) 


10. The principal should suspend from school 

pupils who refuse to work in class or 
complete assignments . . • o . • • . • • ( 

11. The principal should suspend from school 

any pupil guilty of repeated truancy 0 * ( 


( ) 


12. The principal should suspend from school 
any pupil guilty of delinquent behavior, 

such as vandalism } ( ) ( ) 


II. EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES 
13. Students in quthorized clubs should be free 


to decide their own activities without 
staff control.. ( 

14. Athletic leagues between schools should be 
discouraged in favor of leagues within 
schools.. ( 


15. Athletic activities should be given more 

time and emphasis than cultural activities^ 


( ) ( ) 
( ) { ) 


16. The educational value of an extra curric¬ 
ular activity should determine whether or 
not it is approved .•••••••••**( 

17. Pupils should not be allowed to particip¬ 
ate in all extra curricular activities 
regardless of their marks ••«•••••( 


) ( 5 

) ( ) 


18. Pupils active in community leagues should 
not be eligible for interscholastic teams.( 


3 


19. Pupils should be limited in the number of 
activities in which they may participate. 
















83 


DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF. 


20. Once a pupil enrolls in an activity his 

attendance should be compulsory.( ) ( 

21. Extra curricular activities should never 

be permitted to interrupt the regular 
instructional program.. . ( ) ( 


( ) 

( ) 


III. THE INSTRUCTIONAL PROGRAM 

22. Each principal should be free to develope 
his school policies independently of other 

city high schools ..( ) ( 

23. Committees of teachers, rather than the 

principal, should decide all matters of 
coordination and development of courses . { ) ( 

24. Individual teachers should be free to 

teach as they see fit without having to 
coordinate with others •••••••••.( ) ( 

25. The principal should insist on teachers 

adhering to a school policy in assigning 
homework . ••••••••••••( ) { 

26. The principal’s most important job is to 

supervise instruction, rather than do office 
wonk. ( ) { 

27. The principal should visit classes regul¬ 
arly to determine the quality of teaching 

and learning ... . ) { 

28. In Grades X and XI the principal should 
establish his own examination policy for 

his school .. ......( ) { 

29. The principal should advise and evaluate 

teachers only in his own special subject 
fields . . . ........( ) 

30. Each department in the school should es¬ 

tablish its own standards of testing and 
marking . •••••••••.••( } ( 


) ( 

) ( 

) ( 


) c 


) ( } 


( ) ( ) 

























c 









84 


DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF. 

31* All marks for tests and reports should 

be on a percentage basis.( ) ( ) ( ) 

22. The principal should adjust a teacher’s 

marks if he considers it necessary . . , t ) ( ) ( ) 

22. Academic courses such as English should 

be weighted more than non-academic courses 

in assessing a pupil’s general achievement( ) ( ) { ) 

24. Reports of pupil progress should be sent 

to parents at least every two months * , ( 1 ( } { ) 

IV. SCHOOL ORGANIZATION 

25. Grade X pupils should be streamed into 

academic, commercial, or general groups. ()()() 

26. Pupil-parent preferences should be weight¬ 
ed more than staff judgment in deciding 

students’ courses ) ( ) { ) 

27. Classes should be so organized that pupils 

are separated according to ability ♦ . . ( } ( ) { ) 

28. Gifted pupils should be singled out for 

special attention ) ( ) ( ) 

29. A student should not be allowed to enroll 
in a course when his record indicates 

little chance of success in it ..... ( ) { ) { ) 

40. The most capable teachers should be assig¬ 

ned to the most challenging classes, re¬ 
gardless of personal preference. ••'••( ) { } ( ) 

41. A teacher’s preference, governed by sen¬ 
iority rights, should be the basis of 

assigning classes } { } { ) 

42. All teachers, regardless of specializa¬ 
tion, should teach at least one academic 

course.( ) { } { ) 

42. Teachers carrying the heaviest extra 
curricular load should be given the 
lightest teaching load ) ( } { ) 
















85 

DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF. 

44* The timetable should be constructed with 

periods longer than thirty-five minutes. .()()() 

V. TEACHING PERSONNEL 

45. The principal should have authority to 

select his staff. ..( ) ( ) ( ) 

46. Department heads should have authority to 

recommend staff appointments and transfers! _)()() 

47. The principal should evaluate the perform¬ 

ance of teachers for promotion and trans¬ 
fer purposes...( ) ( ) ( ) 

48. The principal should submit to his super¬ 
intendent annual confidential reports on 

his teachers’ effectiveness } ( ) { ) 

49. Key personnel on the staff should be given 

special attention by the principal . . . .( ) ( ) { ) 

50. The staff should share all staff meeting 

planning ................ ®( ) ( ) ( ) 

51. Most staff meetings should deal with pro¬ 
fessional rather than with routine matters! ) { ! ! } 

52. Most staff meetings should be for single 

departments rather than for the whole staff! ) { ) ( ) 

53. The principal and his administrative assist¬ 
ants should make most decisions regarding 

school policies. .. ....( ) ( ) ( 

VI. PUBLIC RELATIONS 

54. Parents should have access to the principal 

at all times during the school day. . • • .( } ( ) ( 

55. Parents should take complaints to the prin¬ 
cipal before going to the teacher .....{ ) ( ) { 

56. Principals should reject notes from parents 
which don’t give satisfactory explanations 

for pupil absences.* ! } ( 3 ( 




















I 


86 


DIS- NO 
AGREE AGREE PREF. 


57. Principals should exercise direct con¬ 

trol over the type and extent of parent 
organization activities.. ( ) ( ) ( ) 

58. Principals should require staff members 

to attend most Home and School meetings. ( ) ( ) ( ) 

59. Principals should expect staff members 

to participate in Home and School pro¬ 
grams when requested ) ( ) ( ) 

60. The principal should write letters to 

the press in reply to unfavorable pub¬ 
licity concerning his school . 


()()() 














57 


APPENDIX II 


INTER-GROUP CONFLICT FREQUENCIES 




Number 

Agreeing 


Number 

)isagreeing 

Number 

No Preference 

n 

C0 



CO 

• 

• 


CO 

d 

• 


0 

u 

• 

T 

Ph 


0 

p 

CO 

m 

C0 

p 

0 

CO 

w 

P 

0 

0 


o 

d 

H 

d 

p 

p 

rH 

d 

d 

p 

H 

d 

d 

P 


Eh 

^ 0) 

•H 

0 


•» 

•H 

0 

o 

«• 

•H 

0 

o 

*■ 

I 

o 

0d 

Pi 

u 

Oh 

Oh 

Ph 

d 

0 

Oh 

Oh 

d 

0 

Oh 

I 

pq 

p d 

d 

0 

d 

d 

d 

cd 

0 

d 

d 

0 

0 

d 

1 

IT 

CQ 

H 1 

PM 

PM 

rn 

CQ 

Ph 

Ph 

Eh 

CO 

PM 

PM 

EH 

CO 

ft 

P u 
H r> 

3 

102 

72 

39 

1 

17 

16 

3 

2 

4 

0 

1 

1 

• 

0 *H 

5 

75 

69 

22 

2 

30 

5 

8 

1 

18 

4 

13 

1 

£ 

d 0 

6 

90 

68 

24 

2 

6 

8 

18 

0 

27 

2 

1 

2 

-H 

p d 

7 

12 

20 

15 

0 

85 

54 

22 

2 

26 

4 

6 

2 

j Oh 

d 

PQ 

10 

85 

70 

40 

4 

26 

9 

0 

0 

12 

1 

3 

0 

| $ 

?M 

13 

70 

18 

2 

0 

36 

50 

40 

4 

17 

10 

1 

0 

l « 

0 

14 

9 

11 

11 

3 

105 

51 

20 

0 

9 

16 

12 

1 

i .. 

cd d 

15 

22 

9 

1 

0 

78 

62 

35 

4 

23 

7 

6 

0 

* 0 

£h o 
P .«H 

16 

34 

48 

27 

3 

60 

21 

13 

1 

28 

9 

3 

0 

! 8 

M JM 

53 Cj 

17 

41 

15 

1 

0 

67 

60 

39 

4 

15 

3 

3 

0 

13 

rH M 

d 

18 

10 

7 

15 

0 

105 

56 

8 

2 

8 

15 

10 

2 

$ 

o 

19 

46 

60 

34 

4 

64 

16 

5 

0 

13 

2 

4 

0 

£ 

rH 

cd 

2# 

64 

56 

24 

2 

20 

16 

12 

1 

39 

6 

7 

1 

' 

d 

25 

54 

58 

16 

3 

38 

15 

18 

0 

31 

5 

9 

1 

! ® 

o 

26 

42 

61 

14 

4 

30 

6 

19 

0 

51 

11 

10 

0 

o 

p § 
O Phi 

27 

84 

72 

17 

4 

16 

3 

13 

0 

23 

3 

13 

0 

0 

d t*0 

28 

46 

29 

23 

1 

43 

41 

12 

1 

34 

8 

8 

2 

■g 

d O 
P ?M 

31 

88 

63 

28 

1 

11 

9 

9 

3 

24 

6 

6 

0 

§ 

2 ^ 

32 

45 

55 

10 

3 

52 

18 

28 

1 

26 

5 

5 

0 

9 

H 

34 

91 

72 

18 

3 

15 

4 

24 

1 

17 

2 

5 

0 

| Ph 

d 

36 

56 

37 

5 

0 

44 

29 

32 

4 

23 

12 

6 

0 


o 

37 

85 

69 

28 

3 

28 

5 

7 

0 

10 

4 

8 

1 

to 

p 

38 

57 

47 

37 

4 

56 

27 

1 

0 

10 

4 

5 

0 

C\3 

i 

cd 

rHi N 

39 

67 

57 

34 

4 

38 

15 

5 

0 

18 

5 

4 

0 

i 1 

O -H 

o d 

40 

49 

45 

11 

2 

49 

25 

30 

2 

25 

8 

2 

0 

0 

rH 

d § 

42 

13 

17 

2 

2 

66 

38 

36 

1 

44 

23 

5 

1 

•H 

I Oj 

o tiO 
03 d 

43 

36 

36 

26 

3 

41 

26 

8 

1 

46 

16 

9 

0 

1 r-H 

d 

O 

44 

26 

33 

22 

2 

84 

23 

8 

0 

13 

22 

13 

2 

1 P4 

! 

48 

77 

57 

19 

3 

7 

10 

12 

1 

39 

11 

12 

0 

1 

d 

O 

49 

25 

32 

10 

2 

50 

30 

11 

1 

48 

16 

22 

1 


CO H 
d 0 

50 

83 

68 

29 

4 

9 

4 

11 

0 

31 

6 

3 

0 

| 

0 d 

51 

20 

33 

17 

4 

39 

19 

17 

0 

64 

26 

9 

0 

I 

PM 

53 

61 

57 

25 

0 

27 

12 

14 

4 

35 

9 

4 

0 

1 ■ - 

d 

o o 

55 

45 

16 

21 

2 

52 

56 

12 

2 

26 

6 

10 

0 

h 

♦H »<H 

56 

53 

63 

36 

2 

51 

12 

1 

2 

19 

3 

6 

0 


H P 
d 0 

57 

16 

24 

12 

0 

56 

40 

15 

2 

51 

14 

16 

2 


d H 

D-i 0 

58 

65 

39 

6 

0 

25 

25 

32 

3 

34 

14 

5 

1 


ri ^ 

PS 

60 

70 

50 

8 

1 

22 

20 

22 

2 

31 

8 

13 

1 












































88 


APPENDIX III 


INTRA-GROUP CONFLICT DATA 

j~. . . .. .. '■ - ■ «.-.- - .t 


1 

Pupils 

0 

Parents 

Teachers 

Sup'ts. 



— 1 — "* 1 * ■ © 1 

o 






-rv — 



- nr ■■ 



o 

o a 

JjD 

GO 

oo 


o 

O O 


o 

o o 

co 


MxJ £ 

a 0 

a 

xid 

ad 

•pm 

-d d 

d d 

d 

xj d 

dd 

ft 


•P d -P 0 

d 

-PH 

-P0 

0 

d d 

-p © 

0 

-PH 

■P 0 

® 

o 

P- 

d *H *H d 

ft 0 

a© 

•Hd 

ftp 

0*H 

•H d 

ft d 

d® 

•H d 

ft d 

EH 

d a 

0 0^0 

Oft 

0® 

£? 0 

O0 

O 0 

£© 

O 0 

00 

£ ® 

O ® 

O 

0 rC 

a © ft 

0 

Od 

ft 

ft 

d 0 

qn 

ft 

od 

ft 

ft 

W 

P E 

u d • © 

•d 

UbO 

• 0 

• 0 

0d 

• 0 

• 0 

U'oQ 

• 0 

• 0 

CO 

H - 

0 m o u 

O ft 

®cd 

Od 

od 

ft W) 

Od 

O d 

©od 

O d 

Od 


C 

ft ft 

ft 

ft 

ft ft 

ftft 

cd 

ftft 

ft ft 

ft 

ft ft 

ftft 


2 

27 95 

28 

32 

65 

13 

33 

36 

7 





4 

78 115 

8 










d 

5 

71 105 

18 




73 

30 

12 




-P o 

d *H 

6 






57 

42 

1 




® J> 
t-j crt 

7 



27 

74 

4 

40 

37 

6 




3 Xj 

8 

75 104 

19 

78 

74 

4 







-p 0 

CO pq 

9 

79 108 

15 




39 

38 

5 





10 

77 111 

12 











13 

66 106 

17 

26 

68 

10 








14 






35 

31 

12 




S-i 

15 

22 100 

23 










3 

16 

36 94 

29 

70 

69 

9 

68 

40 

3 




cd iH 
d d 

17 

38 108 

15 

20 

75 

3 







+3 o 
K *H 

18 






45 

33 

10 




P3 d 

19 

42 110 

13 

79 

76 

2 







d 

d 

20 

70 106 

17 

63 

71 

7 

49 

37 

6 




O 

21 

75 108 

15 

64 

42 

1 








22 

59 95 

28 

51 

68 

10 

69 

36 

7 





23 

76 84 

39 

78 

72 

6 

67 

36 

7 




H 

cd 

24 

25 108 

15 










d 

25 

59 92 

31 

79 

73 

5 

47 

34 

9 



i 

•h d 

26 






42 

33 

10 



i 

+3 CD 
O d 

27 






57 

30 

13 



! 

d & 

28 

52 89 

34 

41 

70 

8 

66 

35 

8 




d O 
-P d 

29 



46 

61 

16 







2 pm 

30 

71 100 

24 

48 

69 

9 

72 

39 

4 




H 

31 






76 

37 

6 





32 

46 97 

26 

75 

73 

5 

26 

38 

5 





33 

70 97 

26 

66 

74 

4 

69 

35 

8 





34 






47 

38 

5 





36 

56 100 

23 

56 

66 

12 







a 

o 

37 

75 113 

10 




80 

35 

8 




•H 

38 

50 113 

10 

64 

74 

4 







■§ 

39 

64 105 

18 

78 

73 

5 







i—fl •r-3 

40 

50 98 

25 

64 

70 

8 

27 

41 

2 

50 

4 

0 

g 5 

41 



44 

61 

17 

46 

37 

6 




x3 t>C 

42 



31 

55 

25 







O d 
CO O 

43 



58 

62 

16 

76 

34 

9 





44 

24 110 

13 

59 

56 

22 

73 

30 

13 





































89 


m 


APPENDIX III (continued) 





Pupils 

Parents 

Teachers 

Sup 

f ts« 





0 

0 


0 

0 


0 

0 


0 

0 



-p 

O 

oo 

-pp 

0O 

oo 

-p 

o 

o o 

-p 

o 

OO 

02 


-Pd 

00 

00 

00 

-P0 

00 

0 

.00 

0 0 

0 

00 

00 

0 

0 

00 

+30 

0 

00 

•H0 

0 

+30 

-P0 

0 

+ 3 © 

-P 0 

0 

o 

3 0 

0 ^ 

•H0 

00 

03 

£0 

<00 

03 

•H0 

00 

03 

•H0 

00 

P 

0rQ 

O0 

£0 

O 0 

00 

0 

O 0 

00 

£0 

O 0 

00 

£0 

O 0 

o 

P 3 

00 

0 

0 

00 

<0 

0 

O0 

0 

0 

O0 

0 

0 

© 

H 3 

00 

.0 

• 0 

ft0 

O0 

• 0 

00 

• 0 

• 0 

00 

• 0 

• 0 


a 

ft?30 

Q0 

Q0 

tJD 

1ZJ0 

O0 

0bO 

O0 

O0 

©t*0 

O0 

O0 



0 

Sft 

ftft 

0 

ft 

ft ft 

(00 

ft ft 

3 ft 

ft«tf 

ftft ftft 


45 

65 

89 

34 

65 

63 

15 








46 







74 

38 

5 




1 —1 
tiO 0 

48 







61 

31 

12 




g 3 

49 




52 

62 

16 







•h 0 

0 o 

50 







73 

40 

3 




O 02 

cd 0 

51 







50 

34 

9 




0 0 

52 




53 

55 

23 

45 

33 

10 

50 

4 

0 

Eh ft 

53 

69 

88 

35 




64 

39 

4 





54 

51 

100 

23 

37 

71 

7 

51 

39 

4 




02 

55 

46 

97 

26 

22 

72 

6 

64 

33 

10 

50 

4 

0 

d 
o o 

56 

51 

104 

19 







50 

4 

0 

•H «H 

H -P 

57 




38 

64 

14 







rQ 0 

- i 

58 

82 

90 

34 

61 

64 

14 







— > «1 
ft <)> 

59 







78 

37 

6 




ft 

60 

76 

92 

31 

71 

70 

8 

27 

30 

13 










































































