



@x mm 
mumum 



UNIVERSITY 

OF 

ALBERTA 
PRINTING DEPT. 































THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE ROLE OF THE PROVINCIALLY APPOINTED SUPERINTENDENT 
OF SCHOOLS IN LARGER UNITS OF ADMINISTRATION 
IN CANADA 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 


by 


CECIL PATRICK COLLINS 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


March 31, 195S 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/roleofprovincialOOcoll 






ABSTRACT 


During the past one hundred and fifty years school 
systems in Canada have changed from church to local to prov- 
incially dominated systems. With each change the need for more 
and better supervision has placed greater emphasis on the 
position of the superintendent. The problem in this thesis is 
concerned with the changes which the introduction and develop¬ 
ment of the larger units of administration have had on the role 
of the superintendent. The question was, TT To what extent is 
there role consensus and role conflict between the formal 
expectations as expressed in law and the actual behavior as 
expressed by the superintendent?” 

Data for the legal role were obtained from school acts, 
annual reports of departments of education, unpublished dis¬ 
sertations and many secondary sources. Data on the actual 
behavior were gathered from the superintendents of schools in 
larger units through questionnaire and interview. Further data 
on both aspects of the role were obtained through interviews 
with deputy ministers, chief superintendents of schools, and 
directors of senior branches in the three provinces of British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. 

The field of role analysis in educational administration 
in Canada is virtually unexplored and, consequently, conclusions 
in this investigation are subject to review and reconsider¬ 
ation in the light of further research. With this qualification 
in mind the following conclusions are presented: 


. 

By 


. 

? 























C 




. 






- 










' • r 




C < 












< * 




















1. In his legal role, the superintendent is expected to be a 
line officer of the Department of Education and a staff officer 
of the board of trustees, while in his actual behavior the 
superintendent sees himself as both line and staff officer of 
both the Department of Education and the board of trustees. 

2. In the larger units of administration many superintendents 
are particularly concerned about the lack of definition of lines 
of authority. The problems inherent in the relationship between 
the superintendent and the board of trustees or their employees 
are related to the conflict between the de jure expectations 
and de facto behavior. 

3. Within the frame of reference of the leadership role the 
superintendent is attempting to resolve the potential role 
conflicts between his position and counter positions in the 
Department of Education and in the larger unit of administration. 
4* Resolution of the major conflicts which have arisen between 
de jure expectations and de facto behavior depend in part, at 
least, on decisions to be made in relation to three possibilities 

(a) the application of sanctions necessary to bring 
actual behavior into conformity with legal expectations 

(b) local employment of the superintendents by boards 
of trustees 

(c) legal definition of the actual behavior of super¬ 
intendents in terms of leadership with formal recognition given 
to the right of the superintendent to act on his own initiative. 


■* 

' 

. 

* 

- 

* 



* 




. 
























ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


My indebtedness to the superintendents and inspectors 
of schools in all provinces in Canada, and particularly to 
those in larger units of administration is apparent. To 
the Deputy Ministers, Chief Superintendents of Schools, and 
other senior officials of the Departments of Education I 
owe special thanks for assistance in distributing and 
collecting the questionnaires and for information supplied 
during interviews. The material to be found in the study 
could not have been obtained without their generous co¬ 
operation. 

My gratitude to the Faculty of Education can be 
appreciated only by those who have had the pleasure and 
privilege of pursuing advanced work under their guidance and 
encouragement. To Dr. A. W. Reeves, Chairman of the Division 
of Educational Administration, Dr. J. H. Andrews, Dr. H. T. 
Coutts, Dean of the Faculty of Education, Dr. R. L. James, 
and Dr. R. S. MacArthur, special indebtedness is gratefully 
acknowledged. 




















c ' 

- 

c . • . '' [ ' c ' • 




. 

. 

c «■*«.»! 

< 3 


. 









TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION . 1 

The Problem. 4 

Statement of the problem .••••••.. 4 

Delimitation of the problem . 4 

Definition of Terms.* . 6 

Larger units of administration ...... 6 

Local district board . 6 

Superintendent of schools . 7 

Power . 7 

Authority . 7 

Function . 12 

Administrative . 13 

Supervision . ...... 14 

Advice . 13 

Sources of Data .. 16 

Instruments for collecting data. 17 

II. ORGANIZATION OF THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM .... 22 

Stage I: Paternalism. 24 

Lower Canada (Quebec) 23 

Upper Canada (Ontario) .......... 27 

The Maritime provinces . .. 2£ 




































vi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Western Canada . 29 

British Columbia . 31 

Summary of developments in Stage I . . . 31 

Stage II: Development of Agencies 

of Local Control. 32 

The local school district . 3S 

Summary of Stage II . .. 3$ 

Stage III: Centralization of Authority . 39 

Central control in other provinces . . . 42 

Summary of Stage III.. 44 

Stage IV: Larger Units of School 

Administration .. 45 

Early developments in establishing 

larger units of administration 4$ 

British Columbia . 50 

Alberta.. 52 

Saskatchewan .. 55 

Nova Scotia. 5& 

New Brunswick .. 59 

Summary of Stage IV. 61 

III. STRUCTURE AND AUTHORITY .. 67 

Structure.. 67 

The Canadian model .. 6& 
































vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Larger units of administration . 72 

Alberta. 73 

Boards of trustees... 76 

Local boards of trustees.. . 77 

Saskatchewan . 7$ 

Boards of trustees. Si 

Local boards of trustees. S2 

British Columbia . S3 

Larger units of administration . S4 

Local administration ........... S6 

The Eastern Zone... S9 

New Brunswick . ...... 90 

Nova Scotia. 91 

Summary. 94 

Authority. 97 

British North America Act of 1S67 .... 97 

Focal points of power in education .... 99 

Minister of Education.. . 100 

The Deputy Minister of Education. 102 

The Department of Education ....... 102 

Boards of trustees. 104 

Summary. 106 






















. 

























viii 


CHAPTER PAGE 

IV. THE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS . . 112 

Organization . 113 

Historical development . 114 

Stage I .117 

Upper Canada.117 

Lower Canada.120 

Maritimes .121 

Western provinces . 122 

Summary .123 

Stage II.125 

Stage III.128 

Conditions of appointment ..131 

Area of responsibility . ..132 

Duties and responsibilities ........ 134 

V. SAMPLE AND METHODOLOGY.147 

Questionnaire . 14& 

Interviews. 149 

Reliability. 152 

Validity.153 

VI. THE SUPERINTENDENT AS A LINE AND STAFF OFFICER 158 

Balance of power. 160 

British Columbia.. . 163 

Sources of authority . ...... 166 



































ix 

CHAPTER PAGE 

The Department of Education. 167 

Boards of trustees. 16$ 

Own initiative. 171 

Functions. 172 

Advisory function.. ... 173 

The supervisory function.. . 174 

The administrative function ........ 176 

Summary . 176 

Alberta ................. 17$ 

Sources of Authority ..... . 179 

The Department of Education. 179 

The board of trustees ........... 1$2 

Functions ....... . 1$3 

The advisory function . 1$4 

The supervisory function ......... 1$5 

The administrative function ........ 1$6 

Summary .. 1$6 

Saskatchewan. 1$9 

Sources of authority ... ........ 190 

Functions . 191 

The Eastern Zone. 193 

Chapter Summary . 193 






































X 


CHAPTER PAGE 

VII. THE ACTUAL ROLE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT .... 201 

Actual School practice . 201 

Categories of activities . 202 

Functions . 203 

Instruction . ..... 204 

The teacher and classroom instruction . . 204 

The pupil . . 20$ 

In-service education . 209 

Adult education. 211 

Special classes . 213 

Management. 214 

Instructional management ........ 213 

Personnel management . .... 219 

Business management . 223 

School Community Relations . 22$ 

Summary ... . ...... 232 

VIII. DE JURE AND DE FACTO ROLES OF THE 

SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS . 237 

Role Consensus . . 23$ 

Relationships among superintendent of 
schools, department of education, and 

board of trustees. . 23$ 

Functions . .. 241 






































. 

.. 




















xi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Role Conflict. 245 

Sources of authority . 246 

Functions . 249 

The concept of leadership. 251 

Consensus between theory and practice 
in the leadership role of the 

superintendent. 251 

Summary . 252 

IX. SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND FURTHER RESEARCH . . 257 

Summary . 257 

Historical background . 257 

The problem . ...... 25$ 

The legal role . . .. 259 

The actual role. . 260 

Conclusions ..... . 262 

Line and staff officers .. . 262 

Balance of power. 262 

Leadership. 263 

Alternatives . 263 

Further Research. 265 

APPENDIX. 267 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 305 












































LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Distribution of Questionnaire and Respondents . . IS 

II. Selected Characteristics of Various Provincial 

Departments of Education . 70 

III. Systems of Publically Operated Schools in the 

Provinces of Canada . 71 

IV. Distribution of Questionnaires in the Pilot 

Study by Provinces ... . . 152 

APPENDIX B 

V. Experience of Superintendents . 279 

VI. Number of Pupils in Superintendency ....... 2$0 

VII. Number of Classrooms in Superintendency . 281 

VIH. Number of Special Supervisors in Superintendency 282 

IX. Summary of Rank Scores from Questionnaire by 

Province: Functions . .. 283 

X. Summary of Rank Scores from Questionnaire by 

Province: Sources of Authority . 284 

XI. Summary of Rank Scores from Legal Sources by 

Provinces .285 

XII. Percentage Distribution of Rank Scores from 

Interviews by Province.286 





























xiii 

TABLE PAGE 

XIII. Distribution of Responses Obtained During 

Interviews by Per cent. 2$7 

XIV. Consensus on Categories of Activities: On 

Percentage Distribution . 2&9 

XV. Summary of Rank Scores, British Columbia .... 291 

XVI. Summary of Rank Scores, Alberta. 292 

XVII. Summary of Rank Scores, Saskatchewan. 293 

XVIII. Summary of Rank Scores, Nova Scotia . 294 

XIX. Summary of Rank Scores, New Brunswick. 295 

XX. Data From Questionnaires, British Columbia . . • 296 

XXI. Data From Questionnaires, Alberta. 29$ 

XXII. Data From Questionnaires, Saskatchewan. 300 

APPENDIX C 

XXIII. Units of Administration and the School Inspector 

and His Work . 303 
















t 



' 












LIST OF CHARTS 


CHART PAGE 

I. Relationships Established by Statute and 
Regulation Between (a) Superintendent 

and Department.138 

II. Relationships Established by Statute and 

Regulation Between (b) Superintendent and 
the Board of Trustees of a Larger Unit 

of Administration.139 

III. Duties and Responsibilities of the Superintendent 
As Assigned by the School Act and Regulations 
In the Following Areas of the Educational 

Program ..... . ... 140 










LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Interna and Externa in Education. 62 

2. Structure of the Department of 

Education, Alberta, 1936 74 

3. Structure of the Department of 

Education, Alberta, 1936 75 

4. Structure of the Department of 

Education, Saskatchewan, 1943 ........ 79 

5. Structure of the Department of 

Education, Saskatchewan, 1956 ........ SO 

6. Structure of the Department of 

Education, British Columbia 1956 $5 

7. Structure of Large Municipal 

Districts, British Columbia ........ S7 

S. Structure of Large Rural Districts, 

British Columbia . ....... SS 

9. Structure of the Department of 

Education, New Brunswick, 1956 92 


10. Administrative and Financial Structure of 

Rural Schools in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia . 93 

11. Sources of Authority, British Columbia .... 177 





















t 
















xv i 

FIGURE PAGE 

12. Distribution of Functions, British Columbia . . . 177 

13. Sources of Authority, Alberta. 1$S 

14. Distribution of Functions, Alberta . 1SS 

15. Sources of Authority, Saskatchewan . 192 

16. Distribution of Functions, Saskatchewan ..... 192 

17. Summary of Percentage Distribution of Sources of 

Authority by Province . 197 

IS. Summary of Percentage Distribution of Functions 

by Province . ......... 198 

























- 

- 




' 

















; ®s 




















CHAPTER I 


INTRODUCTION 


The development of the larger unit of school admin¬ 
istration as the basic unit of school organization came 
about as the result of many diverse pressures. One of the 
most important causes was the depreciation of land values 
during the depression of the 1930 T s. The consequent loss 
in revenues from local taxation reduced many small school 
districts to the point of bankruptcy. Another cause was 
the range in inequalities of educational opportunity which 
existed between one rural district and another and between 
rural areas and cities. The larger unit of administration 
was brought into being to increase the assessment base and 
thereby reduce the inequalities (in the ability to pay) 
between one area and another. It was hoped that a broader 
and more stable financial base would make possible an educ¬ 
ational program more suited to the needs of the students in 
each community. At the same time it was recognized that an 
effective type of leadership also was essential if the 
potentialities of this new organization were to be exploited 
fully. The responsibility for providing this leadership at 

the community level was given to the superintendent of schools. 





■ 


- ' 









■ 























* 

- 


















2 


The departments of education expected their repres¬ 
entatives in the superintendencies and inspectorates to 
provide the leadership and direction necessary for the 
successful operation and exploitation of the new organ¬ 
ization. They felt that active public support for education 
was one of the key factors in successful operation and 
expected the superintendents to take the leadership in 
obtaining it at the local level. The boards of trustees of 
the unit depended upon the superintendent for advice and 
direction in helping them to meet the problems which arose. 
Within the community itself the change from the small dis¬ 
trict to the larger unit affected almost every person in one 
way or another. Aspects of education which had been accepted 
as part of every day living suddenly became matters of per¬ 
sonal concern. The people, too, turned to the superinten- 

2 

dent for answers to many of their questions. 

In adjusting his role to these new and different 
expectations the superintendent became the focal point of 
the new and developing organization. His status changed 
from that of an occupant of a government position to that 
of educational leader and expert. At the superintendency 
level the department of education, the board of trustees, 
the teaching staff and the people looked to the superinten¬ 
dent to lead the way to a better educational future. 










































* 

. 


















< 












The role of the provincially-appointed superintendent 
of schools in larger units of administration has been a matter 
of concern to many groups: the Canadian Education Association, 
the departments of education, the boards of trustees,and the 
superintendents themselves. The Project in Educational 
Leadership, sponsored jointly by the Canadian Education 
Association, the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, and the University 
of Alberta placed initial emphasis on T? the functioning of 
the superintendent in larger area school systems.™ Through¬ 
out the Project the main emphasis has been upon the focal 
position of the superintendent and upon the role as he defines 
it. 

In 1951 the Canadian Education Association sponsored 
the Project in Educational Leadership because of concern over 
the lack of common definition of the role of the superinten¬ 
dent.^ In 1953 Dr. G. E. Flower, Director of the Project, 
expressed the feeling that a Canadian approach to supervision 
and administration was beginning to develop, but was as yet 
unarticulated.^ This inquiry is concerned with the situa¬ 
tion in 1956. The origin of the problem lies in the behavior 
expected of the superintendent by law in comparison with the 
actual interpretation of the role by the superintendent 
himself as he adapts his behavior in accordance with the 
expectations of those individuals and groups with whom he 


works 





■ 








* 

- 





c 


C 






















' C ' . . . . . .. ..la,. 

! ' 

„ 





























4 


THE PROBLEM 


Statement of the Problem 

The role of the provincially appointed superintendent 
of schools in larger units of administration in Canada has 
many aspects. The present investigation is concerned with 
three major ones: 

(1) The legal role of the superintendent . What are the 
sources of authority established by statute and regulation 
which empower him to act? What functions does the law assign 
to the office of the superintendent? To what extent are 
these expectations the same in all provinces with larger units 
of administration, and to what extent do they differ? 

(2) The actual role of the superintendent as seen by himself . 
What sources of authority does the superintendent recognize 
and accept as determinants of his behavior, and to what 
extent? What use does he make of the functions assigned to 
the office of superintendent by law and tradition? 

(3) The relationships between the de jure and de facto roles 

of the superintendent . What implications for leadership 
reside in the similarities and in the apparent differences 
between the two roles? 

Delimitation of the Problem 


The field of school administration in Canada is 












* 


















$ 








. 

V 




















: * ' 





















. 









5 


largely undefined and unexplored. Thus, any insights into 
the place, function, and role of the superintendent in 
Canadian education must of necessity be held tentatively 
and subject to revision as further research provides more 
information. 

Geographically, only those provinces which have 
established large units of school administration are included. 
These provinces are found in two zones. In the first zone 
are the provinces of British Columbia, Alberta, and Sask¬ 
atchewan. In all of these provinces the larger unit of 
administration has been in operation for more than ten years. 

In the second zone are found the provinces of New 
Brunswick and Nova Scotia. In the latter province the larger 
unit of administration was formally introduced in January, 
1956. Prior to this date Nova Scotia and New Brunswick 
had county units for fiscal purposes only. While much of 
the control of the finances such as the levying of taxes 
and the distribution of monies rested with the county board, 
responsibilities such as the employment of staff, the care 
and maintenance of buildings and premises, and the provision 
of instructional materials remained with the small local 
district board. Since the investigation is concerned with 
the situation as of July, 1956, only a survey of conditions 
in these two provinces is included* 






Although the interrelationships between superinten¬ 
dent, principal, board of trustees, board members, teaching 
staff, and business manager of school units have an import¬ 
ant bearing on the role of the superintendent, their inclusion 
would make this investigation unmanageable. Each of these 
relationships, along with many others, needs extensive and 
intensive investigation before the modern mosaic of Canad¬ 
ian education will become clear. 

DEFINITION OF TEEMS 

Larger Unit of Administration is the designation given to an 
area, established by provincial statute, that replaces or 
includes under a central board a large number of formerly 
autonomous and contiguous school districts or sections. In 
British Columbia the larger unit of school administration is 
known as the school district, in Alberta as the school div¬ 
ision, in Saskatchewan as the school unit, and in Nova Scotia 
and New Brunswick as the county unit. 

Local District Board is the designation given to the trad¬ 
itional small school district or section. In all of the 
provinces, except British Columbia, it is retained as part of 
the larger unit structure. The boards of these districts are 


known as local district boards. 









7 


Superintendent of Schools is a designation which is synon¬ 
ymous with inspector. The term "supervisor” as used in 
Prince Edward Island and Newfoundland has a similar con¬ 
notation. 

Power 

Power supports the fundamental order of society and 
the social organization within it, wherever there is 
order. Power stands behind every association and 
sustains its structure. Without power there is no 
order J 

Social power, as it manifests itself in social instit¬ 
utions, is often defined as a kind of power. Some of the 
kinds of power which are commonly designated and categorized 
are economic power, moral power, military power, and pol¬ 
itical power. The education institution in Canada is a 
government agency and, as such, is organized on the basis 
of political power. 

In a democracy political power resides in the rights 

conferred by the people on its representatives sitting as a 

corporate body to order the relations among individuals, 

between individuals and groups, and among groups in accord- 

$ 

ance with politically acceptable aims and objectives. J 
Authority 

Bierstedt views power as always latent—never manifest. 
Authority, Bierstedt defines as "the institutionalized right 
















<• 





. 

r r K ' c ' 













































to employ power, not power itself."9 Within this frame of 
reference then, power is associated with authority when the 
behavior of individuals or group is ordered. When behavior 
is not ordered or affected there is no authority. Thus 
power can be present with no authority. At the same time, 
authority does not depend exclusively upon power. 

Simon defines authority as the power to make decisions 

10 

which guide the actions of others. Authority, however, is 
a double-edged sword. On one side is the superordinate who 
has the power to make decisions and to command performance; 
on the other is the subordinate who accepts. The full 
exercise of authority depends upon the role expectations of 
the superordinate that the subordinate will obey, and the 
perception and acceptance of the role by the subordinate. If 
the subordinate refuses to obey, there is no authority. 

Dubin states that "when authority is exercised, the 
subordinate holds in abeyance his own critical faculties for 
choosing between alternatives and uses the formal criterion 
of the receipt of a command or signal as his basis for choice. tT -^ 
A person, then, has authority to the degree that he can 
obtain the suspension of the critical faculties for choosing 
between alternatives and influence them to act in accord¬ 


ance with his own intentions 




9 


The behavior of others, however, may be influenced 

by means other than the use of power. Knowledge, ability, 

skill and competence in one person can make his influence 

so persuasive that others suspend their right to make 

decisions and accept those of the person with these superior 

12 

qualities as the basis for their choice. In this, author¬ 
ity depends upon influence and prestige, not power. So, 
as there may be power without authority, there may be also 
authority without power. 

Education, as a government agency, is organized as a 
bureaucracy with a hierarchy of status positions arranged in 
a pyramid on the basis of scalar ranking. Authority is 
delegated to each position in terms of the specialized 
functions it is to perform and the level of command it is 
to exercise. Each status position in the hierarchy is 
defined and circumscribed by a set of rules and regulations 
which establish its relationship"and interaction with all 
other ranks in the structure. Lines of authority are the 
channels of communication which proceed vertically from the 
superordinate through the subordinate positions to the 
bottom of the hierarchical pyramid and horizontally from one 
status position to others which occupy the same rank. Per¬ 
sonnel who occupy these status positions are known as line 
officers .^ As such they exercise the authority delegated 








, 


< 





* 

, < ' : 




• 
















, 










































10 


to the office through channels of communication which have 
been reserved to the office. 

As in all large bureaucracies, increasing complexity 
in the educational system has necessitated more and more 
functional specialization and the need for expert and spec¬ 
ialized advice from staff officers. The staff officer 
occupies no status position within the hierarchy, but he is 
associated with a status office* * Thus the status of the 

staff officer is determined in part by the institutionalized 

14 

authority of the line officer with whom he works. But, it 
is also determined in part by the personal authority he 
wields as an expert and his ability to influence others 
through his superior knowledge and ability. 

At the superintendency level the minister of education 
has conferred authority on the superintendent as a line officer 
to administer the laws and regulations of the department of 
education and to supervise the interna of education. Along 
with this the superintendent is expected TT to attend all board 
meetings" and "to advise the board on all matters within their 
jurisdiction".^ Thus, the superintendent of schools is to 
act as a line officer in his relations with the department of 

education and as a staff officer in association with the 


board of trustees. 







11 


The second major authority holder at the superinten¬ 
dency level is the board of trustees. Contained in all 
school acts in all the provinces of Canada are sections which 
set out in considerable detail the duties and responsibilities 
which the board of trustees shall assume. In the main these 
sections define the amount of authority the board has in 
order to make decisions with respect to the externa of 
education. In addition to defining the areas in which the 
board of trustees shall have authority, other sections des¬ 
cribe in some detail those in which discretionary authority 

is assigned for the purpose of taking initiatory action, or 

l & 

making independent decisions. 

With the introduction of the larger units of admin¬ 
istration the superintendent was attached to the board of 
trustees as a staff officer and thus placed in close assoc¬ 
iation with the authority vested in it as a corporate body. 
With the acquiescence of the superordinate authority the 
superintendent of schools accepts and uses authority which 
has its source in the board, as well as the designated and 
discretionary authority which is assigned to the office. 

The superintendent of schools in a larger unit of 
administration thus has three sources of authority which he 
can accept or utilize for the purpose of adjusting his be- 



1 







. 











: 









* 















12 


havior to the role expectations of the alter groups in each 
situation. The first source of authority is found in depart¬ 
mental regulations and statutes and are identified as depart ¬ 
mental directives throughout the dissertation; the second is 
found in board minutes and policy statements which are 
identified as board directives ; and the third is in the 
initiatory authority of the office of the superintendent to 
make independent decisions in all those activities not 
specifically controlled by board or department directives and 
is identified as acting on his own initiative . 

Function as it is used throughout this thesis has a meaning 
more closely related to that in biology than in other fields. 
In biology the term "function” is understood to refer to 
the vital or organic process considered in the way in which 
it contributes to the maintenance of the organism. The func¬ 
tional value of the superintendent in the organization is 
determined by the specific contribution he makes to the goal¬ 
seeking activities of the central and local authorities. 

Both look upon the functional competence of the superintendent 
as essential to the maintenance and improvement of the educ¬ 
ational system as a whole. 


The functions with which we are concerned are like 










13 


those of the nervous system, (including the brain) in 
relation to the rest of the body. Like the nervous system 
they exist to maintain the bodily system of the structure by 
directing those actions which are necessary for more effect¬ 
ive adjustment to the environment. Since the elements of the 
structure are interrelated and interdependent, functions also 
are interrelated and interdependent. However, they are sub¬ 
ject to specialization, and thus are identifiable in operation. 

By tradition and law the functions ascribed to the 
office of superintendent of schools are administrative, super¬ 
visory and advisory. 

Administrative : a law-administering function. In this area 
the superintendent as a line officer is held responsible for 
administering the law as set forth by statute or board reg¬ 
ulation. In this sense inspection and reporting is part of 
the administrative function. 

The superintendent as an administrator is an agent of 
the department of education and the board of trustees. He 
is selected for the position by the department of education 
because of professional competence and long years of train¬ 
ing and experience in the field of education. On the basis 
of this background he is expected to administer the laws of 
the province and to make intelligent decisions based upon an 









































' 
















■ 



















14 


accurate knowledge of the statutes and regulations. As an 
administrator the superintendent is responsible to the depart¬ 
ment for the productivity of invested capital. He is required 
to measure the general progress toward the attainment of 
objectives, to evaluate, to inspect, and to report to the 
authorities senior to him. Administration is the impersonal 
process of ensuring the functioning of an organization hav¬ 
ing more or less fixed objectives with a view to precise and 
predictable results. 

Supervision : 

Supervision is a co-operative function in which the 
supervisor is part of the process as leader, guide, and 
perhaps at times director. Supervision is concerned with the 
personal qualities of the individual. As a supervisor the 
superintendent is concerned with guiding and counselling 
individuals toward professional improvement and development. 

As such, the goals are of primary importance. 

The goals to be achieved are those of the individual 
and those of the organization. As a line officer and the 
senior official of the Department of Education in the area, 
the superintendent has the responsibility for supervising 


others who have power delegated to them through the minister. 




'• • •. •E/O r; J3 

- 


£ 


. 


* 













. 
































* 


* 


* 




















15 

In this sense the superintendent advises and guides the 
teachers and the board of trustees in order that effective 
attainment of the goals of the organization may be achieved. 

He works with the teachers as individuals to assist them in 
the attainment of personal goals and to integrate their 
objectives with those of the organization. Since both the 
supervisor and the individuals are closely associated in 
working towards both individual and organizational goals the 
interaction is a co-operative one in which both assume 
responsibility for the end product * 

Advice : 

The third function of the superintendent has been the 

last to be recognized as a vital aspect of his work. Only 

since the implementation of the larger units of administration 

has the advisory aspect emerged with sufficient specialization 

to be distinguished from supervision. 

Advice is either asked for, or given, on the basis of 

knowledge, experience, or competence of the adviser. In no 

17 

case is the recipient under any obligation to accept it. 

If he does, the responsibility for the end product is his 
alone. By law the superintendent is to advise the board in 
the administration and operation of the school unit. As the 








16 

educational leader in the area, the advice of the superinten¬ 
dent should have an important bearing on the policies and 
actions of the board. The place accorded the superinten¬ 
dent in the community and the recognition of his influence as 
leader depends to an important extent on the quality of the 
advice and the proof of it in practice. 

SOURCES OF DATA 


The facts for the study of the legal role of the 

superintendent have been obtained mainly from the school acts 

and published regulations of the provinces and the annual 

reports of the departments of education. The reports of the 

advisory committees to the CEA-Kellogg Project in Educational 

Leadership and the reports from the n short courses 11 and 

conferences have provided excellent background material for 

1 $ 

both the legal and actual roles of the superintendent. 

Doctoral dissertations on the administrative organization in 
the educational systems of British Columbia, Alberta, and 
Saskatchewan and some of the attendant problems such as 
finance, superintendent-board relationships, curriculum and 
local district administration have provided valuable insights. 

Information on the actual role of the superintendent 
has been obtained from two groups of people. The chitf 


( 








. 































































' 




- 












17 


superintendents of schools in the provinces of British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan were interviewed to dis¬ 
cover what they expected of the superintendents. Information 
from practicing superintendents in both the western and eastern 
zones was obtained through the use of questionnaires and 
interviews. 

Instruments for Collecting Data 

The Questionnaire was developed for the purpose of discover¬ 
ing the main areas of activity of the superintendent, the 
distribution and emphasis placed on his three major functions 

and the recognition given the sources of authority as sources 

19 

for action in each of the main areas. 

Distribution 

The questionnaire with accompanying manual was sent to 
all superintendents of larger units of administration in the 
western and eastern zones. The following table (I) summarises 
the distribution of the questionnaires and the replies received. 











TABLE I 


DISTRIBUTION OF QUESTIONNAIRE AND RESPONDENTS 



B.C. 

Alta. 

Sask. 

N.S. 

N.B. 

1. No. of Supts. on staff 

49 

57 

59 

14 

13 

2. No. of Supts. in L.U.A.s' a ~ 

42 

53 

53 

14 

13 

3. No. of replies possible 

40 x 

53 

53 

10* 

13 

4. No. of replies received 

25 

33 

53 

6 

9 

5. Non-respondents interviewed 

3 

5 

0 

1 

0 

6. Per cent of response 

70 

30 

100 

70 

70 

7. No. of Supts. interviewed 

19 

20 

24 

2 

3 


aLarger Units of Administration. 
x One person died; one was moved during the term. 
^Four men were seriously ill during the year and not 
able to reply. 


Interviews 

Interviews were held with officials in the departments 
of education and with practicing superintendents for the pur¬ 
pose of supplementing the information gleaned from the 
questionnaires. 


Procedure 


Two interview forms were developed, one to act as a 

20 

guide when interviewing chief superintendents of schools, 

2 ‘ 

and the other when interviewing practicing superintendents. 





















' 





■ 






19 


Notes were not taken during the interviews unless 
some information of special significance was given. How¬ 
ever, other information was recorded immediately after the 
interview was completed. 

Distribution 

The CEA Short Course in Educational Leadership, held 
in Edmonton during May, 1957, provided the opportunity for 
interviewing sixty-five superintendents representing all the 
provinces in Canada. Information obtained from super¬ 
intendents from provinces with no larger units of admin¬ 
istration such as Ontario provided valuable background 
material for the thesis. 

Outline of Procedure 

The inquiry into the legal role emphasizes the inter¬ 
relationships of the position with others in the formal 
organization and the specialized functions and level of 
command which distinguishes it. The inquiry into the actual 
behavior places the emphasis on role definition by the 
superintendent himself. 

In Chapter II the focus of attention will be on the 
historical development of the school system and the adjust¬ 
ments which are made to the external social environment. 


a Except duebee. 











20 

In Chapter III the main concern will be with the 
structure and lines of authority which were developed to 
direct and control behavior and activities for the attain¬ 
ment of the goals. 

In Chapter IV particular attention will be paid to 
the development of the office of the superintendent and the 
professional expectations of the position incumbent. 

In Chapter V the instruments and methods used for 
collecting data on the actual behavior of the superintendent 
will be discussed. 

In Chapter VI the focus of attention will be on a mac¬ 
roscopic examination of the actual role with emphasis on 
the significance placed upon the sources of authority. 

In Chapter VII the focus of attention will be on a 
microscopic examination of the actual role with emphasis on 
the functional aspects of behavior. 

In Chapter VIII the de facto behavior will be compared 
with the de jure expectations* 

In Chapter IX a summary of the investigation, the 
conclusions, and the areas in which further research is 
needed will be discussed. 






. 



















. - 

* 




* 

c 




FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER I 


^ tT A Project in Educational Leadership”, Canadian 
Education , March, 1952, pp. 9-10. 

2 Ibid., p. 10. 

^Ibid., p. $. 

4 Ibid . 

^G. E. Flower, Tt Some Problems of the Superintendency 
in Canada”, Report of the CEA-Kellogg Pilot Short Course, 

May 19-June 5, 1953, Canadian Education , March, 1953, p. 16. 

^Larger units of school administration were introduced 
into Alberta beginning in 1936; Saskatchewan in 1945, and 
British Columbia in 1946. 

7 

Robert Dubin, Human Relations in Administration 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice flair, Inc., 1951), p. 17*2. 

a 

R. M. Dawson, The Government of Canada (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1954), P* 24 ff. 

^Dubin, ££. cit . 

^Ibid . p. 1 & 8 . 

^ Ibid . 

12 

J.B. Sears, Nature of Administration (New York: 

McGraw Hill Book Company, 1950), p. 276 ff. 

^■^Ibid., p. 114. 

1 4 Ibid .. p. 115. 

^ Statutes . Alberta, Chap. 80, Secs., 173-210. 

Statutes , Saskatchewan, Chap. 170, Secs., 51-52. 

Statutes , Nova Scotia, Chap. 7&, Secs. 55-59. 

British Columbia, Manual of Regulations , Council of 
Public Instruction. 

l6lbid. 

17 


Dubin, op. cit ., p. 116. 
































< 






- 





t 


c 


5 


( ‘ 




; 






■ 
























FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER I (continued) 


Reports of the CEA Kellogg Course in Educational 
Leadership , 1953, 1954, 1955, 1956, 1957, prepared for sub¬ 
mission to the Canadian Education Association. 


"^Appendix it, 

Appendix A. 

21 

Appendix A. 


Samples 1, and 2. 
Sample 3• 

Sample 4. 










CHAPTER II 


ORGANIZATION OF THE EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 

In this dissertation organization is considered as 
the dynamic quality within a structure by which functions 
are allocated, integrated, and co-ordinated for the attain¬ 
ment of common goals. 

An organization comes into being (1) when there are 
persons able to communicate with each other (2) who 
are willing to contribute actions (3) to accomplish a 
common purpose. 1 

The past one hundred and fifty years encompass the 
story of the development of educational organization in 
Canada. During this period the people within each province 
invented, discovered, and introduced the means for com¬ 
munication through a representative and responsible type of 
government. The history of educational development in 
Canada also seems to indicate that the willingness of the 
people to co-operate with government depended to a large 
degree on the measure of participation they were permitted 
in the control of education at the local level. The history 
of education in Canada during this period is the history of 
the development of these requirements of organization. 

The development of education, as a government agency, 
can be divided into four distinct, though overlapping, stages. 



0 .... - ‘ &BL '' 

: i - J. .u ' ; ' 

. :* \V . . V " - « ' : < 


* 

i- : v C , c ’• 

. 

' c 





► • 

• V ■ !» * , 5 ■ < 

, 

' 





* 








< : 

c ■ ■ , ' ::c'. 








23 


Stage one was marked by paternalism, in which the church 
authorities played the dominant role in all provinces except 
British Columbia* Here the place of the church was taken by 
the Hudson*s Bay Company* Stage two was identified by the 
emergence of local control through boards of trustees elected 
by local ratepayers. Stage three was characterized by the 
emergence and establishment of central control measures at 
the provincial level* Stage four was the story of the devel¬ 
opment of the larger units of school administration. All of 
the provinces of Canada, with the exception of Quebec and 
Newfoundland, followed this pattern, although not in the same 
chronological order. Upper Canada, or Ontario, provided 
leadership in the development of the organizational pattern 
during the first three stages. Other provinces, again with 
the exception of Quebec and Newfoundland, adopted the pattern 
with little or no change. In the fourth stage, however, 
Alberta took the lead in officially accepting the larger unit 
as a workable unit of school administration on a province¬ 
wide basis. Saskatchewan and British Columbia soon followed 
Alberta. A single experimental unit was established in each 
of the provinces of Prince Edward Island and Manitoba. The 
unit in Prince Edward Island was dissolved in 1955 and, while 

the single unit in Manitoba still continues in existence, no 


: t .../ 

,.. . ■ ■ .1 ; . ' . 1 ■ - ' - • ■ 

■* 

* 


o&oeuV r io itoi* r sBoi<B ai.U> xi-> 'a f £»wufcO V„c asn-i jvo^i^ aric 
/ I- ij CiU'. K :: X : v r 




< 




, 










* 




« 




. 




; : r . : ;k 























24 

other units have been established there. Ontario and Quebec 
(Protestant section) have been experimenting with different 
types of units for some years. Nova Scotia introduced the 
unit on a province-wide basis in January, 1956, while New 
Brunswick is at an intermediate point in the changeover from 
small-district to larger-unit type of organization. 

STAGE ONE: PATERNALISM 

The dominant ideals throughout the first stage were 
determined almost wholly by the European tradition as expres¬ 
sed in English practice. In Upper Canada and the Maritimes 
the ruling classes in the colonies were the governors, their 
associates, and the chief dignitaries of the Church of England. 
As representatives of the ruling classes in England they were 
quite definite on the type of education which they were pre¬ 
pared to tolerate in the colonies. The Roman Catholic Church 
in Quebec, too, placed the emphasis on the European tradition, 
as transmitted through Catholic France. While outwardly 
different, Catholic determination and control of education in 
Lower Canada and Anglican in Upper Canada and the Maritime 
colonies accepted the same basic tenets which were popular 
in the established educational institutions in Europe. As 
in Europe, the ruling classes in the colonies felt that 
education was the responsibility of orthodox religion. The 


■ . ni t ' t . 

■ • * ... . o'i, . s '■ '• ■- ■ 1 ■ 

c | - ■ ." ■ . 

nr/ - : ' .' ■ : 


•. UV .' • • •' . ;. 1 . i. ' i:..' o. : 

■ 

' 

? ' ' ■ ' < , r . 

' ‘ •' ■ 4 - ■ 

■ 

' J . 

? . 

- . - ■ ‘ ‘ • ■ r. ■ 










25 


dominant church was expected to provide the buildings, 
organize financial support, insist upon attendance, and see 
that the curriculum was in accordance with religious prin¬ 
ciples. The difference in the approach taken by the Roman 
Catholic Church and the Anglican Church in Canada was one 
of degree rather than kind. 

According to regulations laid down by the English 
parliament, the Church of England in principle had the right 
to exercise close control over the educational systems in 
England and in the colonies. By a law passed by the British 
parliament in 1604, no person could teach who was not a 
member of the Church of England and who had not obtained a 
license from the bishop of the diocese. In the colonies 
this and other restrictive laws were not rigidly enforced. 

In effect, therefore, the restrictions did little more 
than assure an Anglican tone in the endowed secondary 
schools and in higher education. Late in the eighteenth 
century Protestant and Roman Catholic dissenters were 
given freedom to teach anywhere except in the univer¬ 
sities and the great public schools.Gentlemen 

and adherents of the Church of England in the colonies, 
whether members of the government, clergymen, or other 
people of position and influence tried as a matter of 
course to Anglicize the populace, partly through the 
Church of England schools, but did not try to enforce 
extreme measures against a persistent opposition. 2 


Lower Canada ( Quebec ) 

The primary objective of education in French Canada 
was and is the spiritual salvation of the individual through 







f 

• 

• 



f o": 1 , : ■> . 



; 


i V 


. 



' 

. 








• 

' 3 









< 




.To ■ ' 

: C/j 


, 

' o - [ < . : ■' / 

. 


* 

■ 

. 

< 

C C 

1 8 - 







































26 

the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church. In this respect 
the Church and the government supported each other. 

This unified program of education helped to make a 
distinctive type of society Which did not change as 
France changed and did not yield to new world oppor¬ 
tunity as other colonies did—a remarkably homogeneous 
and cohesive society, unique in Canada and perhaps in 
the Western world.3 

Quebec still emphasizes the fact that it is different from 
the rest of Canada. It insists on the right to be different 
because of language and culture and particularly because of 
the religious orientation of its philosophy, its government 
and its system of education.^ 

Phillips advances the thesis that there was no import¬ 
ant difference between the Roman Catholic and English points 
of view in this stage of development.^ The rebellion of 
1&37-3&, subsequent events which culminated in the Act of 
Union of 1&41, as well as the rapid expansion of secular 
control and determination of educational development, brought 
a parting of the ways. Religious control and domination of 
education in the Maritime provinces about this time gave way 
to government control and direction. The Anglican Society 
for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Lands (S.P.G.) 
relinquished its direction of education in favor of the 
government. 

After 1$40 Lower Canada alone continued to develop 











i 


i i. 




c 




* 


* ’ ■ • ' . 






'O' . 1 . 






> 


j 








27 

its organization in accordance with the principles and phil¬ 
osophy of the Church. The same privileges claimed by the 
Roman Catholics were accorded the dissentient Protestant 
groups. As a direct result of this philosophy two distinct 
educational structures rose in Quebec, one Roman Catholic, 
the other Protestant. 

Upper Canada ( Ontario ) 

The population of Upper Canada numbered about 70,000 
by the year 1300.^ Over half of this number were United 
Empire Loyalists who had been given grants of land in the 
Niagara Peninsula and along the north shore of Lake Erie. 
During the next fifty years successive waves of immigrants 
from the United States, Scotland, England, and Ireland more 
than tripled the population. The Napoleonic wars and the sub¬ 
sequent depression, the cholera epidemic of the early l$30 f s, 
and the potato famine in Ireland and Scotland sent huge 
numbers of people to the colonies. The first immigrants 
settled along the Great Lakes and the mouths of rivers flow¬ 
ing into them. Later immigrants settled in the more inac¬ 
cessible lands away from the navigable rivers. The last wave 
of immigrants of this period, the Irish and Highland Scots, 
were forced to settle on poor rocky land far in the interior. 

The little groups of settlements were isolated. Roads were 





• : 

- 

- 

. . ... c < 











• . • : i ' j ' 










... ■ • ■'.! ■ ' 






■ 




i - }: ■ ' ? 


* 


















* 






. 

* 

. ' . ■/. 1 ' : ; w ■ ■' : ;:u V ■ ■■ 

■ 

♦ 


23 


almost unknown and contact with the outside world was 
extremely limited.^ 

The government of the colony was largely controlled 
by an oligarchy known as ,T The Family Compact”, composed of 
the senior dignitaries of the Church of England, the most 
influential legislative councillors and members of the leading 
families of the colony. John Strachan, Bishop of Toronto, 
and one of the most powerful members of the "Family Compact", 
dominated the educational scene until 1341. Governors of 
the colony saw little need for education for the common 
people beyond the necessity for minimum instruction in the 
three R T s. Both Church and State agreed that advanced educ¬ 
ation at the secondary school and university levels was 
necessary only for the training of government leaders and a 
learned clergy. The educational system which was developed 
in accordance with these principles gave little recognition 
to the needs of the common people. 

The Maritime Provinces 

Until 1325 the English colony along the Atlantic sea¬ 
board was called Nova Scotia. It included the present prov¬ 
inces of Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and most of New 
Brunswick. The S.P.G. had been granted full control of 
education in the colony shortly after its conquest by the 





* 

* ■ ' - c ■ 

< c • , 

. 

1 

- « 

. 

* 

- 

* 

... . 

■ 



29 


British in 1713* This control was further strengthened in 
175# when the Church of England was made the established 
church of the colony. Persons wishing to teach had first 
to obtain a license from the S.P.G. and until the end of the 
eighteenth century there was not ”. • .an instance to be 
found of license to teach granted to any person other than 
an employee of the S.P.G.The S.P.G. was supported in 
its work by land grants from the governor and council, grants 
from the mother body in England, and donations from parents 
and parishioners. 

Western Canada 

The present provinces of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta were carved from Rupert’s Land, the huge tract 
given to The Company of Adventurers Trading out of Hudson’s 
Bay. Until 1&70, when it became a colony of the Dominion of 
Canada, Rupert’s Land was governed solely by the Hudson’s 
Bay Company. At first the Company was reluctant to take 
any direct part in providing educational facilities for the 
children of its factors and traders. Early in the nineteenth 
century, however, the Hudson’s Bay Company adopted a definite 
policy of encouraging missionaries of all denominations to 
establish schools. By 1&70 mission schools had been 




» 

• - ' 


* ♦ . 

* . , 

< • ; 

. f c . . 








30 


established at widely separated points, mainly through the 
work of missionaries of four churches: Roman Catholic, 
Anglican, Wesleyan Methodist, Presbyterian* In point of time, 
the first Catholic mission was founded at St* Boniface in 
1313, the first Anglican missionary school in 1320. 

In 1370 the government of Rupert 1 s Land and the North¬ 
west Territories was transferred from the Hudson 1 s Bay Company 
to the Dominion of Canada. Manitoba, which became a province 
at this time, was placed in control of education in the new 
territory. Distance and difficulty of communication, as 
well as lack of interest, assured little disturbance to the 
control of the church groups over education. The North West 
Territories Act of 1330, however, removed control from the 
churches by giving the Territorial Council power to pass 

Q 

school ordinances. 7 This Council was also given powers to 
organize and establish new districts as soon as there were 
ten children of school age in any settlement which petitioned 
for a school. Some financial assistance was given by the 
Dominion Government between 1331 and 1335, but most of the 
money for the support of the local school was raised through 
local taxation. In 1335 all schools were placed under the 
control and direction of the Council of the North West 
Territories.-^ 


. 

. 

* . ' ' . 

r ... 

. ^ * 

c ... 

' i. • ■ : : :• " ' ' 1J t*w 


* 






< < 







1 J: ■, 


■ 

* 

t ■ - J‘ . J O'- j ;• . ■ , ;■ ■; ; :; ■ ■ v . rn ■ '. 

• : " • £■ • i 





31 


British Columbia 

British Columbia differed from the other provinces in 
that the schools were never affiliated with any church. Until 
British Columbia became part of the Dominion of Canada in 
1B70, education in the colony was the responsibility of the 
Hudson’s Bay Company. When the Hudson’s Bay Company received 
as a Crown grant the Island of Vancouver in 1&49, it agreed 
to provide homes for the British colonists and education for 
their children. From 1$49 until 1&56 the Governor of the 
colony was solely responsible for education. He retained this 
responsibility even after the colony was granted an Assembly 
in 1$56. In response to popular demand, the general school 
system was formally established in I &65 by the Free Schools 
Act of Vancouver Island.^ 

Summary of Developments in Stage One 

Quebec alone retained the theocratic system of educ¬ 
ation commonly found in Canada at the beginning of the nine¬ 
teenth century. In Newfoundland, a colony of Great Britain 
until it joined the Dominion of Canada in 1949, education was 
under the control of four churches: Roman Catholic, Anglican, 
United Church, Salvation Army. Control of education by 
religious bodies was ended in Upper Canada and the Maritimes 
by 1340. In Western Canada political and secular control of 
education came with or shortly after the establishment of 







... ■ o- ; , ‘V ■,- ' ' ; £>, Jr- ■ , 

* 

1 

• ' ' : . ■ . • ‘ . 

■ • • '• ' ,, i , o'. :■ oO :';0 J (,r 


■ 





n 











* .. ■ v ■ ' ; v, • - 

' 

. 

- 

?'.' 

. 

* 



32 


representative forms of government. 

STAGE II: DEVELOPMENT OF AGENCIES OF LOCAL CONTROL 

During the first stage of development, Upper Canada 
was divided into eight districts. Each had a board of 
trustees appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council* 

The appointees to the boards were Anglicans and the teachers 
were mostly Anglican clergymen. Although a government grant 
was made to each of these eight schools, heavy fees were also 
levied. These fees were kept high enough to ensure that the 
students would be drawn only from the wealthy and influential 
classes.^ 

The United Empire Loyalists and settlers from the 
New England States had come from areas which believed in 
and fought for a system of universal education under local 
secular control. They wanted the same privileges in their 
new homeland. Although representative government gave the 
settlers and common people a voice in the Legislative 
Assembly, the ^Family Compact” dominated the Legislative and 
Executive Councils through control of the appointment of the 
members to these two councils. From 1316 to 1&40 the common 
people, through the Legislative Assembly, sought to amend the 
legislation pertaining to education. Such legislation, 
passed in the lower body, was rejected by the Legislative or 


, / v • ClHCC ' a 9*1 

■ 

. ill ' 

jd tk , cl/.) 

< . 

. 

> 

.. i ' : 1 -'r . i 

, ' • f. ' ?; 

„ 

' 

' 

' 

t < 

< ' ' ' ''' • •' f - • ' ' ' ■ ' ' j 

r ‘ - 1 ■ ' • 







33 


Executive Councils .^3 The demands for universal education 
under secular control became more and more persistent and 
here and there apparently minor concessions were made. From 
these minor concessions in 1&16 and later, the organization 
for local control of education developed. 

The Common Schools Act of 1&16 included provisions 
whereby the people of any village, town, or township might 
meet together and arrange for one or more schools, at each 
of which the attendance must be no less than twenty students. 
Three trustees were elected with power to appoint teachers 
and select textbooks from a list prescribed by a District 
Board of Education. The District Board, made up of men 
appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, supervised 
all the schools and apportioned the legislative grants of 
£100 to each of the districts. The District Board of 
Education also must approve the recommendation of the local 
board before a teacher could be dismissed from any school. 

In l£24 the power to certificate teachers was given to the 
eight District Boards of Education in the province.^ 

The year 1316 is also significant in New Brunswick 
and Nova Scotia. By Common Schools Acts in these two prov¬ 
inces, direct grants were made to the trustees or teachers 

by the government, whereas such grants formerly had been made 




' , ■ 

* 

* 


• Ci -j . . . \ , • •• . : l'V 

»■■"■■■ . 

■' ' < 


* 

* 






, 

c 





34 

only to the S.P.G. for grammar schools in which the privil¬ 
eged minority had a special interest. From this date until 
1341 there was little change in the administration of educ¬ 
ation in the Maritime colonies or in the Canadas. 

Growing opposition to the entrenched position of the 
"Family Compact" culminated in the Rebellion of 1337-3#, the 
Durham Report, and the beginning of responsible government 
in 134#. The Municipal Act of 1#41*^ set up the machinery 
for local control of school and municipal affairs. The 
people of the district now were permitted to establish a 
common school for their children. The minority religious 
group, either Protestant or Catholic, was also permitted to 
form a separate committee and establish its own schools. 

Though the system of local control outlined in this act was 
found unworkable, it was the forerunner of the Public Schools 
Act of 1#46. 

In 1344 Egerton Ryerson was made Superintendent of 
Education in Ontario, an office he held until 13?6. For 
more than thirty years the story of the educational progress 
in Ontario is the story of Ryerson 1 s attempts to put into 
practice his ideas of school administration and government. 

He was an exponent of central control of education on one 
hand and a supporter of local determination on the other. Out 


, . «. 

- - ( » 

: - ' ‘ * ‘ • . 1 . ■ ' ■ ■ J.;‘ .1 

■ < 

T 

* . 

- ■ 

• ' 

* - 


* 




* s 

■ 

? ■ ‘ 








■ 















35 

of this apparent conflict between two opposing ideas, Ryerson 
developed a synthesis which holds to this day as one of the 
most distinguishing characteristics of Canadian education. 

Ryerson fully believed that authority in a democratic 
society, regardless of how strongly reinforced by statute, 
could not succeed without the support of the people. "Inter¬ 
change of ideas on education in regular conventions by parents, 
teachers, inspectors, clerical, and official visitors is 
essential to the vitality and cohesion of the whole. 

Through tours to all parts of the province, attendance at 
annual meetings of ratepayers, and the publication of the 
Educational Journal . Ryerson tried to keep his public informed 
and to assess their needs. He tried to determine the direction 
of their efforts and to adjust the school system to these 
necessities. Not only did Ryerson make strenuous efforts to 
keep the people in the province informed, he also kept in 
close touch with educational developments in the United States 
and Europe. He made the study of educational systems of 
other countries and the study of local conditions a system¬ 
atic part of his administration. 

Ryerson made five extended tours of the United States 
and Europe. From the United States he borrowed the idea of 

supporting schools by a uniform rate on property and from 






* 

* 

' 

c • ' , 

* . 

< ; ‘ . .. ■ • 

< ' ' < ■ ‘ , ■ . 

, . . ' . ' • 

i cv/ i■ .,;\„sq Xj~* j^/cidT 

: .! , < 

‘ • •' , ;• . c . • _ _ 

■ J 

’ 

. • * ■■ 


' 

* 





36 

Holland the idea of state inspection. From the United States 
he learned of the principle of non-partisan control of educ¬ 
ation and from Ireland central control of textbooks. But 
while much was borrowed, all was woven into the fabric of an 
educational pattern which is peculiarly Canadian. As 
Ryerson stated, ” . . • no school law, or school system, can 
be successful in a free country which does not harmonize 
with the feelings and circumstances of the people among whom 
it is established. ”-^7 Following his first tour of fourteen 
months, Ryerson presented his views in a lengthy report. 

This report became the basis for the Public Schools Act of 
1346. What was not enacted by statute in 1346 was included 
in later acts. In the concluding remarks of the Chief 
Superintendent’s Annual Report of 1371, Ryerson wrote: 

After nearly thirty years’ service in promoting what 
I believed to be the best interests of our School 
System, I am more than ever profoundly impressed with 
the conviction of the correctness of the views on 
these subjects which I expressed in my preliminary 
’’Report on a System of Public Instruction for Upper 
Canada” which I submitted to the Government in 1346. 

Other provinces in Canada borrowed from the report of 
1346 rather than from the legislation passed in Ontario 
between this date and 1372. In Ontario the Public Schools 
Act of 1371 stands as a landmark in the educational history 
of the province, but to Ryerson it was but the culmination of 


* 


. 







■ 1 1 , * , . < 

. . . ; .. . :.. . , ■ . . V 





*8- i 















37 


what he attempted to introduce in 1$46. 

The Act of I &46 established local control as a major 

principle of school administration in Canada. The duties, 

responsibilities, and procedures for the election of local 

boards of trustees set out in this Act are little different 

from those found in the school acts of eight of the ten 

x 

provinces of today. Local management of some aspects of 
school affairs stimulated and maintained a general interest 
in education. At the same time opportunities were afforded 
the electors and the elected to apply the principles of 
democracy in the control of matters of vital and immediate 
concern. The attainment of responsible government under 
Lord Elgin in 1&4$ made the implementation of Ryerson ! s 
proposals in education politically possible. The people 
of the province now had the means of communication to com¬ 
mon purposes and direct government agencies towards their 
attainment. 

The people in the Atlantic provinces did not recognize 
the necessity of local election of trustees as essential to 
effective operation of their schools. In many cases the 
courts or justices and magistrates administered the local 
schools in the name of the province. Until the power to 

— y- — —.. . 

Quebec and Newfoundland are the exceptions. 






„ 

• .• ’ : . < ' 

* 

- 

' ■ 


* 

■ T ■ . • 

■ 


•. . . • ■ ■ ' ‘ ' : *'■> 

. 


. 

* 

• « ' . • • : • 










33 

elect trustees was granted, attempts to provide free schools 
IQ 

were abortive. 7 


The Local School District 

The Public Schools Act of 1#50 20 defined the areas 

assigned to local control and direction and those reserved 

to the central control of the province. Provision was made 

for the division of townships into school sections, each 

fifteen to twenty square miles in area. The school section 

was administered by an elected board of trustees with power 

to select teachers, exercise control over religious instruc- 

21 

tion and to determine the method of financial support. 

The function of the local authority was to be 
largely administrative subject to the paternalistic 
oversight of the central government. • . . The 
province should assume the status of senior partner, 
critic, guide, and philosopher in a school system 
having the appearance, perhaps, but hardly the 
essence of local autonomy.^2 


Summary of Stage Two 

It was through the leadership of Egerton Ryerson that 
the opposing demands for local control and the determination 
of the governing groups were synthesized and an acceptable 
educational organization was developed. 










39 


STAGE III: CENTRALIZATION OF AUTHORITY 


From 1340 to 1330 the threat of the "infiltration of 
Republican ideas tf 23 concerned both governmental and educ¬ 
ational authorities. Fenian raids and rampant nationalism 
in the Northern states posed a constant threat of engulf- 
ment to the British colonies in Canada. It hurried the 
divided colonies into confederation in 1367 and, in educ¬ 
ation, placed emphasis on the necessity for a strong central 
authority. 

In his report of 1346, Egerton Ryerson determined in 
broad outline the pattern of organization of education in 
Ontario. Because of the effect which these recommendations 
had on education in Ontario and other provinces, extensive 
quotations are made from Ryerson 1 s report: 

Fundamental General Principles of School Legislation 

Before proceeding to offer any suggestions for amend¬ 
ing the present Act of 1343, I desire to lay down two 
or three principles which I consider fundamental. 

1. If it be intended that the System of Public Instruc¬ 
tion be Provincial, or national, it must be one through¬ 
out the Province. There cannot be a distinct system, 
or no system, as it may happen, in every County, Township, 
or School District. 

2* In order that a system of instruction may be 
Provincial, the machinery of it must be so—the various 
parts of it must be made to move in harmony, the one with 
the other, and the whole must be subject to one common 











•; : ■ : ^ • • - r - uqs 


~ ' 


i 


-•*. ■ . < 








< 










r 


< . . 

* 


* . 










< 




- 


e 



* 

< ... t 






' 

















4 o 

direction. This cannot be the case where the different 
parts are wholly independent of each other—where the 
County and Township Superintendents, and each Corporation 
of Trustees, are as independent of the Crown in Canada 
as they are of that in China. 

3. Furthermore, one chief design of a Monarchical 
system of Responsible Government is to stamp the sentiment 
and spirit of the public mind upon the administration, 
as well as upon the legislation of the Country, and to 
secure the collective acts of the Country against the 
antagonistic or selfish acts of individuals, or isolated 
sections. It makes the Executive Government not only 
the Representative of the whole community in its actual 
composition, but also in the execution of every part of 
the law for the benefit of the community. As there is 
one responsibility, so there must be one authority—one 
mode of appointing to, and removing from, the head of 
every Department of authority, x^hether supreme or sub¬ 
ordinate-in all localities and gradations of office. 

This principle of Responsible Government is contravened 
by the Common School Act of 1343, in the whole system of 
local superintendency. ^ 

The delineation of function between central and local 
authorities was made on the basis of distinguishing the 
difference between the interna and externa of the school system. 
By 1371 the provincial authority in Ontario was responsible 
for curriculum, textbooks, provincial examinations, and the 
training and certification of teachers. In his report of 
1346, Ryerson pressed for the establishment of a body of 
Inspectors employed and directed by the central authority. 
Opposition to this as a form of tT Prussian autocracy If J 
forced Ryerson to compromise on the employment of inspect¬ 


ors by municipal and township boards 


26 


Control of the 






41 

curricular and supervisory services by the provincial depart¬ 
ment were " ... in effect, natural outgrowths of the 
desire to achieve uniformity and common direction for educ¬ 
ation in Upper Canada."^7 

The externa of the school system included those aspects 
with which the local people were the most concerned* These 
are medical inspection and sanitation, the employment and 
dismissal of teachers, the construction, maintenance and 
repair of school buildings and premises, the equipment in the 
school, supplies for teacher and pupils, and the raising and 
expenditure of money. With few exceptions these same powers 
have been retained by local boards. The detailed powers of 
local and central authorities will be discussed later under 
the topics of structure and legal authority. 

The Act of 1&71, in Ryerson T s opinion, achieved the 
main objectives of free schools for all, the improvement of 
school inspection, the uniform classification of teachers, and 
a uniform curriculum. The sections of this act dealing with 
curriculum give Ryerson’s concepts of the function of the 
school in Canadian society. In his own words Ryerson states: 

1. The course of study proposed should not be beyond 
the reasonable capacity for the pupils for whom it 
is intended. 


• ■ 

* ■ ... 

- 

. 

. 

■ t 

r ' : J o 

c . : c. 

" . 

. 

. 

' ' . * ■' ■ ■ :■ . .. . <. 

< ' • 

■ 

0 

. • . . •: 






42 


2. The course of study prescribed should be sufficiently 
comprehensive to be adapted, not only to the pursuits 
and occupations of the people, but also to individ¬ 
ual groups or classes of pupils.2o 

To ensure continuity and full support for education in 
both grammar and high schools, the law contained provisions 
which directed "that High Schools shall be provided for by 
local rate equally with Public Schools"*^ and "the subjects 
for admission to the High Schools shall be the same as those 
prescribed for the first four classes of the Public Schools."30 
The new act also required that each high school hold a 

written entrance examination, the results of which were sub- 

31 

ject to the approval of the high school inspector. 

Possibly the most effective measure for central control 
of the interna and certainly one carrying disciplinary sanc¬ 
tions was the control of external examinations. Ryerson 
urged the adoption of a uniform standard of admission to high 
schools and collegiates in the province* Further, diplomas 
or certificates given to students were to be granted only 

on attainment of a passing mark of at least fifty per cent on 

32 

a series of examinations prepared by the central authority. 

Central Control in Other Provinces 

The Maritime provinces kept in step with Ontario in the 

development of similar measures of central control. However, 








! j .’.I 1 • . | 

- ■ ' ' , 




■ 

,■ : . ■ ’ . , - c • - 

. 


- 




- I • - 1 ■ • 

~ 0 :>. ,, :• 





J ' 


' 


' 






* 






' 




, 














43 

Inspectors were appointed by the central authority and given 
the power and responsibility for acting in the name of the 
provincial department many years before Ryerson’s recommendation 
was fully implemented in Ontario. 

Manitoba, as part of Rupert’s Land, had developed a 
school system based upon missionary control. In the Red River 
Colony, the church had assumed responsibility for providing 
schools and teachers and funds for their operation. In 1&71 
Manitoba joined the Dominion of Canada as a province, and a 
year later an act was passed patterned on the famous report of 
1346. 

The transition from theocratic control of education to 
the Ontario system took longer in that part of the North 
West Territories which is now Alberta and Saskatchewan than 
it had in Manitoba. The transition period lasted from 1S70, 
when this territory became a colony of the Dominion of Canada, 
to the School Ordinance Act of 1$92. For the first five years 
the schools in the North West Territories were under the 
control of the Lieutenant Governor in Council for Manitoba. 

In 1$£4 the Ordinance for the Organization of Schools in the 
North West Territories placed the schools under a Board of 
Education consisting of two sections, one Protestant and the 
other Roman Catholic. Each section of six members had complete 




T 

. 

' • t 

- 

. . < . : 

. 

•- ■ J.- , : -.:. 

. .. ' 1 ■ , ; 1 arV; 

« . . 

* 

* 

' 

■ 

' < 







44 


control of its own schools, the grading and examination of 
pupils, licensing of teachers, appointment of inspectors, as 
well as the determination of curricula and textbooks. 

For a time it seemed that the Quebec system of educ¬ 
ational administration would predominate. The rapid increase 
in settlers from Ontario after 1331, however, swung public 
favor to the Ontario model. The Ordinance of 1392 made the 
basic design as that in Ontario.34 The School Ordinance Act 
of 1901 established a Department of Education to control all 
matters pertaining to schools and school districts. The head 
of the department, the Minister, was to be a member of the 
Executive Council, with power to appoint such officers and 
staff as might be required.35 When the Alberta and Saskatchewan 
Acts were passed in 1905, this organization became an intrinsic 
part of the educational organization of each province. 

In British Columbia, the Free School Acts passed in 
1365 and 1369 were found unworkable and shortly after the 
province entered confederation in 1370 the Ontario system 
as set out in Ryerson’s report of 1346 was adopted.36 

Summary of Stage Three 

The Hope report summarizes the pattern of development 
in six of the seven provinces which formed part of the 
Dominion of Canada in 1900: 







■ 







, ■ n ' ■ 

■ t V. <; : >0/ ' , .* ' ’ ^nJ C. : 

. 5 ■ ' • 

*■ i ■ • . . ' ■ ; .. i : - •' ' 

* 

« 

; ; • ; /. ■■ ' * :J . .. , 0 : I : ■ OX £ >U 

* ‘ ' ' ■. - :■■■■!• 

K <, 

. ■ 

... ’ . i ’... t ' '• 

.; 1 ■ . ... V.. r 

■' - . • r • . ' : / .■ ...' ; or> J ■ •» • 

♦ 

. 



45 

The pattern usually followed involved roughly the 
following two steps: (1) The populated area of each 
province, including the urban centres, was divided into 
hundreds of small rural school sections or districts, 
or into urban wards- Each of the former average four 
to six miles square in area, supported one school, which 
usually had but one teacher, and was administered by an 
elected board of trustees, usually three in number. 

(2) "Districts" within cities and towns were amal¬ 
gamated to form one school unit under a single board. 07 


STAGE 17: 


XARGER HIT ITS OF SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 


Pioneer conditions in the Canadian provinces demanded 
only that the people be able to read, write, and cipher. 

Y/ith wealth and opportunities spread rather evenly over rural 
and urban areas, the great majority of people employed in 
basic industries found little need for advanced education. 

The one-roomed school with an attendance area small enough 
for children to walk to school in good weather and not too 
far for a team and sleigh to travel in the winter met the 
needs of most students. 'The secondary school was in fact a 
vocational school for the small number of students who 
planned to enter the professions or the clergy. 

The rapid expansion of technology brought about a 
concentration of wealth and industry in the urban centres. 

As the cities grew in size the financial resources at their 
command made it possible for them to meet the demands for 
better training placed upon their educational system by 
industry. The mechanization of the farms and the increase 




46 


in the size of the farmstead, particularly in western Canada, 

made it necessary for large numbers of young people to leave 

rural areas and seek employment in cities. They found that 

the one-roomed rural school had not provided them with the 

knowledge and skills needed to compete in the labor market 

38 

with those educated in urban schools. lack of sufficient 
numbers of pupils and of financial resources made it impos¬ 
sible for the small rural school to offer the same educational 
opportunities as the urban school. In fact, many districts 
found it difficult during the 19£0 T s to finance the minimum 
program. The depreciation of land values subsequent to and 
during the depression of the 1930 T s forced large numbers of 
these small districts to the verge of bankruptcy. Two 
factors, economic difficulties and the inequalities in the 
educational opportunities available to the students in 
urban areas and in rural districts, made a reorganization of 
the administrative structure essential. The Report of the 
Royal Commission on Education in Ontario sums up the solutions 
adopted by various provinces in Canada in these words: 

In states and provinces where economic stress was 
a less pressing factor than sparsity of population a more 
common method of meeting the demands for equalization 
between rural and urban areas was the enlargement of 
the unit of administration through the consolidation of 
attendance areas. States and provinces which did not adopt 
either the county unit or consolidation of attendance areas 





47 


fall into one of the following three categories: 

(a) those whose units of administration were already 
large enough to meet the needs brought about by the 
economic and social changes; (b) those whose com¬ 
parative wealth enabled them to meet the increased 
demands in spite of poor district organization; and 
(c) those which, not being in either class (a) or (b), 
made no changes despite economic necessity, reputedly owing 
to educational apathy. 39 

In New Brunswick and Nova Scotia consolidation for financial 
purposes was made after World War II. In 1956, Nova Scotia 
moved to more extensive consolidation of powers in the hands 
of the central board. 40 The radical developments took place 
in Western Canada. 

In 1944 the Honourable Mr. W. S. Lloyd, Minister of 
Education for Saskatchewan, expressed the thinking of most 
of the educational administrators in Western Canada when he 
said: 


There are two basic needs which must be faced 
immediately—the need to provide more equitable oppor¬ 
tunities in education, and the need to distribute 
educational costs. In short, education must be 
accepted as a collective social responsibility. The 
larger unit will make steps in this direction possible. 
The province must then be prepared to equalize further 
between units. 

We must emphasize that it will not be sufficient 
merely to extend present opportunities. Educational 
offerings must be diversified as well as extended: 
both the cultural and the practical aspects of educ¬ 
ation must be placed within the reach of more students. 
This will require buildings, equipment, supervision and 
above all—planning. It is the conviction of the 
Department of Education that these cannot be effect¬ 
ively and efficiently provided within the limitations 
























: . ' j. ; -- 

' ? • 

• , •: . 









of the small unit system.On the other hand the 

larger unit does provide a vehicle by means of which 
the objectives stated above may be realized.41 

Early Developments in Establishing Larger Units of Administration 
After 1900 several of the provinces of Canada gave 
serious consideration to the development of units of admin¬ 
istration larger than the small school section or school 
district. In 1905 British Columbia passed legislation which 
made each organized municipality a single district. Some 
twenty-eight district municipalities, equivalent to the town¬ 
ship in Ontario, were set up under this legislation, but 
almost ninety per cent of the schools in the province were 
not affected since they were in what was known as unorganized 
territory. Although permissive legislation was passed in 
1916 to allow individual districts to join together to 
become consolidated districts very few were organized. In 
1924 J. H. Putnam and G.M. Weir were commissioned to make a 
survey of the school system. They recommended that the 
government bring about consolidation of tf assisted n schools 
wherever possible, with or without the consent of the local 
boards.^ Most of the recommendations, however, were too 
radical for the government of the day and little was done until 
1933 when the first experimental unit was organized in the 


Peace River Block 










* 

c < 

■ 

* 

* ' 

. , 

* 

j 

,, ■ ■ * . €'• > I . c' ' . Ov 





49 

In the prairie provinces, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 

Alberta, the movement toward consolidated schools reached its 

43 

peak between 1917 and 1924. Several small rural school 
districts were merged to form one large district for the 
prime purpose of providing high school as well as elementary- 
education for their students. By 1924 over one hundred 
consolidated districts had been formed in Manitoba, forty^ 
four in Saskatchewan, and forty-five in Alberta. In the 
latter province practically all of these districts have been 
absorbed by the larger units of administration. In 
Saskatchewan the same process is going on and within a few 
years it is expected that the consolidated district will be 
a thing of the past. 

In the provinces in the eastern zone, Nova Scotia and 
New Brunswick, consolidation is proceeding more and more 
rapidly and is becoming accepted as the intermediate step 
toward the establishment of the larger unit on the western 
model. 44 

The Report on Education in Ontario summarizes the 
situation in that province quite adequately in the following 
statement: 

The present situation with respect to the constitution 
of local units of school administration and local educ¬ 
ation authorities is, to say the least, confusing. The 
number of types of units and the lack of correlation 
with municipal organization result in a situation where 




< C < 



< ■ ' " 

■ 

, 


' 

j .i • 

■ 

- 


i;-. ' • t " 


A 'V ' ~ 

, v* ■ ? 


J J 


1 .. - 



• 

. 




■ . ' 


WOi 

eii " J... ; hip. ' ;. ■ i 

- 


. 

: 


* < 

5 ' 

■ 









50 

the exceptions are often more apparent than the general 

rule.The units of school administration in 

Ontario can be classified in different ways: according 
to the type of municipality of which they are composed; 
according to the method of their creation; according 
to the number of pupils enrolled in their schools; 
according to their area; according to whether they are 
rural or urban; or according to the type and extent of 
education offered by the authority responsible. 45 


British Columbia 

The term T, larger unit of school administration T? was 
first used in 1933 in reference to the famous experiment 
carried on in the Peace River area* Because of economic 
difficulties a group of seventeen schools agreed to join 
together under the official trusteeship of the inspector of 
schools. The department of education gave its blessing, but 
not its official recognition, to the experiment. The 
results were so good during the first year of operation 
that four more units were formed the following year. In 
1935 the Council of Public Instruction gave official rec¬ 
ognition to the success of the experiment. The five units 
were organized into one superintendency and placed under 
the inspector as official trustee. All former district 
boundaries were abolished and the official trustee was given 
full power to exercise all the authority of the former board 
of trustees. The local boards were retained as advisory 


bodies. In addition an area council of five members was 

46 

appointed to advise on matters of general policy. 




. , . . . 

- 

' 

■ 


■ ' 

• ’ 1 

•' ' • ■ 

i . ■ . • 

< « . 

* 

* 










* 

/ • ... 














51 


In 1937 permissive legislation was passed to allow 
for the formation of other experimental units. Following a 
plebiscite in favor of the experiment, one unit was established 
in the Matsqui-Sumas-Abbotsford area and one in the Nanaimo- 
Ladysmith area on Vancouver Island. The former area was 
made up of rural- and village-type municipalities while the 
latter was a rural-city type of administrative unit* In all 
cases the ratepayers could demand a vote on the continuance 
of the unit within three years. At the end of the allotted 
time no votes were asked for in any one of the three exper¬ 
imental units. The initial units, all different in kind and 
composition, demonstrated the value of the larger unit of 
administration to the government of the province. 

In 1944 Dr. M. A. Cameron was appointed as a commission 
of one to inquire into educational finance and administrative 
reorganization. His report, presented to the government in 
1946, strongly recommended that the larger unit of admin¬ 
istration on a province-wide basis be introduced immediately 
as the only feasible solution to the imminent breakdown of 
the traditional system of organization. Since the three 
experimental units had proven the success of the new type of 
organization and since the people within these units had 
indicated their approval by not asking for a vote, the report 







52 

recommended that the remainder of the province be organized 
on a similar basis without further reference to the people. 
Cameron’s recommendations were put into effect through amend¬ 
ments to the Public Schools Act and the new organization came 
into effect in April of 1946.^ Great differences in the 
geographical and physical characteristics throughout the 
province necessitated three main types of districts as 
compared with the single pattern type in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. In all, the province was divided into seventy- 
seven larger units of administration. Twenty-three small 
rural districts remained outside the larger organization 
because of isolation and long distances between communities. 

Alberta 

Reorganization of the educational structure in Alberta 
had been under consideration for many years prior to 1936, but 
changes had been opposed consistently by the School Trustees 1 
Association. In spite of the economic difficulties faced by 
most of the rural boards in the province, the school trustees 
fought to retain the small district as the basic unit. 

In two areas of the province economic conditions had 
forced extreme measures. The discovery of oil in 1923 in 
Turner Valley had brought in a large influx of workers. A 
large and rapid increase in the school population brought the 



, ; ■ ■- ' . ■ ■ v ‘ . : • ■ . . V- ' ■ t ; • • • ' 

. 

* 

J * ■ ' •••■ 7 • ' 

■ : 1 • ■ ' : . ' 01 i 

* 

i i-'.‘ ■■ : : . : ' . : " f.'. ,. \4. ‘ ^ i : ^ ;v,:: 

. 

- 


: 

* 

'• K '■ ’ ' ' 

* 

. 






53 

The boards of 


small district face-to-face with bankruptcy. 

trustees in the Turner Valley field resigned, and the whole 

area was placed under the control and direction of the 

inspector as the official trustee. Near Hanna, drought 

conditions drove so many settlers off the land that no one 

district had the financial resources to keep a school open 

for those who remained. In 1933 sixty-seven districts were 

combined to form the Berry Creek School District under the 

administration of the inspector as official trustee. In both 

cases all the assets and liabilities of the old districts 

were assumed by the new district and the inspector assumed 

49 

the full responsibilities of the former school boards. 

Under an official administrator with the resources of a large 
area at his command, both districts found it possible to 
overcome their economic problems much more satisfactorily 
than the neighboring small districts. 

In 1935 the first Social Credit government, under the 
Honourable William Aberhart, came to power in Alberta. One 
of the first acts of the new government was to deal with the 
problem of educational administration in the province. In 
the first legislature the School Divisions Act provided for 
the immediate organization of the small districts into larger 
units. Since the government felt it had received, through 











54 

the recent election, a mandate from the people to deal with 
the problems in education, no provision was made in this 
act for further plebiscites or votes. Within three years the 
whole province, with the exception of a few isolated districts, 
was organized into fifty-six school divisions. 

Legislation in 1936 also provided for extensive changes 
in other aspects of education in Alberta. In the Annual 
Report of the Department of Education in 1936 the Deputy 
Minister stated: 

Many happenings of more than usual interest in the 

field of education took place during the year just 

closed. Outstanding amongst these were: 

a. The introduction of the new enterprise or activity 
system of education in the elementary school 

b. The beginnings of an "Intermediate School" organ¬ 
ization 

c. The granting of professional status to teachers 

d. The re-organization of rural administrative units 
into large groups of schools or "Divisions" 

e. Revision of the regulations governing teacher 
selection and training 

f. Further increase in the number of new school 
districts organized 

g. The highest percentage of pupils in secondary 
grades in our history. 50 

Since 1936 much legislation has been concerned with 
local governing bodies in the rural areas. The introduction 
of the larger unit of administration in school affairs has 
been followed by the application of the same principles to 
municipal government. The larger municipalities were 
roughly co-terminus with the school division boundaries. A 


c 

. : • • ' : - 

* 


. v : ' ' -■ * • ■ ’ 

: - 


-■ 

. .'IS- v ; 

■ 

. ■ 











♦ 

■ 







Co-Terminus Boundary commission spent considerable time 

and effort in making adjustments in boundaries to bring 

the larger units of administration in school and municipal 
51 

affairs together. 

In 1950 permissive legislation 'was passed which 
provided an opportunity for either the board of trustees 
of the school division or the municipal council to petition 
for the formation of a county. This type of organization 
made it possible for the administration of both school and 
municipal affairs to be placed under a single elected body. 
The county board was to have two committees, one for educ¬ 
ation and one for municipal affairs. The ratepayers of the 
county might ask for a vote on the continuance of the unit 
at the end of four years. Between 1951 and 1956 seven 
counties were established. 

Saskatchewan 

In 1915 the premier of Saskatchewan, Walter Scott, 
and the leader of the opposition joined to urge the leg¬ 
islature to take steps to reduce the inequalities in educ¬ 
ational opportunity between the students in rural and urban 
areas. In 1917 Dr. Foght, an expert in school administ ratio 
was called in to make a survey of educational conditions in 

the province. After two years of work Dr» Foght presented 



c 







56 

his report to the government in 1919*^ Along with many other 
recommendations concerning finance, supervision, curriculum 
and administration, he recommended the municipality as the 
unit of administration in education♦ His report and recom¬ 
mendations were pigeon-holed largely because of the popul¬ 
arity of the consolidated school and its apparent success in 
providing secondary school education to large numbers of 
rural students* 

With the onset of the depression the critical con¬ 
ditions in the rural areas of the province came to the fore. 

In 1933 a committee on school finance under the chairmanship 
of N. L. Reid, the Director of School Administration in the 
Department of Education, recommended the reduction in the 
size of the inspectorates from 150 school districts to fifty. 
School boards would then come to rely more and more on the 
advice of the superintendent, who, because of the reduction 
in size of the superintendency, now could meet with the boards 
more often. Naively, the committee felt that the superin¬ 
tendent could then persuade the fifty boards to assign their 
duties and responsibilities to a single board. The only 
responsibility demanded of the department then would be to 
accept the reorganized district as a consolidated area. 

In Saskatchewan, as in Alberta, the Teachers* 



V , ; , 

e : " ’ 

. 

' 

' SJ’ 

. 

, 

• ; •; I • : ■. < • • 

» 

, 

. 

* 

. 





57 


Federation gave strong support to efforts on the part of 
the government to seek more efficient and effective admin¬ 
istration at the local level. The trustees of the local 
district boards, on the other hand, opposed any changes which 
would affect their position or powers. Their solution to the 
problem was simple—more money from the government in the 
form of grants. The local boards of trustees were handi¬ 
capped only in their ability to raise money, not in their 
ability to spend it. 

By 1937 the situation was extremely critical. A 
committee on school administration was convened under the 
chairmanship of Mr. Justice Martin. The report stressed the 
deplorable condition of the financial situation in practically 
all parts of the province. They recommended that immediate 
action be taken to introduce the larger unit of administration 
on a pattern similar to that found in Alberta.55 A com¬ 
promise between those who wanted the introduction of the 
larger unit and those who opposed it was worked out. In 1940 
the legislature passed the School Divisions Act modelled 
almost entirely on the School Divisions Act of Alberta, with 
one important difference. In Saskatchewan no inspectorate 
would be organized as a larger unit until a petition was 
received signed by at least twenty-five per cent of the rate¬ 
payers for a vote. If a majority of the voters were in 


vi . & ' * : ' i • ' • • 

. 

••• j 

:: :-v 

■ ■ ' X ' t ■ ' 

. 

• ' t ... . . ' ' : 














* 












* 









- 

; 


r. c • . 

. 


' 







53 

favor of the larger unit, it would be brought into effect.56 
As crops and prices improved under war conditions improved 
finances hid the necessity for reorganization. Consequently, 
no area took advantage of this legislation. 

In 1944 the C.C.F. party took office for the first 
time and, like the Social Credit party in Alberta nine years 
earlier, introduced legislation providing for the immediate 
organization of the province on the basis of larger units. 

The most important change made in the School Divisions Act 
was that the larger unit would come into effect unless the 
people petitioned for a vote against it. If the vote was 
not favorable to the unit, then none would be introduced. 
Further, at the end of five years the ratepayers in any 
superintendency could petition for a vote on the continuance 
of the larger unit.5? At the end of 1956 there were still 
four superintendencies in the province which were composed 
of small districts. 

Nova Scotia 

Evolution of the larger unit of administration in the 
provinces on the eastern seaboard has progressed more slowly 
than in western Canada. The Superintendent of Education 
pressed for consideration of the municipality as the unit of 
administration for many years before enabling legislation 





, 


.! , .. *J .. c 


„ 



* 

■ ; < 






• i 





: 

* 



t 



■ id 





* 







: 









. 







* 

' 






j 













* 















r 


. >... • •' ' 






' • I 


■ 




* 



was passed in 1943 following the report of a Commission which 
recommended the municipality as a fiscal unit. Here, as 
in Saskatchewan, much of the responsibility for obtaining 
the acceptance of the idea of the larger unit among the rate¬ 
payers and public in a local area rested with the inspector. 
The plan went into operation in two counties on an exper¬ 
imental basis in 1943.^9 By 1950 all of the rural munic¬ 
ipalities (21) were fiscal units. In 1954 a Royal Commission 
on School Finance strongly recommended that the municipality 
become the unit for all educational administration.^ In 
January, 1956, the boards of trustees made up of three members 
appointed by the municipal council and three members appointed 
by the Lieutenant Governor in Council took over control of 

"j 

educational affairs. x 
New Brunswick 

In 1937, Mr. Plenderleith, former Inspector of Schools 
in the Peace River Block in British Columbia, and probably 
the person most responsible for its success, was invited to 
New Brunswick as an instructor in a class on rural admin¬ 
istration. The class made a survey of King’s County; the 
resulting recommendations advocated a county unit based on 
the municipality. ^ In 1943 the government assumed approx¬ 
imately fifty per cent of the cost of buildings and equipment 






-io j . HO • ' •: ■ ; 

■ 

' ■ , ' . 

' 

' 

< . . 

, ■ 

« 

. 

' v j\i >'J. 





60 

of rural high schools. At the same time the financing of the 
schools was placed under a county board made up, as in Nova 
Scotia, of four appointees of the Municipal council and three 
of the Lieutenant Governor in Council. The county thus 
became the unit for taxation and for financing the minimum 
program; the local districts remained as the basic admin¬ 
istrative units and as units for the financing of all expend¬ 
itures above the minimum program. 

The county unit in New Brunswick cannot properly be 
called a larger unit of administration as the powers of 
appointing the teachers and for capital expenditure, as well 
as the details of operating the externa of the school, still 
rest with the local boards. In many ways it is an inter¬ 
mediate step between small local district control and the 
larger unit as known in western Canada. Many of the inspec¬ 
tors in New Brunswick have given much time and effort to 
the development of consolidations of small school sections 
within their inspectorates. Where several small school 
boards agree to the merger a central board of five to seven 
members assumes control of the new consolidated district. 

The majority are elected and the minority are appointed by 

6 4 

the Lieutenant Governor in Council. In New Brunswick the 
larger unit of administration is coming slowly, more by a 
process of attrition than evolution. 


■ 



. 

' 









■ 

- 


• 



' 

; ■ /: ', ' -:.S v." 



' \ - : ‘ ’ ) . t * 


■ ■; : ' 



l 0 





, • ■. \ : 



• 




i 

' 

; ( . 

, 

. . : 

« 

c 

» . 






61 


Summary of Stage Four 

Stage four is primarily concerned with the story of 
the willingness of important and influential groups to 
participate in a solution to the problem of educational 
administration. In all provinces now having larger units 
of administration senior officials of the department and 
teachers 1 organizations supported the idea of larger units 
for many years before they became established. During this 
time their efforts were balked many times by the boards of 
trustees. The latter opposed the change because it increased 
the size of the unit of administration and thereby reduced 
the local, personalized control of education. Through their 
influence in the local communities, the boards made it 
politically inexpedient for the member of the legislature 

65 

to ignore their wishes. 

It took many years of economic stress and steady 
demands for more equality of educational opportunity to change 
this core of opposition to grudging acceptance. It took 
many more years to gain the full support of former members 
of boards of trustees for the new organization. 





































. 







, 

- 

, ’ 










■ • 


* . 


* 























62 


Interna 

Courses of Study 
External Examinations 
Textbooks 

Methods of Instruction 

Teacher Training and 
Certification 

Pupil Progress 

Inspection and Supervision 

Adult Education 

Centralization 

Const 


Externa 


ruction of Buildings 
Finance 

Instructional Materials 

Piiblic and the School 

Salary—Teachers 

Working Conditions of Teachers 

Classroom & Playground Equipment 

Employment of Staff 

Maintenance of Buildings and 
Premises 


Figure 1. Interna and 


Externa in Education. 









, 








: ' : 

. r. ' ' 

■ ■ ■ : • 




■ r /. J . 

■ — 


■ . J.f . xJoir ■ 




D 

;• J j. i ... d::-' •. .1 

J,oc»f*-L. <oil ' 

:• . - 1 













' 

b j/ :' : ' 












■ • . 









FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II 


^Chester I. Barnard, The Functions of the Executive 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1947T7 P* 32. 

2 Chas. E. Phillips, The Development of Education in 
Canada (Toronto: W. J. Gage & Co., 1957), p. 33. 

3 lbid .. p. 33. 

^Ibid., p. 26. 

^Ibid., p. 30. 

^Ontario, Report of the Royal Commission on Education 
in Ontario (Toronto: King f s Printer, 1950), p. 9. 

^C.P. Collins, tr Colonization in the British Empire, 
1337-1352”, (Unpublished master’s thesis, University of 
Saskatchewan, 1942), p. 90. 

^Phillips, op . cit., p. 60. 

^ Statutes of Canada . 33 Viet., c. 43, Secs. 3-7. 

A. Shortt and A. G. Doughty, Canada and Its Provinces 
(Toronto: Edinburgh University Press, 1914), Vol. 19, p. 222. 

UDenis C. Smith, ”A Study of the Origin and Develop¬ 
ment of Administrative Organization in Educational Systems 
of British Columbia", (Unpublished doctoral thesis, Univer¬ 
sity of California, 1952), pp. 3-10. 

12 Phillips, op . cit .j pp. 111-112. 

l^ ibid . 

lz KLbid . 

^ statutes of Canada . 4 & 5 Viet., c. 29. 

l^C.B. Sissons, Egerton Ryerson , His Life and Letters 
(Toronto: Clarke Irwin & Co., 1947), Vol. 2, p. 152. 

1?J. G. Hodgins (ed.), Historical and Other Papers and 
Documents Illustrative of the Education System of Ontario 
(Toronto: King’s Printer, 1911), Vol. 3, p. 324. 











































'■ 


t 




c 



< 












FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II (continued) 


l g Ibid .. p. 320. 

19phillips, op. cit .. p. 12S. 

^ Statutes of Canada . 13 & 14 Viet., c. 4S. 

21 Ibid .. Sec. 21. 

22 

T. C. Byrne, "The Historical Development and Eval¬ 
uation of the Provincial Leadership in the Field of High 
School Instruction for the Province of Alberta" (unpublished 
doctoral thesis, University of Colorado, 1956), p. 26. 

23 

Phillips, op. cit., p. 132. 

2Zf Hodgins, op . cit ..pp. 162-3. 

^Phillips, op. cit ., 

26 

^Ontario, Report of the Royal Commission on Education 
op. cit., p. 13. 

2 ?Byrne, op . cit .. p. 27. 

2 %odgins, op. cit., pp. 237-23#. 

2< ^Statutes of Ontario . 34 Viet., c. 33, Sec. 36 . 

^°Hodgins, op . cit .. Vol. 22, p. 115. 

^Statutes of Ontario , op. cit., Sec. 3$. 

32 

Hodgins, op . cit., Vol. 23, p. 265 . 

^ Ordinances . North West Territories . 1##4, No. 5. 
34ordinances, North West Territories . 1#92, No. 22. 
33 ibid .. 1901, c. 29, Secs. 3-7. 

^Smith, op. cit ., p. # ff. 

3?0ntario, Report of the Royal Commission on Education 
op. cit., p. 252 . 
































65 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II (continued) 

o d 

^ Your Child Leaves School . Second Report, Canadian 
Research Committee on Practical Education (Toronto: W.J. 

Gage & Co., 1950), p. 29• 

^Ontario, Royal Commission Report on Education , op. 
cit., pp. ,244-243, 

^Statutes . Nova Scotia, Chapter 73 (1956 Amendments). 

^-Saskatchewan, Department of Education, An Explanation 
of the Larger Units of Rural School Administration (Regina: 
King’s Printer, 1944), p. 6. 

^ 2 J. H. Putman and G. M. Weir, Survey of the School 
System,(Victoria: King T s Printer, 1925), pp. 12-13, 

^3s©e Annual Reports , Departments of Education, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, British Columbia, 1913-1925. 

^Interview with Inspectors of Schools, Nova Scotia and 
New Brunswick, May, 1957, 

^Ontario, Report of Royal Commission , op . cit . p. 214. 

^British Columbia, Department of Education, School 
Organization in British Columbia (Victoria: King’s Printer, 
1925), pp. 12-13. 

^ Statutes of British Columbia . Archives of British 
Columbia (Victoria: King’s Printer, 1946). 

*Aj. C. Jonason, "Larger Units of Administration in 
Alberta" (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Oregon, 
1951), PP. 70-71. 

^Ibid . 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report , 1936, 

p. 6. 

^ Statutes of Alberta . 

^ 2 Alberta, Department of Education, Report of Commission 
on Co - Terminus Boundaries , 1954. 















































FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER II (continued) 


53h # W. Foght, A Survey of Education , A Report to the 
Government of the Province of Saskatchewan (Regina: King’s 
Printer, 191$). 

5%. L. Reid, "School District Finance (Regina: 
Department of Education, 1933), p* 4. (Mimeographed.) 

^Saskatchewan, Department of Education, Report of the 
Committee on School Administration (Regina: King’s Printer, 
1940), p. 37. 

^Statutes of Saskatchewan , c. 76, Sec. 4* 

5? Ibid ., c. 41, Sec. $. 

5$H. P. Moffatt, ’’Financing Public Education in Nova 
Scotia" (paper presented to Institute of Public Administration 
in Canada, 1956). 

5 9 Ibid . 

^Nova Scotia, Department of Education, Report of the 
Royal Commission on Public School Finance (Halifax: King’s 
Printer, 1954), P* $3. 

^Nova Scotia, Department of Education, Annual Report , 
1956, p. vi. 

°^New Brunswick, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , 1939, p. 39* 

63ftew Brunswick, Department of Education, Report of 
the Royal Commission on Financing of Schools , op. cit., p. 55. 

6 4lbid . 

^interviews with Senior Officials, Departments of 
Education, Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia. 




























t 







c 





c 




. 




1 











CHAPTER III 


STRUCTURE AND AUTHORITY 
STRUCTURE 

Organization is primarily concerned with functions 
and functional analysis; structure with authority and the 
effectiveness of communication. Organization is dynamic; 
structure is static. Structure is used by organization for 
the systematic control of behavior and activities so that 
goals can be achieved. 

Structure is a systematic arrangement of statuses 
and roles. The status of a position is determined by 

(1) the relationships established, (2) the necessities of the 

chain of command, (3) law and regulation. All individuals 

and groups associated with the institution occupy a status 
2 

position. 

The educational structure in each of the provinces 

conforms closely to the main characteristics of bureaucracy 

3 

as identified by Weber. These are (1) the distribution of 
the regular activities in a fixed way as official duties; 

(2) each lower office is under the control of a higher one; 









» 

. 




Hi: 










6& 

(3) employment is based on technical qualifications and the 
employee is protected against arbitrary dismissal; (4) the 
performance of activities and discharge of responsibilities 
is governed by a system of laws and regulations designed to 
ensure uniformity; and (5) the ideal official is expected to 
conduct his office and perform his functions with impersonal 
regard for the common good. 


The Canadian Model 

An examination of the structure of each Department 
of Education in Canada, with the exception of Quebec and 
Newfoundland, reveals many common aspects. These were sum¬ 
marized in 1950 in the official publication of the Canadian 
Education Association, Canadian Education . 

The administration of education in each province is 
carried on by a department of education whose personnel 
is somewhat as follows; 

Minister of Education 

May or may not be a professional educator 

Along with the provincial Cabinet determines educational 

policies 

Responsible for the administration of the provincial 
education program. 

Deputy Minister of Education 

A civil servant, senior in the department 
A professional educator 

Advises the minister and carries out the policies 
Provides continuity since he does not change with the 
government 

Known by other or additional titles in some provinces. 






‘ 

. 

■ ' . 0 

..... .' • ( 

- . » . • . < 

' 

» ■ ' : 

»v 


: ''' . :■ . ' , 

. • ■ ' 





69 


Chief Superintendent, or Chief Inspector of Schools 
Heads up the inspectorial or supervisory staff. 

(Each province has a corps of officials acting as 
inspectors or supervisors of the schools of the 
province). 

Director of Curriculum. 

Director of Vocational Education. 

High School Inspectors. 

Elementary School Inspectors. 

Registrar. 

Accountant. 

4 

Manager of Textbook Branch or Bureau. 

The only provinces which differ markedly in structure 
from the model and in the basic characteristics are Quebec 
and Newfoundland. While each of the provinces differs some¬ 
what in the number of positions, the amount of similarity in 
the basic bureaucratic structure among all of the provinces 
is considerable. 

Table III indicates considerable difference in the 
number of authorities recognized by the provincial govern¬ 
ment as having responsibilities for school systems in Canada, 

7 

but the differences are more apparent than real. In the 
two provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, for instance, 
there is a gentleman 1 s agreement which permits public schools 

which are admittedly Roman Catholic. Both have large French 
Canadian minorities and, where the geographical area is 







' 










' 










: ' 


‘ 










■ I . 







70 


TABLE II 

SELECTED CHARACTERISTICS OF VARIOUS PROVINCIAL 
DEPARTMENTS OF EDUCATION? 


Code - 

OS 

X 

yes 

•H 

1 

High School Only 

B 

2 

Some Elementary 
Schools 

£ 

rH 

O 

o 

3 

In Vancouver Only 

• 

u 

PQ 



£ 



• 

P 



T) 

T3 


OS 



o 

o 

o 

as 

£ 

£ 


£ 



• 

£ 

•H 

•H 

as 

aS 


0 



Pi 

Oh 

25 

P 

rH 

r—1 


P 

as 


- — .» 

'—• 

co 

o 

0 

TJ 

OS 

o 

P 

o 



£ 

a 

M 

£ 

P 

p 

o 

•H 

o 

O 

£ 

CO 


£ 

U 

ai 

p 

Sh 

0) 

0 

£ 


• 

O 

0 


•H 

as 

p 

P 

PQ 

as 

EQ 

<P 

P 

m 

£ 

P 

0 

0 


> 


£ 

i — 1 

aS 

as 

£ 

£ 

£ 

• 

o 

• 

0 


CO 

g 

O 

O’ 

O’ 


S 

cu 

a 


Department of Education 
with Minister 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


X 

X 

X 

X 

Advisory Council (lay) 



X 

X 







Deputy Minister 

x 

X 

X 

X 

X 


X 

X 

X 

X 

Provide for Inspection 











of Rural Schools 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X X 

X 

X 

X 

Provide for Inspection 











of City Schools 

X 

1 


X 

X 

X 

X 

1 


X 

Permitted to Employ 











Superintendents 

3 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X X 

X 

X 


























71 


TABLE III 

SYSTEMS OF PUBLICALLY OPERATED SCHOOLS 
IN THE PROVINCES OF CANADA 6 



All 

Under 

One 

Local 

Authority 

Religious 

Separate 

Schools 

Separate 

Authorities 

for 

Secondary 

Schools 

Total 

Possible 
Authority 
for one Area 

Br. Columbia 

X 



.. 1 

Alberta 


X 


2 

55 a slca tnbftwan 


X 

X 


Mpnitohfl 

X 



1 

Ontpri o 


X 

X 

3 

Qnphpr 


X 


2 

New Brunswick 


X 


1 

Nova Scotia 

X 



1 

P. E. Island 

x 



1 

Newfoundland 


X 


A 

































72 

mainly such, a French Canadian inspector is usually assigned 

to the area. In addition, these "Acadian" schools have what 

is known locally as an "Acadian visitor" who fulfills much 

of the function of an inspector who advises and directs in 

$ 

respect to religious education. 

Larger Units of Administration 

The larger units of administration were organized for 
the purpose of placing the local administration of schools 
on a stronger financial basis and of providing better educ¬ 
ational opportunities for the boys and girls in the rural 
areas. By placing one board of trustees in charge of an 
area administered formerly by eighty or more boards, the 
single board found its potential power resources greatly 
increased. The new power ratio between the central author¬ 
ity and the local authority brought new forces into play. 
These, in turn, demanded a rearrangement of status positions 
and channels of communication within the structure. In some 
cases fresh demands were met by the addition of new positions 
only; in others important changes were made in the internal 
structure and lines of authority. None of the senior 
directors interviewed in the three provinces in the western 
zone was prepared to say that the structure as it exists 
now (1956) is entirely satisfactory. 










, 

1 




■ 



* 








'.0 i - ■- v 
















■ 

• 

< 



- 

. : rx; b 


. 


— 



, 


C « ' 

. 





' 






, 




: i ' ■ . .. 










j 






73 


I ALBERTA 

Between 1935 and 1945 the pressures for new services 
from the Department of Education brought an increase in the 
number of branches and sub-branches.^ In many instances the 
head of each of these branches reported directly to the 
deputy minister. So much time and effort of the deputy 
minister was consumed with the details of administration 
that he was not able to perform effectively his functions as 
the senior officer of the department. 

A reorganization of the internal structure of the 
department took place in 1945• The ranking of status pos¬ 
itions was changed with the redistribution of the official 
duties. Figure 2 is a schematic illustration of the internal 
structure of the Alberta Department of Education in 1936; 

Figure 3, the same department in 1956, twenty years later. 
Although more branches had been added to the structure, the 
number of people or directors reporting to the deputy min¬ 
ister had not increased. Until 1935 the chief inspector’s 
branch was concerned only with the inspection of elementary 
schools. In 1956 the chief superintendent was head of the 
Division of Instruction and responsible for all aspects of 
supervision and instruction. Second only to the Division of 
Instruction in 1956 was the Division of School Administration— 


■ 




n 


- 





• ■ 


' 

4 




-■ 


J 



« X 


■ ' 

! ' ' ' . < • 


t . ' 




f : i 

. 

. 



. 








74 



Figure 2. Structure of the Department of Education, 
Alberta, 1936. 

(from unpublished paper, Department of Education, 
Alberta, 1936.) 


























% 











75 


1 Minister of Education 1 


1 Deputy Minister I 


Division of Instruction 


1. Inspection & Supervision 

2. Night Schools 

3. Private Schools 

4. Handicapped Children 

5. Industrial Arts 

6. Home Economics 

7* Curriculum Branch 
£• Registrar 
9. Co-ordinator of 
Teacher Training 


Division of School 
Administration 


Corresgondegce School 


Provincial Institute of 
Technology and Art 

School for the Deaf 


Canadian Vocational Training 


Students T Assistance Board 


Statistics 


Figure 3. Structure of Department of Education, Alberta,1956. 
(from unpublished paper, Department of Education, Alberta, fT ) 






























76 


a branch which was not present at all in 1936. As one 
traces the changes within the structure of the Department 
of Education in Alberta during the past twenty years, he 
finds an adjustment to change not only in function, but in 
structure and status position. This is a characteristic 
which is not evident to any great extent in either 
Saskatchewan or British Columbia. 

Boards of Trustees 

In 1936 approximately eighty school districts, more 
or less, were brought together to form a school division.^ 

At the time no town or village districts were included, but 
later amendments to the School Act corrected this weakness. 

At the present time most of the villages and towns in the 
province are included in the school divisions. 

Each school division was divided into five sub¬ 
divisions, with a board member elected by the ratepayers from 
each subdivision. Each member held office for a period of 
two years, with members from the even-numbered subdivisions 
and odd-numbered subdivisions being elected in alternate 
years. All assets and liabilities of the school districts 
contained within a school division were taken over and 
practically all the powers and responsibilities of the former 
district boards were invested in the central school division 








„ 

C ' ; ■ 

. 


• > . 

• , ; ' ’ - ■ ■ ' « ■ : ' f ' ° 

1 ' . , .. 

* 

' . ■ 

; ■ : : ' ’ ‘ 

* 

1 > ■ ^ ' ' 


* 

' ■ 






77 

board. These powers and duties are specified later in 
this study in a section on the legal powers of boards of 
trustees. 

Local Boards of Trustees 

Local boards of trustees were retained in Alberta. 

They were primarily responsible for making recommendations 
concerning the care and maintenance of the schools in 
operation in their district. For some years after the estab¬ 
lishment of school divisions local boards declined in number 11 
because the members and the local people felt that, since 
most of the powers and responsibilities had been taken from 
them, there was not much left to do. The trend towards 
centralization of school facilities in towns and villages 
and the closing of large numbers of rural schools led to 
further reduction in the number of local district boards. 

If these boards found little to do when their local school 
was operating, they found less reason for existence when 

the school was closed and the children were carried by 

12 

busses to central schools. 

The development of large central schools, however, 
has led to the establishment of attendance area boards. In 
some instances these boards are comprised of representatives 
from all areas served by the central school and often are 
quite influential in the development of school policies. 











* 

• 

> 




























„ 






• 
























• 



• - ■ 

01 





* 







■ 






' 

•' C 







. 

• : i 












. 



< 







; 


■ 




■ 



' 



« 






- 




:'. ' ‘ ; • " ‘ • ' C 

. 

. 

■ . ■ 

* 





7 $ 


II SASKATCHEWAN 

In Saskatchewan, as in Alberta, the Minister of 
Education is the executive head of the department with 
power to establish the necessary offices to carry on the work 
of the department* Unlike Alberta, there is an advisory 
body, the Educational Council—made up of five members, two 
of whom must be Roman Catholic—appointed by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. This Council has the responsibility of 
reviewing all matters dealing with the administration and 

inspection of schools, and such matters as are referred to 

13 

it by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

In contrast to Alberta there has been a very large 
increase in the number of officials who report directly to 
the deputy minister. The passage of the permissive legis¬ 
lation^ on school units in 1940 was followed by a large 

15 

increase in the number of branches and sub-branches. The 

organization of larger units throughout the province after 

1945^ led to further division of duties and the establishment 

of more branches. In 1943 the heads of eighteen branches 

reported directly to the deputy minister,(Figure 4); in 1956 

twenty-two, (Figure 5)* In contrast to this, there were 

17 

only eight branches in 1939. 




79 



Figure 4« Structure of Department of Education, Saskatchewan, 1943* 








































X 


o 


ft 


-P 



0 


X 

O 



X 


ft 

X 


0 

ft 


•H 



X 

ft 


ft 

o 


S 

X 


{>» 

0 


•p 

ft 


X 

0 


ft 

•H 


0 ■ 

X 


Q 

ft 



S 




x 
0 
X 
o 
ct5 
0 
Eh 

ft 
O 

x 

o 

ft 
O 
0 
x 

ft 

Q Eh 


X 

X 

X 

ft 

CO 

•H 

?x0| 

(1) 

03 


X 

X 

CO 

•H 

> 

ft 

O 

X 

O £ 
CO o 

♦H ft 
> -P 
X X 
CD O 
ft 2 
X X 
CO pq 


o 

o 

xi 

o 

CO 

ft 

o 

X CO 
O ft 
CO CO 
•H X 
> o 
X x 
0 cd 
ft o 
3 X 
CO PC; 


CO 

I 

ft 

o 

X 

o 

CO 

•H 

> 

x 

0 

ft 

X 

CO 


o 

O 

X 

o 

CO 

ft 

o 

X 

o CO 
CO 0 
•H ft 


ftX 
X ft 
co ft 


X 

d 

o 

ft 

0 

0 

X 

x 

o 

o 

ft 

o 


cd 

ft 

•H i—I 

o o 
a o 

ft X! 
X O 
ft CO 






X 





X 







o 



0 


X 




0 


X 

•H 


0 

X 

ft 

•H 

X 



ft 0 

• 

o 

ft 


bo 

0 

X 

ft 

0 



X H 


ft 

X 


X 

X 

0 

PQ 

o 

0 


0 O 

X 

ft 

o 


ft 

<3 

Q 


•X 

o 

X 

X o 

o 

X 

X 


X 



0 

ft 

ft 

o 

X X 

ft 

o 

X 


ft 

X 

0 

X 

ft 

ft 

ft 

0 o 

ft 

X 

w 


ft 

X 

X 

ft 

o 

0 

ft 

ft CO 

cd 

X 



X 

0 

ft 



•H 

cd 

X 

o 

w 

ft 

X 

CQ 

X 


X 

ft 

ft 

X 

ft ft 

X 


X 

X 


ft 

X 

o 

0 

X 

ft 

ft X o 

X 

rH 

X 

o 

ft 

X 

o 

ft 

b£ 

ft 

0 

X 0 

W 

X 

o 

£ 

o 

o 

ft 


X 

co 

•h 

0 ft 0 


o 

ft 

ft 

o 

X 


ft 

X 


X 

X 2 ft 

ft 

•H 

ft 

o 

X 


ft 

o 

PQ 

X 

ft 

X CO X 

»—l 

0 

X 

X 

o 

ft 

o 

c 


2 

& 

0 0 

X 

W 

o 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 

X 

X 

X 

X 

ft H 2 

X 

X 

o 




X 

o 

X 


<3 X 

X O X 


ft 

> 

ft 

ft 

X 

o 

CO 

X 

0 

o 

ft o 0 




o 

o 

o 

CO 



ft 

ft 0 

Xxft 

ft 

ft 

ft 



ft 


«» 

X 

X 

O ft 

0 0 2 

o 

o 

o 

X 

X 

X 

• 

X 

X 

X 

, > 

ft CO ft 




o 

o 

X 

1—1 

o 

0 

X 

X x 

X x 

X 

X 

X 

0 

0 

ft 

X 

0 

ft 

O 

O 0 

CO X m 

o 

o 

o 

ft 

ft 

0 

X 

ft 

o 


ft p. 

bO ft 

ft 

ft 

ft 

> 

> 

ft 

ft 

> 


ft 

o 2 

ft ft X 

o 

o 

o 

X 

X 

X 

o 

X 

ft 

o 

0 CO 

0 X CO 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

•H 

X 

0 

0 

o 

X 

•H 

X 

X 

X 

ft 

ft 

£ 

•X 

X 

ft 

X 

•H 

X 

•H 

ft 

ft 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

o 

Q 

o 

ft 

ft 

Q 

CO 

CO 

< 

ft 

CO 

o 

CO 


0 

X 

X 

b0 

ft 

ft 


Structure of the Department of Education, Saskatch 





































Boards of Trustees 


The Larger Units Act passed in 1944 was based upon 

the School Divisions Act of 1940. Each of the school units 

organized in the province included approximately eighty 

rural and village districts, and all towns with a population 

1$ 

of two thousand or less. As in Alberta, each unit was sub¬ 
divided into five or six subunits. Unlike Alberta, members 
were elected to the unit board by representatives of the 
local district boards rather than by direct vote of the rate¬ 
payers. In 1956 Saskatchewan amended the Larger Units Act 
to provide for election of unit board members by direct 
vote of the electors.^ 

Until 1956 the local boards of trustees in Saskatchewan 
occupied a much more important place in the structure than 
in Alberta since they had to remain in existence in order to 
elect a trustee to represent them on the unit board. In 
places where it was not possible to keep a board in operation, 
the subunit trustee usually acted as the official trustee. 

In some instances he was official trustee of the majority of 
school districts within his subdivision. While the official 
trustee was supposed to make every effort to appoint a 
delegate to vote in the election of a new trustee the practice 
made manipulation easy for the sitting trustee, who usually 






















* 


i' AnA-: ■ ' ' ' 




■ 


' • e 


■ 


< ■' ■ 

. 


, 

. 




■ • ■'■ ['■: 







, * 

. i:' ... 













* 



XJ ■. 








a ' mo 








: . •' c ' 





62 


found little difficulty in ensuring his own reelection or 
the election of the man he wished to support. 

Local Board of Trustees 

During the 1930 t s large numbers of schools closed 
down as the number of abandoned farms grew. By 1944 many 
superintendents of schools were official trustees of as 
many as twenty-five districts within their superintendencies 
Centralization of school facilities in the town and villages 
in many parts of the province closed large numbers of one- 
and two-room schools. Often the village or town centralized 

school would have in attendance children from fifteen to 

22 

twenty-five, or more, local school districts. Although 
not very common throughout the province as yet there was 
evidence that the centralization of schools was leading to 
a rapid increase in attendance area boards .^3 in all, the 
growth of large attendance areas, the changes in the Larger 
Units Act permitting election of unit board members by the 
electors, and the general movement to a village-dominated 
rural economy,^4 greatly reduced the powers formerly held 
by local district boards. As these forces just mentioned are 
still operating and will continue to do so for some time, 
the local boards of trustees are almost sure to disappear as 
a part of the administrative structure in Saskatchewan. 











Ill BRITISH COLUMBIA 


S3 


In British Columbia the executive functions of the 
government educational structure reside in the Council of 
Public Instruction made up of the cabinet, deputy minister, 
and superintendent of education* The Department of Educ¬ 
ation was established in 1920 as a department of the civil 

service and in 1925 the office of the chief inspector of 

25 

schools was created. 

Throughout the history of education in British 
Columbia the Council of Public Instruction and the senior 
departmental officials have been concerned about the struggle 
for control of the school system between the central and the 
local authorities. It was mentioned in the Putman and Weir 
report,^6 the King report,^ and the Cameron report of 
1946.^ This same concern was voiced by a majority of the 
senior officials during interviews in 1957. 

The emphasis placed upon central control and direction 
of the educational system is much more in evidence in 
British Columbia than in the other two provinces in the 
western zone. The geographical features of mountain and 
valley, the great range in financial resources between the 
cities, the semi-urban, heavily populated, and wealthy 
sections, in comparison with the poorer villages and 













' 

1 ■■■ 

. 

' ... 

■ 


. ( 

- 








' 

, 







r ; rw .• J i no..ubo 






:?or.: fro.. •' now 


< 










#4 

settlements, make it essential for the provincial authority 
to maintain a strict control if equality of opportunity is 
to have any meaning.Much of the increase in adminis¬ 
trative branches has come as a result of a determination to 
maintain, and at times regain, full control of the school 
system. Figure 6 is a schematic illustration of the struc¬ 
ture of the Department of Education in 1956.3° All of the 
directors of the various branches of the department channel 
their communications through the assistant superintendent. 
All of the branch directors report directly to the deputy 
minister, or his assistant. 

Larger Units of Administration 

In British Columbia the school district is the larger 
unit of administration. When the Public Schools Act was 
amended in 1946 to permit the establishment of larger units 
of administration, provision was made for three different 
types of school districts. They are: 

(1) Large municipal school districts, thirty-five 
in number, composed of one or more municipalities plus 
a rural area. Nanaimo is an example of this type. 

(2) Municipal school districts, seven in number, in 
which the school district is co-terminus with the limits 
of the municipality. Vancouver is an example. 


(3) Large rural school districts, thirty-five in 
number, composed of rural areas and villages. The Peace 























































1 

























• 


















. 




t 




- 








■ 




: . c .. . ; • • : ■ - 

t 

. 






- 

* : - » 

' 

c' 













&5 


Council of 

Public Instructior 


Minister of Education [ 




Superintendent 


Departmental 

Provincial Boarc 

— 

of Education 

— 

Co-ordinating 

of Examiners 




Committee 


Assistant Deputy 


Chief Inspector 
of Schools 

Co-ordinator 
of Services 

Co-ordinator of 
Teacher Education 

Director of 
Adult Education 


Director of 
Administration 

Departmental 

Registrar 


Departmental 

Controller 


Vlunicipal and Provincial 
Inspectors of Schools 


Legislation 

School Finance 
Departmental Organization, 
Coordination & Evaluation 
Dominion Provincial 
Education Agreement 
School District-Department 
Co-ordination 
Education Soldiers 1 
Dependent Children 
Libraries, Archives, 
and Museums 
Public Information 


Provincial Curriculum 
Advisory Board 
Curriculum Development 
and Courses of Study 
Text Book Branch 
Tests, Standards, 

Research 

Consultant in Depart¬ 
ment Examinations 
Elementary and Secondary 
Correspondence Education 
Educational and Vocational 
Guidance 

School Radio and Visual 
Educat i on* 


Figure 6. Structure of Department of Education, British 
Columbia, 1956. 

(Adapted from Public Elementary and Secondary Education in 

-Bri tis h. Colum b ia ) 30 















































































£6 


River district is an example of this type. 

(4) Unattached small rural school districts, twenty- 
three in number, composed of small isolated rural 
districts. Two of these districts, one in a suburb of 
Vancouver and the other in the suburb of Victoria, are 
exceptions.31 

All of the cities, with the exception of Vancouver, as 
well as the towns and villages became an integral part of the 
larger unit of administration in 1946.^2 

Local Administration 

In each inspectorate there may be from one to four 
large administrative areas. Each has a Board of School 
Trustees elected by the ratepayers and may have five, seven, 
or nine members. In the large rural areas contact is main¬ 
tained with each of the former districts through represent¬ 
atives. There is usually a representative from each attend¬ 
ance area, or one representative for each one hundred students 
enrolled, up to a total of three. The representatives are 
elected at an annual meeting of the ratepayers at a date 
set by the Inspector of Schools. The representatives must 
have the same qualifications as those for a trustee, but come 
up for election every year. As well as being the liaison 
officers between the district and the board, the represent¬ 
atives also elect the trustees who are to represent rural 

33 

areas on the District Board.^ In essence, the represent¬ 
atives play the same role in British Columbia as the boards 















- 

; . ' • • r 

.. ' • t • ■ 




- 





- - 


, i: ■■ u- , - ; 'ii V r:< 

. 








\"x ovq tg‘;1 






^ » ' 

















$7 



Figure 7. 


Structure of Large Municipal Districts. 


34 


British Columbia. 
























88 



Figure 8 . 


Structure of Large Rural Districts 


35 


British Columbia 



























39 


of local district trustees or attendance area boards in 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

The duties, powers, and functions of the district 
boards in British Columbia are quite similar to those of the 
corresponding type of boards found in the other two western 
provinces. These will be discussed further in the section 
dealing with legal status and powers. 

IV THE EASTERN ZONE 

By 1940 it was evident in many parts of the provinces 
of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick that "rural and village 
school sections could no longer function effectively.”36 
In 1942 in Nova Scotia and 1943 in New Brunswick the county 
finance unit was brought into being. The municipal board was 
made responsible for levying a uniform tax for school pur¬ 
poses over the whole of a municipality. A new administrative 
body, the County Finance Board, received, after they had 
been approved by the county superintendent of schools, requests 
for funds in the form of budgets from each of the boards of 
school sections within the county. All of the budgets were 
consolidated and a single tax rate was struck for the county. 
The money raised, along with grants received from the govern¬ 
ment, was used for the purpose of paying for the "foundation" 






■ 








•. . i I 


5 


• 









• .0 


















' 




* 














* 








■ . 




■ 






• V ' 
















90 


program*^7 New schools and extensive renovation to old 
buildings were, and are, paid for through the sale of 
debentures by the local board of the school section. Annual 
payments on the debt are accepted as part of the cost of the 
foundation program.^ 

The County Finance Board is made up of three members 
appointed by the government of the province and four appointed 
by the municipal council. They pay all bills for the oper¬ 
ation of each of the school sections in the county. To meet 
their expenditures they receive regular payments from the 
municipal board and the Department of Education grants. All 
surplus funds, however, become part of the general reserves 
of the municipality. The County Finance Board has neither 
reserves nor debts. 

New Brunswick 

In 1955 the Royal Commission on the Financing of 
Schools in New Brunswick found that the advantages expected 
of the fiscal units had not materialized.*^ The Commission 
recommended the extension of the equalization grants which 
had been in force since 1943 and the extension of the powers 
of the County Finance Board to make them county school boards 
with "the same authority over all schools within the county 



* 

•. - 

. 

’ . ■ 

, 

■ t < 

• . V ; 

* 

' 

. 

. 

' 

' 







91 


unit which the present boards have. "40 To date no legislation 
has been passed to put this recommendation into force. 

Wherever it is possible, however, the county super¬ 
intendents report they have brought about the consolidation 
of many of the small school sections. With consolidation the 
small district board of trustees disappears and a new board 
administers the affairs of the new attendance area.^ In some 
counties a large number of consolidations have taken place, 
in others none. 

Since 1943 few changes have taken place in the struc¬ 
ture of the Department of Education or the structure of the 
county unit* In Figure 9 the present structure of the 

JO 

Department of Education in New Brunswick is illustrated. 

The deputy minister is also the chief superintendent to 
whom all county and high school superintendents report dir¬ 
ectly. Figure 10 illustrates the main positions in the 

I Q 

structure and the lines of authority in the county unit. ^ 

Nova Scotia 

In 1954 The Royal Commission on Public School Finance 
in Nova Scotia tabled recommendations very similar to those 
made a year later in New Brunswick.^ In the 1955 session 
of the legislature, however, the school act was amended and 
the TT county finance boards became in fact the county school 




-r ■: ■■ ' ■ t : ' 

- 

•' ' 

„ 

^ .. ' 

* 

- 

c.....; J • : .. . • ' f:‘ . . J 9 

' ; :■ : 

- 

, 

. ■ j • I . • 

. ; , .)i:i , i ■ - lo ;4 . : tOO< 

. i . 

i',: , ■ . O,' , " C 







92 


Board of Education 



Minister 

of Education 



Deputy Minister and 

Chief Superintendent 


Assistant to the 
Deputy Minister 


Director of 
Teacher Training 



Assistant to the 
Deputy Minister 


Director of Foundation 
Services 


Director of 
Vocational Education 


Engineer, School 
Building Planning 


Director of Research 
and Curriculum 


- Registrar 


County School Inspectors 


Figure 9* Structure of Department of Education, New 
Brunswick, 1956. 


(Adapted from unpublished paper, 1957.) 































































. 


• . ■ . . 




, 






93 


Board of Education 



Minister of Education 



Deputy Ministe 
Department of 

:r and 
Education 


No: 

Of: 

De- 

n-Instructional 
ficers of the 
partment 


County Superintendents 
of Schools 

Instructional 
Officers of 
Department 









County Finance Board County 

Council 




Boards of District Schools 


Boards of Consolidated Schools 


Figure 10, Administrative and Financial Structure of 
Rural Schools in New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. 











































94 


boards” on January 1, 1956.^5 The addition of new powers 
to the previous county finance board brought no changes in 
the method of appointing members to a board of trustees* As 
in New Brunswick, all members of the County School Board 
are appointed, three by the government and four by the mun¬ 
icipal council. Consolidation, too, has been given consid¬ 
erable emphasis in Nova Scotia, with the consequent dis¬ 
appearance of large numbers of small district boards. Figure 
10 describes the county structure in Nova Scotia as well as 
in New Brunswick. 

The Department of Education in Nova Scotia, however, 
has a somewhat different structure than that in New 
Brunswick. The Chief Inspector is also the Assistant Deputy 
Minister directly responsible to the Deputy Minister. In 
addition, there are at least eighteen divisions or branches, 
the heads of which are all directly responsible to the 
Deputy.^ (Figure 

Summary 

Similar types of bureaucratic structure in each of 
the Canadian provinces have produced similarities in general 
characteristics and systems of authority. 

The Department of Education in Alberta has adjusted 
itself to the changes brought about by the larger units of 



. 


/ - : .(V, c 

.... : . ■ ' ■ • • - ■ ■ - ■ ? 



t < 

. 


’• ' V 

. 

* 


' ■ 




■ 


. 




' 






* 

t c ■ ■ . < 

- 













. : . . 










96 


administration by redefining many status positions, their 
relationships, and the lines of authority* Saskatchewan and 
British Columbia, on the other hand, have met the challenges 
of the new developments by adding more and more branches and 
sub-branches without any basic alteration in the lines of 
authority. 

In both Saskatchewan and Alberta the local district 
boards have been retained as part of the structure of admin¬ 
istration. Until 1956 in Saskatchewan members of the unit 
board were elected by representatives of the district boards. 
Now these members are elected by popular vote and the pres¬ 
tige of the local boards has been further reduced. 

British Columbia has extremes of geographic, economic, 
and population concentration which are not found on the 
prairies. Because of its necessity for adjustment to the 
particular physical and economic factors found in the prov¬ 
ince, British Columbia has developed three types of 
administrative structure. In Alberta and Saskatchewan the 
superintendency is the larger unit of administration; in 
British Columbia from one to four of the larger units may be 
included in one superintendency. 


. 

*V- 

i 

* . 




- - 

. 

- ■ •’ • .• ■■ ;< • 

• : « 









97 


AUTHORITY 

Stability in an organization depends upon the ability 
to predict that other people will do the right thing at the 
right time* Within a government bureaucracy such as educ¬ 
ation the expected modes of action--the roles--and the 
relationship of one position to another--the statuses—are 
defined and circumscribed by statutes, rules and regulations. 
Laws enacted by the legislature provide the basis for the 
definition of specialized functions which each office holder 
is to perform and the level of command he is to exercise. 

The law confers on the office holders in the hierarchy the 
right to exercise legal authority for the purpose of direct¬ 
ing others in subordinate positions for the purpose of 
achieving the goals of the institution. 

British North America Act of 1S67 

Part V of the British North America Act of 1367, 
Sections 91, 92, and 93 are the only sections of the act which 
establish the limits of the sovereign powers of the provinces. 
Section 91 establishes the right of the federal government to 
make laws for "the Peace, Order and good Government of Canada, 
in relation to all Matters not coming within the Classes 
of the Provinces" and reserves to the government of Canada all 









■ ■ ' ••• 


~ 


. 




> 




r: v.' t 








s oJ & V H : Ir^iL.O'j • 




' ' 








. 

. 

i ’ ' 






■ 




residual powers. Sections 92 and 93 constitute the legal 
basis for the sovereign powers granted to the provinces.^ 

No provision was included in this act whereby the 
federal government could amend its own constitution. This 
can only be done by an act of the parliament of Great 
Britain upon petition from the Canadian Parliament. The 
provincial legislatures, however, have full power as sover¬ 
eign bodies to amend their own constitutions within the 
limits established by Sections 92 and 93. Dawson, an auth¬ 
ority on constitutional law, holds that "every legislature in 
Canada acting in its legislative sphere is sovereign, its 
powers are exclusive, supreme, absolute.With qualific¬ 
ations guaranteeing the rights of denominational schools 
and minorities recognized, Section 93 guarantees the absolute 
sovereignty of the province in the field of education. 

Through exclusive powers over municipal institutions 
and matters of local concern, all authority of the local 
governing bodies resides in the power assigned to them by 
the provincial government. In education, the local board 
of trustees, as a powerholder of the central government, is 
administrative agent of the superior authority and as such 
its legal existence depends upon the government of the prov¬ 
ince. It is the trustee of provincial power and authority. 


, 

. 

■ 

.1 


'■ 

. 

. - 1 *. 

; i .: ■ : c ' . 

: 

■ < ’ ' rr " 

• ' , < 

* 











c 


' 



i 




■ 





k 

< 


;- J’. 

■ ■ ■ 




; : ,U;j 














' " ' • J k ' '0 


■ ' , 

, 

, ■ i ' ••• 1 ■'.■■■ . . ' . 

' 


l o Hi 

* 




. 



99 


Focal Points of Power in Education 

The status positions which were defined in the 
previous section dealing with structure are the focal points 
of power, or are the power holders within the individual 
bureaucratic structures which have been established in each 
of the provinces. All political power resides in the legis¬ 
lature itself. More and more, the cabinet with full control 
of executive functions is also becoming the controlling 
factor in the legislative process. It has become almost 
the exclusive responsibility of the cabinet to introduce 
government bills. Political sanctions and close control of 
the party members give the party in power—the government- 
close control of legislation. Government bills which the 
cabinet sponsors become statutes, or the government may fall.^ 
In some provinces the cabinet deals directly with 
education through its minister; in others it does not* In 
British Columbia and Nova Scotia the Executive Council 
constitutes itself as the Council of Public Instruction when 
dealing with educational matters. This Council has the 
Minister of Education as its chairman and the Deputy Minister 
as its secretary and chief administrative officer. In 
New Brunswick the central educational authority is the Board 

of Education, which consists of the Lieutenant Governor, the 










: . r; ' : ■ ■■■■ :r. \ 

• , ; 

... 

Llii . ' 


* 








/ Siij i.' lo;o:;' 

■■ 

. ;: ; 

■?. ' id 

. 


* 


1 ' 












. ■ 




100 


Executive Council, the Chancellor of the University of New 
Brunswick, and the Chief Superintendent and Deputy Minister. 

In Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario, the Minister 
of Education is a member of the cabinet and acts as the 
executive and administrative head of the educational system 
of the province. 

Minister of Education 

The Minister of Education as a member of the cabinet 
is the head of the department and a member of the legislature. 
As such he is responsible to the legislature for the conduct 
of his own department.^ As a representative of a provincial 
constituency he is responsible to his electors as a member of 
the legislature. The Minister is not necessarily expected 
to be a professional educator. His main qualifications for 
the post reside in his ability as a politician, his good 
common sense as a layman, and his ability to integrate pol¬ 
itical with educational requirements.^ In recent years 
there is a trend throughout Canada to fill the post of the 
Minister of Education with a person who has had teaching or 
administrative experience in education. 

Dawson defines the position of Minister as ”a seat in 
parliament, and uncertain tenure of office and the opportunity 
to exercise complete power in his own department.”^ As the 









. - • - : t 







. 

* 

- 


i- 

. 

: ■ ■ ■ ; .* ■ . ‘ ■: 1 " * 

■ 

* 

- 

1 , ■ 

■ t 


, - 

. 




. 





101 


executive officer of the cabinet the Minister has the power 
and responsibility to make such regulations and appoint, or 
provide for, such officers and offices as are necessary for 
the effective implementation of the educational policies 
of the government. 

During the tenure of office of Egerton Ryerson as 
Superintendent of Education for Ontario, two main focal 
positions were established as power holders for the del¬ 
egated authority of the Minister. The first and superior 
one resides in the Department of Education and its officials 
the second in the boards of trustees in local areas. As a 
result of the work of Ryerson the Department has become 
identified with two main areas of education, the foundation 
program and the interna of instruction. The boards of 
trustees are responsible, under the direction and super¬ 
vision of the Department, for much of the administrative 
work concerned with the foundation program. They are 
responsible also by direct authorization of the Minister for 
the administration of the externa. Permission is granted 
the local boards of trustees to provide educational oppor¬ 
tunities beyond those required by the foundation program. 




- t 








t ; ••• . .. • •:> - • i ' ■ ■ 

. 

. .* • ; c ■ 

? ■ 

* 

* 




102 


The Deputy Minister of Education 

The Deputy Minister is the chief adviser of the 
Minister and the administrative head of the department* As 
the permanent, non-political, head of the department, he 
provides continuity in administrative leadership. He exer¬ 
cises the powers and authority of his office in the name of 
the Minister and, as such, he and his department are an 
extension of the executive and administrative functions of 
the Minister.^ 

The Department of Education 

The bureaucratic structure of the department provides 
the means by which status positions serve as power holders 
and sources of authority derived from a superordinate. The 
superior-subordinate arrangements of the structural patterns 
establish the flow of authority through the channels of 
communication* All heads of branches may hold authority dir¬ 
ect from the Deputy Minister, as in Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia, 
and New Brunswick, or their authority may progress down 
through two or three separate and increasingly subordinate 
steps, as in Alberta. For example, the office of the chief 
superintendent retains what authority is necessary for the 


carrying on of activities for which it alone is responsible 










a 

, 

■ 

■ ■ ' ■■ ■ - . ' 

■ . 












’ . . . ■ ' 




. 

• ’ : ' • ■ • ‘ ^ 

. 

, 

. . • ■ . ■ : ■ , : X . ' 

' . ■ ■ ’ 

. , 


t ' : • 






















103 

and delegates authority to other positions down the scale to 
the point where the receiver must himself be responsible for 
all activities. 

The officials of the Department of Education put into 
operation the laws and statutes which have been enacted by 
the legislature. Within the bounds of such discretionary 
authority as is granted, they also have the authority to 
establish such regulations as are necessary for the effective 
operation of their branches or divisions. 

The department is expected to make such regulations as 
will guarantee a uniform standard of education over the whole 
province--the foundation program. Traditionally, the depart¬ 
ment itself directs, co-ordinates, and controls those aspects 
of the program known as the interna and supervises in a 
more or less general way those other aspects of the foundation 
program for which local boards of trustees and sometimes other 
departments of the government are responsible. The department 
is expected to make regulations for the organization, govern¬ 
ment, and administration of schools, the supervision and 
inspection of schools, courses of study, and the training and 
certification of teachers. It is expected to establish the 
minimum requirements, or ensure that the minimum requirements 


.. . , , : f .r,o. 

.... .. ■ • ' . ■ r - ' = ; 

, a ■'. 5 v I' > > i U i 

O, . : . . i I 

t 

.. ; ■; , • ' - ' •’ ■ ;J - - r - riv; 


* 


- ■ K ’i 


.■ : . •- ' ■’ 


■ 


- 


„ •: ■ t ' / r.- ' • ’ ' ' ■ - "■ — ' 

.< ■ ' X ' ■ ' 

* 

, 





104 

are enforced, in the construction and maintenance of school 
buildings and premises and in such special courses in adult 
technical, vocational and agricultural education as may be 
offered. 

All departments of education are responsible for the 
development and implementation of curricula. Through the 
curricula, or what are known as the courses of study, the 
instructional program in the classrooms and schools is 
determined. The effectiveness and efficiency of the instruc¬ 
tional program are evaluated by the use of external exam¬ 
inations at various terminal points in the educational career 
of the students. Continuous evaluation of the instructional 
program is the major responsibility of the corps of super¬ 
intendents employed by the department. In a few provinces 

54 

school grants have been paid upon proof of performance. 

Boards of Trustees 

The responsibility of the Department of Education is 
bounded by the political boundaries of the province estab¬ 
lished by agreement at the time the province became part of 
Canada, or by subsequent agreements between the provincial 
and the federal governments. The responsibility of the board 
of trustees is bounded by community borders established by 




< ' 

. 

• ' " t ' ■ 

. 

* 

< " ■ ■ v ■ ■ < • : 

■ 

- 

* 

, 

- 

■ 

* 








105 

the provincial government. Adjustment in such boundaries has 
been made and is still being made, but the final responsibility 
and authority for such divisions rests with the provincial 
government. It is only in recent years that provincial 
authorities have moved to make local administrative units 
coterminus. 

The second and subordinate power holder of the del¬ 
egated authority of the Minister is the board of trustees. 

As such, the local boards of trustees are expected to admin¬ 
ister, manage, and supervise the schools within their dis¬ 
tricts, larger units of administration, or consolidated 
districts, under the authority of the Minister and the reg¬ 
ulations of the Department of Education. In provinces where 
a strong central authority is considered essential, the 
trustee aspect of the central authority is stressed. In 
others, where decentralization is an accepted ideal, the 
stress upon trusteeship is not evident. 

In the western zone boards of trustees have a dual 
responsibility. They are elected by the ratepayers of their 
districts and are responsible to these electors for the 
educational welfare of the children. As trustees they are 
also responsible to the central authority. In the eastern 
zone some members of boards of trustees are appointed by 
















. 






■ 











. 


- 













_ 








■ 





■ 







r 





c 


• 





- 


, ■ 








< 

>S ( 1 Ut 






< ■ .■ 


, r 

. . . . . ; . 

K ' ? 

- . • 

■ u j » n • • ■ ■ 

. . i ' ■ ■ ' l ' ; 

. 



106 

the municipal council and some by the government. Under this 
arrangement the people of the local area have little control 
over the office holders and they, in turn, have no identif¬ 
iable responsibility to the local people. 

The local boards of the basic educational unit in 
each province have as their common responsibility the pro¬ 
vision of school accommodation, engaging, transferring and 
dismissal of teachers and other employees, and the financing, 
administration, and management of the physical plants. The 
boards plan, build, and maintain school buildings within the 
terms or regulations laid down by the government and admin¬ 
istered by a regulatory body which may, or may not, be the 
Department of Education. The property, site, and capital 
assets of the schools in the area under their management are 
all in the name of the board of trustees as a corporate body. 

Summary 

The bureaucratic structure of provincial departments 
of education obtains stability and permanency through the 
legal definition of the expected modes of action. The 
Minister is held responsible by the legislature and his 
constituents for the effective implementation of the educ¬ 
ational policies and program of the government. 

Provincial authority is delegated to two major power 



t ■ : ‘ x 

. 

? ' 

* < 

.. 

. ; . , ..... 

. , , 

* 


. 






* 

















107 


holders, the Department of Education and the boards of 
trustees* As the superior authority, the department has 
the main responsibility for a uniform foundational program 
in the province and the supervisory and advisory responsib¬ 
ilities for the power administered by the boards of trustees* 
The subordinate authority, the board of trustees, is 
responsible for administering the externa of education and 
for adapting the provincial program to the needs of the 
local area. 

















t ' 

- 


' ' t 

; : »■. 






. 







FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III 


^•R. Dubin, Human Relations in Administration (Engle¬ 
wood Cliffs: PrentioeHall, Inc*, 1951), p. 7. 

2 Ibid., p. 22. 

3m. Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organ¬ 
ization . trans. A.M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1947), pp.330-40. 

^”The Structure of Public Education in Canada”, 
Canadian Education . V (September, 1950) pp. 6-$. 

^R. B. Howson, ”The City Superintendent of Schools in 
Canada” (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Cal¬ 
ifornia, 1956), p. 18. 

6 Ibid .. p. 22. 

7lbid ., p. 29. 

^Phillips, o£. cit .. p. 219. 

^Alberta, Department of Education, 

1935-45. 

-^Alberta, Statutes . Chap. £0. 

■^Alberta, Department of Education, 

Table 2, 

■^E. D. Gillespie, ”A Study of Some 
in Larger School Units of Administration 
(unpublished doctoral thesis, Teachers r College, Columbia 
University, 1950), p. 146 . 

■^Saskatchewan, Statutes . Chap. 169, Secs. 3-11. 

^Saskatchewan, Statutes . Chap. 76 . 

■^Saskatchewan, Department of Education, Annual 

Reports . 1940-44. 

l 6 Ibid .. 1946-55. 


Annual Reports . 

Annual Report , 1956, 

Emerging Practices 
in Saskatchewan” 





























109 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III (continued) 

^Saskatchewan, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , 1939, p. iv. 

■^Saskatchewan, Statutes , Chap. 41, Sec. 3. 

•^ Ibid ., Chap. 170, Sec. 10. 

2Q Keport of Royal Commission on Rural life and 
Education , Vol. VI, p. 25. 

21 

Saskatchewan, Department of Education (unpublished 
reports of Superintendents of Schools}. 

22 

^ Ibid . 

23 fh ,, 

1D1CL . 

24- 

Rep ort of Royal Commission on Rural life and 
Education, Vol. VI., p. 26l 

25 British Columbia, "School Organization in British 
Columbia", compiled by the Provincial Advisory Committee to 
the CSA Kellogg Project in Educational Leadership, 1952, pp 
40-1. 

9 a 

J. Ho Putman and G-.M. heir, Survey of the School 
System (Victoria: Xing's Printer, 1925}. 

27 H. B. King, School Finance In British Columbia 
(Victoria: Xing's Printer, 1935). " 

2 fi 

6 M* A. Cameron, Report of the Commissi on into mqui 
into Educational Finance , Province of British Columbia 
(Victoria: King's Printer, 1945). 

29 

British Columbia, School Organization in British 
Columbia , op . cit ., p. 6. 

British Columbia, Department of Education, Public 
Elementary and Sec on1ary sducation in British Columbia 
(Victoria: Queen*s Printer, 1955), p. 11. 

3 ^ 

British Columbia, School Qrganizatlon in British 
Columbia , or . cit., pp. 46-7. 


































































< 

















110 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III (continued) 

32 Ibid. 

33 Ibid .. p. 53. 

3 4lbid . , p. 74 . 

35ibid., p . 75 . 

3 %ova Scotia, Report of the Royal Commission on 
Public School Finance (Halifax: Queen T s Printer, 1954), 

p. 6. 

and 

New Brunswick, Report of the Royal Commission on 
the Financing of Schools in New Brunswick (Fredericton": 
Queen 1 s Printer, 1955), pp. 14-15. 

3?Nova Scotia, ibid ., p. 7* 

New Brunswick, ibid ., p. 15. 

38lbid. 

3 %ew Brunswick, ibid .. p. 16. 

4 °Ibid .. p. 58. 

41 Ibid., p. 55. 

42ibid., p . 57 . 

43 New Brunswick, Department of Education (unpublished 
paper). 

^TJova Scotia, op . cit .. p. 14. 

^Nova Scotia, Statutes . Chap. 7$ 

^Nova Scotia, Department of Education, Annual Report , 
1956, p. 33. 

^Canada, Statutes, 30-31 Victoria, Chap. 3. 

^Robert M. Dawson, The Government of Canada (Toronto 
University of Toronto Press, 194$)", p. 197. 

49 Ibid ., p. 281. 

50 


' Ibid ., pp. 205-7 
































. 















t 


1 



<; * 






Ill 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER III (continued) 


5 !lbid » r p. 230. 

52lbid # , p. 261 . 

53lbid., p. 266 . 

^Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, The Organiz ¬ 
ation and Administration of Public Schools in Canada (Ottawa: 
King’s Printer, Government of Canada, 1952), pp. 57,73,102, 
230,256. 















CHAPTER IV 


THE OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 

The development of the position of the superintendent 
of schools, or the school inspector, has been closely assoc¬ 
iated in each of the provinces of Canada with the growth in 
size and complexity of the educational institution under a 
single authority. During the period when the church dom¬ 
inated the local school systems each school was considered 
as a single unit under the supervision and direction of the 
local representative of the church.^” The United Empire 
Loyalists brought with them the idea that education was the 
responsibility of the family. Since this was not accepted 
by the British colonists in the Maritimes and the Canadas, 
these people, along with others who rejected clerical con¬ 
trol of education, banded together to form private schools. 
The board of trustees elected or appointed by those who 
were immediately concerned with the school was held respons¬ 
ible for its operation. Then came the need for financial 
aid from the central government of the colony. Once the 
central government granted assistance to locally or priv¬ 
ately supported schools, it was faced with the problem of 
equitable distribution of the funds and the introduction 


















«■ 

. 

. 












, 

.. ' ' ’ c 

„ < 

. ' • ' - 

. 

.. 

, 









113 


of some supervisory method to ensure efficient use of the 

money. Thus developed in Upper Canada the conception that 

education must be a function of the central provincial 
2 

authority. 

I. ORGANIZATION 


In the early period the need for state supervision of 
schools in both the American states and in Canada arose from 
similar conditions. In the United States the authorities 
found that when state financial aid was given to local and 
private schools—■ 

. . . whatever aid was given . . . must be administered 
by some central authority representing the state, who 
would have the dual responsibility of (1) distributing 
the fund equitably, and (2) supervising the schools so 
that the fund would not be wastefully expended. Thus 
was gradually developed the conception that education 
is a function of the state. 3 

Dr. Phillips sums up the early period in Upper Canada 
in a similar way: 

The usual steps by which central authorities came into 
being were (1) the establishment of some system of grants, 
(2) the setting up of boards intermediate between the 
locality and the government to examine and license 
teachers, (3) the establishment of a provincial board 
with wider powers, and (4) the employment of a provincial 
superintendent and, subsequently, additional personnel. 

The order of the last two steps was sometimes reversed.^ 

Although the initial moves toward leadership of the 
state in education seem to have developed from the same causes, 








i. ' ' ' ' < 


- 








. 






- 

O' ' r h. ■ i ■'■■■■ •■■■ ■ ‘ : •/ ' ! Jot 1 X i»I< Off DC 

‘ l - 

■ •. . 




. * . « * • 

< .. ' •• 

0 . t • *v* 

„ 




■ 








* 

:vbv 


• • ;v • 

. . . • : ’ 
■ ; : • , " ) ; . . • - ' 

< • < 

■ 


















114 


the development took different directions. The control and 
direction of education in the United States is now quite 
different from that found in the Canadian provinces. It is 
quite safe to say that the parting of the ways between 
American and Canadian systems is almost wholly due to the 
efforts of one man—Egerton Ryerson. 

Historical Development 

The early development of the position of superintendent 
of schools in the American states and in Upper Canada closely 
paralleled each other. In both countries the schools were 
first visited by clergymen—if they were not the teachers-- 
for the purpose of examining the efficacy of religious 
instruction. Later, as local secular control of the schools 
became more firmly established, regular school committees 
took over the duties of the clergymen. In many instances a 
member of the school board who had more ability than the 
others was delegated to represent the other members at such 
a visitation. In both Upper Canada and the American states 
these early school visitors served voluntarily without pay*^ 

Attempts in the United States to establish during the 
early part of the nineteenth century the position of state 
superintendent of schools proved abortive. In 1$12 the first 




. 

' ' 


' 






• — — 










» 

...... ‘ = 

< * 1 • 

< 

' 

- 










115 


superintendent of schools was appointed in New York State, 
but the office was abolished for political reasons six 
years later and the responsibilities for the distribution of 
state grants and for supervising the schools were transferred 
to the secretary of state. Similar attempts in other states 
—Maryland, Michigan, and Rhode Island-met the same fate. 

It was not until 1&75 that the position of state superinten¬ 
dent became a permanent part of the educational structure 
in all states. 

In Upper Canada the position of state superintendent 
was first held on a permanent basis by Dr. Strachan in 1&23. 
However, since Strachan was very interested in establishing 
the English tradition of grammar schools in the Eton, Harrow, 
Rugby tradition of local control of all interna, he did not 
expect or encourage any reports to a central authority. He 
was largely responsible for the establishment of a grammar 
school in each of the eight districts for the purpose of 
meeting the needs of the wealthy and influential classes. 

The common schools-most of them private—which served the 
needs of the lower classes were not the concern of the 
government of the colony. When Ryerson was appointed to the 
office of superintendent in 1&44 he was determined to bring 
about a complete reversal of this policy. 











, 


: . - • 


\ ; : ' ' - ' . . - 

. 

t 

< - 

. 

. 



116 

To Dr, Strachan each local area had the full respons¬ 
ibility for providing the type and quality of education it 
desired and could afford; to Egerton Ryerson the state had 
a responsibility to all its citizens for providing a univer¬ 
sal free system of education on a uniform basis, guaranteed 
and underwritten by the central government. Dr. Strachan 
believed that the local school, in the true English trad¬ 
ition, should control the interna of the instruction and the 
central government the externa; Egerton Ryerson believed the 
reverse. No uniform system of free universal education 
could be successful, Ryerson was certain, if the central 
authority did not control the core of the program of instruc¬ 
tion—the interna. Dr. Byrne puts it this way: 

Curriculum and supervision are different aspects of 
the core problem of the administration of instruction. 
Inevitably, the assumption of leadership in one area 
implies an equally dominant role in the other. They 
are, in effect, the obverse and reverse of the same 

coin.5 

The point of divergence between the development of 
the position of the state superintendent in the American 
States and Canada is here. Local control of the educational 
system in the United States was firmly established by 1&30 
and local authorities would not brook interference by state 
appointed superintendents. In Upper Canada Ryerson was 
faced with the same opposition. The cry of "Prussian 














* 

s u • : 








. 

. 

„ 


- 




t- ' * • ' ’ >e ‘ 

* 






' 


: • ; .. • •: ; t; • 




, 

. 

, 






117 


Imperialism" forced him more than once to abandon plans to 
replace the locally appointed inspectors with state appointed 
men. 


Ryerson realized that the efficient operation of the 
elementary school system rested almost entirely on the cap¬ 
abilities of the superintendents. In his report of I &46 
Ryerson wrote that an efficient school system 

. . . involves the examination and licensing of 
teachers, visiting the Schools, discovering the 
errors, and suggesting remedies as to the organiz¬ 
ation, classification, and methods of teaching in 
the Schools, giving counsel and instruction as to 
their management, carefully examining the pupils, 
animating Teachers, Trustees, and parents, by 
conversations, addresses, etc. whenever practicable, 
imparting vigor, by every available means, to the 
whole School System.^ 


STAGE I 


Upper Canada 

The report of the commission established in 1$39 
"To Inquire into the State of Education in Canada" gives 
ample evidence of an undeveloped and ineffective school 
system.^ The commission stated that there was no artic¬ 
ulation of standards or subject matter between the common 
and the grammar schools. Many varieties of textbooks were 
in use because most of the parents had copies or because 
good salesmen had sold them for their looks rather than their 













. 

. 
















■ ! : • , , r ' ' - 






















. : 











■ 


. 









■ ' 




. • 






: ■■ ,■ ' . r ' . v ■ ' ; * 



























quality. There was a deplorable lack of qualified teachers, 
and a lack of common purpose or objective between one 
district and another. 

Although there were instances of school visitors who 
gave conscientious and capable service, there were too many 
reports of a ridiculous nature. A description of a kindly, 
good natured school visitor is given by J. L. Gourlay in his 
History of the Ottawa Valley : 

He made the tour on horseback, the roads admitting 
of no other mode of travel, except on foot, which was 
much more common. He would dismount at the school- 
house, and with the bridle reign on his arm, place a 
hand on each side of the door frame, the horse looking 
in as if to examine the furnishings, to the great 
enjoyment of the young folks, who seldom saw a horse 
in that early time. The gentleman would ask a little 
boy how to spell a word of one syllable to which the 
little man would address himself with energy, but with 
his eyes fixed on the horse. After a short standing 
examination he would dismiss them with a benignant 
smile and very gracious words of which he had an 
abundant treasury at easy, ready command.$ 

In 1316 the government of Upper Canada agreed to con¬ 
tribute grants to the support of the schools within each of 
the districts. While the local trustees were expected to 
inspect and supervise the schools, they seldom bothered to 
carry out their duties. The township council designated a 
person to inspect the schools within the township, but 
such inspection was left to the convenience and judgment of 
the appointee. 





* 

* 

t . 

: 

* 

t t ' ; • 1 ; 

, 

t ; ' ' ' ' : • 

• , : : . 

- 

. 

. 

. 

* 

- 





119 


In an attempt to correct some of the abuses in 
administration and supervision, the act of 1#50 made the 
municipal council the governing agent between the local 
and provincial authorities* This council was given the 
responsibility of appointing the county superintendent who 
was to oversee not more than one hundred schools and who 
was required to report to the Chief Superintendent of the 
province. At first, in all of the provinces, inspectors 
were paid on the number of visits to schools. After a 
relatively short trial period, however, this practice was 

Q 

discontinued and salaries were paid on a yearly basis. 

During this period the emphasis was on inspection. 

The inspector was to assess the methods of conducting classes, 
the knowledge of the pupils in the various branches of 
study as established by the curriculum, and to inspect the 
buildings and premises. All of this was to be formally 
reported. However, Ryerson also expected the inspector to 
assist the teachers to improve their methods of teaching. 

. . . his visits can be made far more essentially 
useful than they would be were his efforts limited 
exclusively to the collection of such information as 
would enable him to furnish the desired report. He 
can, in many instances, aid the Teacher in supplying 
the defects arising from the want of training. 1U 


K -:'o, ;i c 

* 

■ '.r : t v - ; ' 

. 


■ • 

. 


■ 


, 

.. . : • 

; , 

■ 






, 


. 

. 

* 













120 


It was not until 1$71, however, that any particular 
qualifications for the position of inspector were established. 
The act of 1S71 required that the candidate for the post of 
county superintendent must hold the highest certificate 
issued for the elementary school and submit to an examin¬ 
ation. The new regulations laid the basis for the gradual 
improvement in the qualifications of the inspector and the 
quality of work done. However, the rise in the status of 
this position has been slow and continuous, but not spectac¬ 
ular. 

Direct control and appointment of the superintendent 
by the province occurred first in the field of secondary 
education as a result of the demands of the university for 
better prepared entrants. In 1&55 the Council of Public 
Instruction in Ontario was granted power to appoint grammar 
school inspectors, and in that year the first two were named.^ 

Lower Canada 

The history of inspection and supervision of schools 
in Lower Canada reveals conditions which were similar to, 
if not worse, than those found in Upper Canada prior to 1&40. 

A certificate to teach given to a teacher at Old Lorette, and 
dated l£3&, was signed by five persons, two of whom made 




- 

- 

* 

* 

: ' 

. ■ * < • 







121 


their "marks", a third misspelled his own name, and a fourth 
could barely write. In 1&77 a principal of a leading 
academy reported on his impressions of his first inspection: 

A gentleman once suddently entered my school whom, 
by the dryness of appearance, primness of attire, and 
air of immense but polite superiority, I recognized as 
my Inspector. He approached my desk, making three bows 
on the road. ... I examined the boys in geography. 
After a while he waved his hand again and I took 
history. He then rose, said little, waved his hand 
much, put some expensive books by second-rate authors 
in my hands, packed up his cap, put on the unofficial 
hat and withdrew with more elaborate bowing than ever. ^ 

School visitors were usually clergymen, although in 
1&31 nineteen who were appointed were all members of the 
legislative council. Teachers reported others who expected 
to receive sums of money from those whom they visited.^ 
After 1&55 qualified inspectors were appointed to visit the 
academies and model schools. As in Upper Canada, the 
improvement in the quality of work done, though slow, was 
continuous. 


Maritimes 

In New Brunswick until 1$33 inspection and supervision 
of schools was under the control of the S.P.G. After this 
date local trustees and magistrates were expected to carry 
on the supervisory duties, but little was done. In Nova 
Scotia the supervision of schools was put into the hands of 



, . c 

. 

* .• *• < 
c 

- ■ 

- • • • 

- ; ° 

' , t ' 

n 


* 














- • • 


. 


. i A V 













122 


boards of commissioners appointed by the lieutenant-governor 
in council after 1326. In 1352 New Brunswick and Nova Scotia 
followed the lead of Ontario and appointed inspectors on a 
part-time basis. Full-time inspectors were appointed by 
New Brunswick in 1353, by Nova Scotia in 1365.^ 

Western Provinces 

Until they became part of the Dominion of Canada, the 
schools in the North West Territories and Rupert’s Land were 
controlled, directed, and supervised by the clergy. Manitoba 
became a province in 13?0 and six years later put into 
effect regulations which required inspectors to hold a first- 
class teaching certificate, or to be a graduate of a univ¬ 
ersity. The rest of the North West Territories was ruled 
as a colony of Canada until the formation of the provinces 
of Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1905. 

The position of the school inspector in the North West 
Territories was not fully established until the school law 
of 1335 gave the right of appointment to the Board of Education.^ 
At this time the Board was administering two systems of educ¬ 
ation, one Catholic and the other Protestant, each with 
powers to appoint its own members to supervise instruction 
in the classrooms under its charge. The ordinance stated 




* 

■ 

. 

. 


’ 

. ' 


* 


t ' \ i • : ' j > •' < 


/ • . • ' • 





123 


that the inspectors were to visit the schools at least once 

a year, examine the pupils, assess the work of the teacher, 

check on the textbooks, examine the premises, and report on 

1 $ 

all these factors to the Board of Education. 

The ordinance of 1392, however, gave the Executive 

Council the authority to appoint all inspectors, assign their 
place of work, and prescribe their duties.^ In 1901 the 
Department of Education was established and the corps of 
inspectors became an integral part of the secular structure, 
completely divorced from their earlier relationship with the 
church. 2 ^ 

In British Columbia a paid inspector was appointed in 
1379, and in 1391 the Council of Public Instruction was 
empowered to appoint such inspectors as were required. 

Conclusion 

By the end of the first stage the office of superin¬ 
tendent of schools in most provinces had become established 
as a status position within the hierarchy of a department 
of education. In Ontario the elementary school inspector, 
though appointed by the county or township board, was 
closely controlled through departmental regulations. All 
secondary schools were inspected and supervised by 



■ ■ , f 

. r , . ■ ■ ■'■■ -3 ’ ■ 






c 

. 

- 


£ 


1* 1 K < ■ M r ; •. ■ ** . 






124 


provincially appointed inspectors* The recommendations made 
by Ryerson in I &46 had become the basis for school law and 
regulations almost in toto in all of the provinces. Although 
education was under several provincial authorities, this 
common source for school law and organization established the 
basis for a Canadian outlook in education. 

By 1S95 the position of inspector of schools had been 
assigned duties and responsibilities which were common in 
all provinces. Teminal examinations of students at the 
end of the public school period, or upon entrance to high 
school, were held. The results of these examinations were 
subject to the inspection and approval of the high school 
inspector .^ He was expected to visit all schools within 
his inspectorate at least once a year, recommend authorized 
texts, meet with the local board, and act as arbiter in 
settling differences arising from interpretation of the 
school act. His obligations to the Department, or to the 
Chief Superintendent, were to report on school matters 
within his area, prepare an annual report including stat¬ 
istics on school enrolments, number of visits, number of 
meetings attended, quality of instruction, and the number 
and qualifications of teachers in his area. 



. . 4 • ■ ' i..‘ - . j ' • • ' - a 




. 


. 







' 

* 

. 

« t 

: . ■ 


>■ i . .■ v’.J , rn-;.‘ fo i-.fi- 




t • 




c ’ i ■I ■ ' i b 









125 


STAGE II 

The second stage in the development of the position 
of the superintendent of schools is mainly concerned with 
consolidation of the position. As each of the departments 
of education in Canada moved towards closer and more spec¬ 
ific control of the interna, the inspectoral staff found its 
duties in the field greatly increased. Reorganization of 
the size of districts led to larger and larger staffs being 
employed to ensure efficient and effective implementation of 
departmental policies. The increasing complexity of the 
school system and the broadening of the school program 
brought about more and more branches within the Departments. 
Curriculum planning became so involved that practically 
every provincial department of education now has a separate 
branch charged with the development of courses of study. 

Provincial control of the curriculum and the courses 
of study in order to ensure a minimum, uniform standard of 
education in all parts of each province was accepted with 
little question. Uniformity of curriculum offerings was 
guaranteed through central authorization of the textbooks. 
Responsibility was placed upon the inspector to see that 

only the authorized books were in use in the schools under 




s 

t 

, 


' 

. 

* 

' 


. 

. 

. 





126 


his jurisdiction. With the external examination and the 
final determination of the promotion of students subject to 
the approval of the inspector, the central authority was in 
control of the necessary disciplinary measures to enforce 
its regulations and statutes. 

The strong faith which the central authority placed 
in school inspection is reflected in the following statement 
from the report of the Chief Superintendent of the North 
West Territories in 1901: 

Thorough inspection insures the state receiving good 
value for its expenditure on behalf of education. 

Schools are as good as their inspection is intelligent 
and thorough, and poor as that inspection is aimless 

and accidental.22 

By 1912 consolidation of the control and direction of 
the central authority over the interna of instruction was 
complete. The position of the superintendent of schools was 
firmly established. In the local community, in theses of 
the local boards and the teachers they employed, the office 
of the superintendent was the local counterpart of the 
provincial authority. In Rural Schools in Canada,J. C. 
Miller discussed aspects of the organization, administration, 
and supervision of education in the Canadian provinces which 
have changed little since. 


The two main functions of the inspector of schools 













. 


. 


' 

, 






■ 


. :> ,.o' 








„ 

. 




■ ■ * 

, 




. ' . 


. 







» 







127 


were administrative and supervisory. As an administrator he 
was to interpret the school law for the teacher and trustees 
and see that both school law and regulations were carried 
out by all concerned with the work of the school. He was to 
aid the Department of Education in administering the school 
system so that uniform standards of attainment were ensured, 
and he was expected to inspect the financial records of each 
district to ensure careful and efficient management of school 
monies. The inspector was to "inspect the work of the 
teacher, ascertain the standing of the pupils, demote or pro¬ 
mote as he deemed advisable, inspect register, time table, 
and written work of the pupils. 

In his capacity as supervisor the inspector was 
expected to assist the teacher and trustees to improve instruc¬ 
tion in the school. He was to aid the teacher in planning 
her work and, if feasible, demonstrate modern or improved 
techniques through model lessons. In all cases he was to act 
as the agent of the department. A comparison between the 
work of the inspector in 1912 and the superintendent in 
1956 reveals very few changes in functions. 


* 


_ 


. . : V . 


■ 

- 

■ • - • • r' ■ 

j • ! I..-. < ■ 


• ' ’ 

. 

, 

. 







12$ 


STAGE III 

As an agent of the department each superintendent was 
responsible for the administration of all regulations and 
directives of the department relating to the interna of 
education. He was expected to assist the local boards in 
the administration of the externa so that each child could 
obtain an education at least in accordance with the aims and 
objectives of an accepted foundation program. As city- 
administrations raised the foundation programs to higher 
and higher levels, the ideal of uniform opportunity for all 
children in each province became less and less possible. 

The small units in operation throughout the provinces had 
few financial resources and hardly enough children in the 
district to keep the school open. There was little pos¬ 
sibility of ever closing the gap between educational oppor¬ 
tunities in the rural areas and the urban centres. 

The depression years of the 1930 f s reduced the slim 
resources of the local areas to the point where they could 
not keep the schools open; they could not pay a teacher; 
they could not buy fuel nor supplies. Under these conditions 
control of the interna at the provincial level meant little. 
The resources of the provincial government were not such that 
they could assume the difference between what the local 


. . ■ 

■ * 


• , 


* 




> i- ■ ' ' : 

















, 




’ 


• : 

. ■ X ; ' J.' . . ' 

. ' . ' ' ■ ■■ •' • ‘ - X ■ X 

' 




129 


areas were able to raise and the costs of maintaining the 
schools in the province. Of the alternatives available to 
the central government, the only acceptable one seemed to be 
the reorganization of the administration of schools at the 
local level so that more efficient and effective use could 
be made of existing resources. 

Once the decision had been made to establish the 

larger units of administration on a province-wide basis the 

Department of Education expected their inspectors to do 

everything in their power to assist in establishing the new 

type of educational organization. In this new situation the 

local superintendent was expected to administer the interna 

as before and, in addition, to work closely in an advisory 

capacity with the board of trustees of the larger unit and 

its officials. Through advice and leadership he was expected 

to assist the local authority to utilize the new concentration 

25 

of power effectively. He was also expected to assist the 
local authorities to adapt the school system to the needs of 
the local community. 

The development of the potentialities of the larger 
unit of administration brought the advisory aspect of his 
work to the fore. Instead of the two major functions 




< ' ‘ ‘ 1 ; 

■ 

' 

■ 

* 

■ 



- 








130 


identified by Miller—administrative and supervisory—the 
superintendent of schools in larger units of administration 
found that his new relationship with the board of trustees 
made three functions necessary. The administration pro¬ 
cess concerned with the interna placed the emphasis on the 
administrative and supervisory functions, while that con¬ 
cerned with the externa demanded the full exploitation of 
the advisory function. 

In the provinces in the western zone the role of the 
superintendent is gradually being redefined in practice, if 
not in law. The redefinition is being done by the super¬ 
intendent himself in terms of the local and provincial 
expectancies in the leadership role. While he is not the 
chief executive officer of the board of trustees, he is in 
charge of the administration of the educational program and 
has full responsibility for the improvement of instruction. 
As an adviser to the board of trustees of the unit, he plays 
a major role in the development of policies concerned with 

centralization, school buildings, the extension of educ- 

26 

ational services, and special remedial programs. In some 
cases he is given responsibility by the board for the 
employment and placement of teaching staff; in others his 
advice is taken without question. 






— 5 


- • 

.... : 


; 7 ? . . ^ 'i\r- riO* 0 ' 










„ 

' 

. 


















v ; ■* ' O ■' . - • 














' 




' 


" < 


. 


131 


27 

Conditions of Appointment ' 

In the main, each of the provinces requires appointees 
to have from three to five years 1 teaching experience in 
elementary and secondary schools* Although previous exper¬ 
ience as a principal or vice principal is not a requirement, 
most of the appointees are made from holders of such pos¬ 
itions* Academic requirements in each of the provinces 
usually include at least a degree in education from a rec¬ 
ognized university. In all of the provinces the qualific¬ 
ations for superintendents of schools are surprisingly 

... 2 $ 
similar* 

In New Brunswick some areas are almost wholly French 

Canadian and Roman Catholic. While there is no official 

recognition of minority rights in education in this province, 

care is taken to assign superintendents who are bilingual 

29 

and Catholic to these areas. 

British Columbia, unlike any other province, permits 

the local area to contribute to the salary of the super¬ 
intendent. Boards of trustees who wish to have the inspector 
act as the chief executive officer of the board or who 
desire special services from the superintendent may pay him 

a maximum of twenty-five dollars per one hundred pupils per 
year. This contribution is in addition to the salary he 
receives as an employee of the provincial Department of 








.. 

vc ,f ■' 1 

* 

















■ 

- 


- 










. 




. \ r 








. 

C ' . ' 5 






* 






~ 





132 


Education. At the time of this study all but three areas 
make contributions to the total salary of the superintendent. 

There are two classifications of superintendents 
employed by the provincial department in British Columbia— 
the municipal inspector and the inspector of schools. In 
the first category the superintendent is an agent of the 
provincial government, but, because the local area includes 
a city and pays a portion of his salary, the board of 

trustees has some voice in who shall occupy the office of 

; 

superintendent. In theory, municipal inspectors may have 
their expenses paid to conventions and meetings which the 
district board thinks he should attend outside his own 
inspectorate. The second group cannot accept such expense 
money from the district boards. While this distinction is 
made on a theoretical basis, most of the superintendents 
interviewed in British Columbia claimed that it was a 
distinction in terminology rather than in any actual dif¬ 
ferentiation of duties, responsibilities, or loyalties. 

Area of Responsibility 

Superintendents of larger units in both the western 
and eastern zones are looked upon as the educational admin¬ 
istrators in their respective areas. They are responsible 


















* 

. 

... ' , . ; ' • ' • ' ■ . ’ • f i • '. : ■ 

< < ■ 

, • ' ■ ■ • ' : 

. 

.. ; 

, 

t 

. 




- 












■ 


' 


rv. : ' n : 













133 


for the general supervision of all public school education 
in the unit as well as of all schools in the superintendency 
which are not part of the unit. In each of the provinces the 
boards of trustees look to the area superintendent for advice 
and guidance in planning, co-ordinating, directing, and 
evaluating the total school program. 

Special supervisory personnel are employed by prov¬ 
incial departments to assist the superintendent in such 
fields as technical and vocational education, guidance ser¬ 
vices, and adult education. 

Saskatchewan and Alberta both employ high school 
inspectors who are responsible for evaluating the secondary 
school program in each superintendency. In Saskatchewan the 
high school inspector acts as a consultant or specialist in 
the high school field. While in a superintendency the high 
school inspector is expected to work in close collaboration 
with the area superintendent. Together they plan the program 
of inspection which is to be carried out during the visit of 
the high school inspector. Each high school superintendent 
is selected primarily on the basis of competency in a content 
field such as science, mathematics, literature, or social 
studies and, as such, acts as a resource person to the area 


superintendent• 



















. 

. 

. 


* 




. 








* 

. 




*.'•••• '■ •> ■ : • ' • 









134 


In Alberta the high school inspector has about the 
same relationship to the area superintendent as in 
Saskatchewan. He does, however, assume much more respons¬ 
ibility for giving leadership to the local superintendents 
through zone meetings, assisting with in-service training 

programs, school building surveys, and general educational 

30 

planning. As in Saskatchewan, the high school inspector 
is selected primarily because of specialization and com¬ 
petency in a subject matter field.^ 

The provinces of British Columbia, New Brunswick 
and Nova Scotia do not have high school inspectors. The 
area superintendent is responsible for the whole program 
of supervision in the elementary and high schools. 

Duties and Responsibilities 

The charts beginning on page 13$ summarize the 
duties and responsibilities which are set out by legal 
statute and regulations in each of the provinces. 

In some of the provinces the duties and responsib¬ 
ilities of the superintendent are spelled out in detail; in 
others the school act merely states that the superintendent 









■ 

- 


? : t 

* 





•- 


% 



t 


t. 

. 


t 

. 

. 








, 



' 





. 





' 


135 

shall be assigned to a district by the Minister of Education, 
who shall instruct him in his duties. In actual practice the 
duties assigned the superintendents by the minister, or by 
the school act, vary little from province to province. 

In the charts below, the information for Column 1 is 
taken from Rural Education in Canada by J. C. Miller.^ In 
his discussion of the work of the superintendent (inspector) 
about 1912, Miller listed his duties and responsibilities in 
some detail. In the relationship between the superintendent 
and the department and in the responsibilities of the super¬ 
intendent for the interna little change is noted between 
those duties listed by Miller in 1912 and those listed by 
school acts in 1956. The duties and responsibilities of 
the superintendent which are different from those listed in 
1912 are those which relate to the relationship between the 
superintendent and the board of trustees of a larger unit of 
administration. 

Chart 1 lists those sections of the school acts which 
outline the duties of the superintendent as an agent of the 
department. These are administrative duties which the 
department expects him to carry out in order to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the foundation program. 





' 

' 

. 

' 








. : 








- 








136 

Chart II lists those sections of the school acts which 
are concerned with the relationship between the superinten¬ 
dent as a government employee and the board of trustees of 
the larger unit of administration. Two of the sections 
(nos. 2 and 3) list duties and responsibilities which the 
department expects of the superintendent in relation to all 
boards of trustees, whether unit or non-unit. The other four 
have reference only to superintendents in larger units of 
administration. 

The duties and responsibilities of the superinten¬ 
dent listed in Chart Hi are divided into specific categories. 
The categories under which official duties and responsib¬ 
ilities are organized were selected for the purpose of obtain¬ 
ing information from the superintendents on the actual role 
they played in education. Before they were finally adopted, 
care was taken to assess their suitability and acceptability 
both from the viewpoint of the superintendents themselves 
and from that of senior authorities. 

As in the previous two charts, the first column, 
headed !t M Tt indicates the traditional duties and responsib¬ 
ilities of the superintendent. In several instances it will 
be noted that in some sub-categories the duties of the super¬ 
intendent are not common to all provinces. In category III 








* 












. t 










- 

^ ■ * 

. 










































137 


the superintendents in British Columbia have no supervisory- 
responsibilities with respect to the work of the secretary, 
while in New Brunswick the inspector has no responsibility 
for the employment, placement, or dismissal of the teaching 
staff. In neither New Brunswick nor Nova Scotia does the 
superintendent have the right to give any direction to the 
secretary-treasurer with or without the sanction of the board 
of trustees. 








. 

i 








138 


CHART I 

RELATIONSHIPS ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE AND REGULATION 
BETWEEN (a) SUPERINTENDENT AND DEPARTMENT 


M x B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


The superintendent is held 
responsible for: 


1. Assisting the Superintendent of 
Education, or his counterpart 
in providing a uniform system 
of education through carrying 
out the School Act and the 
regulations of the department 
or Council of Public Instruction. x x x 


2. Reporting to the department 

on all inspections made con¬ 
cerning teachers, pupils, prem¬ 
ises, buildings, finances, or 
any matters dealing with the 
educational development in his 
inspectorate. x x x 

3. Acting as official trustee of 
any district when he is so 
appointed by the Minister of 

Education. x x x 


4* Ensuring that the expenses as 

budgeted are properly expended. x x x 

5. Aiding the department in any 
way and on request of the head 
of the department carrying on 
such duties as may be assigned 

to him outside his inspectorate. x x x 

6. Interpreting the law for teach¬ 
ers and trustees and answering 
any questions and furnishing 
any information which will 
assist them in performing their 

duties. xxx 


xx x 


xx x 


xx x 


xx x 


xx x 


x x x 


^J. C. Miller, Rural Education in Canada 















.1 : 


■: . ,, : , . . : . ■ l 




. 












5 


. 








.[V 


c 


i 







j 







■ ci • 

. .?/] • • 


J 

il 


. . 







. ' 


r n 

...... ■",! JfX 6 ,VCr ; ' 3if;t ‘I'D 

' 

*1 ‘3 • 

.'....■ .. ... i - 

' 

' 

. 


■ 












139 


CHART II 

RELATIONSHIPS ESTABLISHED BY STATUTE AND REGULATION BETWEEN 
(b) SUPERINTENDENT AND THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 
OF A LARGER UNIT OF ADMINISTRATION 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


The superintendent is required to: 

1. Attend, if possible, all meetings 

of the boards of trustees. x 

2. Advise boards of trustees on such 

functions as lie within their 
jurisdiction. x x 

3. Exercise supervisory authority in 
all matters relating to educ¬ 
ational organization, instruction, 

and discipline. x x 

4. Act as a liaison officer between 

the board of trustees, the 
principals and the teachers in 
all matters concerning educ¬ 
ational organization and dis¬ 
cipline. x 

5. Perform the work as the educ¬ 

ational officer of the Board and 
to see that the educational pol¬ 
icies of the department as 
applied locally by the school 
board are administered effect¬ 
ively. x 

6. Perform such functions as may 

be performed by the secretary of 
chairman, if he is so authorized 
by resolution of the board. x 


x 


x 


x 


x 


xxx 


xxx 


xxx 


x x 


x x 














1 



...—. ; w- 






* 

• • 

. 

* 

■ 


. 

- 











140 


CHART III 

DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SUPERINTENDENT AS 
ASSIGNED BY THE SCHOOL ACT AND REGULATIONS IN THE 
FOLLOWING AREAS OF THE EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


I* Instruction 

The superintendent shall 

1. Inspect and evaluate the 
work of the teacher. 

2. Report to the department 
and the board of trustees 
on the work and the 
efficiency in instruction 
of the teacher. 

3. Advise with the teacher in 
order to improve instruc¬ 
tion. 

4. Co-operate with the teacher 
in developing in-service 
education programs such as 
conventions, institutes, 
and workshops. 

5. Co-operate with the 
teachers in attaining the 
aims and objectives of 
the curriculum. 

6. Ensure that all regul¬ 
ations concerning tests, 
examinations and pro¬ 
motions made by the depart¬ 
ment are carried out 
effectively. 


XX X XXX 


XX X XXX 


XX X XXX 


XX X XXX 


XX X XXX 


XX X XXX 















141 


CHART III (continued) 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


II. Instructional Management 


1. The superintendent is 
expected to examine all rec¬ 
ords of pupil attainment and 
promotion, the school regis¬ 
ter, and all other records 
which are kept by the teacher 

2. The certificate of the 
superintendent as to the 
grades and subjects taught 
shall be final. 


x 


x 


x 


X 


The promotion of students 
shall be subject to review 
by the superintendent when 
such has been brought to his 
notice by the teacher or 
principal, or at the time of 
his visit to the classroom. 


x 


x 


x 


x 


x 


4. He is to keep in close touch 
with the attendance records 
of the students and shall 
either act as the attend¬ 
ance officer or shall ensure 
that such an officer carry 
out his work effectively. 

5. He is to ensure that the 
educational policies devel¬ 
oped by the board and with¬ 
in their jurisdiction as 
established by the School 
Act and regulations of the 
department are effectively 
put into operation. 


x 


x 


x 










. 


. 


•' : : ; < ‘ ' 


OJ f.-> ■ ' 

. 


. 



■ i : _ 

. 

i ' • ’ V i ') 

■ ■ Oi ■ ■' 

' 

•- 

. . 







.V U 





} ' 

• • ' ' 

1:K() . ■ 






142 


CHART III (continued) 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


6. To see that the instruc¬ 
tional materials provided 
by the board of trustees 
and in accordance with the 
regulations of the depart¬ 
ment are properly used and 

cared for. x x x x x 

7. To work with such committees 
or groups of teachers or 
principals as are established 
for the purpose of carry¬ 
ing on the educational pro¬ 
gram in a school or in the 
inspectorate, or for the 
purposes of improving 

instruction. x x x x x x 

&. To keep in touch with mod¬ 
ern developments in admin- 
istratioh, methodology, and 
organization and through 
research in co-operation with 
the teaching body seek to 
improve discipline, admin¬ 
istration and teaching pro¬ 
cedures. xx x xxx 















143 


CHART III (continued) 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


III. Personnel Management 

The superintendent may 

1. Act as liaison between the 
Board of Trustees, the 
principals and the teachers. 

2. Assign teachers to respect¬ 
ive positions on the staff 
of the public schools, sub¬ 
ject to the approval of the 
board of trustees. 

3. Require the secretary or 
treasurer of the board to 
produce all papers and other 
records of the board when 
requested to do so by the 
inspector of the super¬ 
intendent. 

4. Require the secretary or 
treasurer to comply with 
any lawful directions which 
might be given by the board 
directly or through the 
superintendent as to the 
execution of his duties. 


x x xxx 


x x x x 


x xxx 


x x 


IV. School Community Relations 
The superintendent is 
expected: 

1. To promote the advancement 
of education through public 
meetings in his inspector¬ 
ate. 

2. To hold meetings of rate¬ 
payers and trustees in order 
to confer with people of the 
district on educational 

problems. x x xxx x 













c 

. 

■ 


' 

. ; ... . ... '■ ■ 

' 

, I ' ' ‘ 

. 

■ 

J. -r/vn :,i, r ':< :> O' ' 

v''f : ■ :r • o 

- 

\ 

. aw ■ • 

' 






144 


CHART III (continued) 


M. B.C.Alta.Sask.N.S.N.B. 


V. Business Management : Policy 
Planning 

The superintendent is expec¬ 
ted: 

1. To attend all Board meet- 


ings, if possible. 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

To advise the trustees on 
matters within their 
jurisdiction. 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

To advise the board of 
trustees in connection with 






conveyance, development of 
policies, administration, 
school equipment and 
supplies. 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


VI. Business Management : Exec¬ 
ution of Policies 

The superintendent is expec¬ 
ted: 

1. To exercise supervisory 
authority in all matters 
relating to school organ¬ 
ization, instruction and 

discipline. x x x x x x 

2. To see that the educ¬ 
ational policies of the 
board of trustees are 
carried out effectively 


x 


x 


X 


X 


X 



















145 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER TV* 

^Ontario, Report of Royal Commission on Edacat1on , 
op . eit•, p • 322. 

^Phillips, 0 £. cit.., p* 125. 

^Department of Superintendence, Educational leader- 
ship, Progress and Possibilities , Eleventh Yearbook (Wash¬ 
ington; National Education Association, 1933), p. 33. 

^Phillips, op . cit ., pp. 234-5. 

5 By rne, op. cit ., p. 44. 

^Eodgins, Documentary History of Education in Upper 
Canada , op # cit ., Y'ol. VI, p# 206. 

^ Ibid #, pp. 243-284. 

Quoted in Phillips, op. cit ., 

9 

Statutes, Province of Canada , 

Chap. 48, Secs* 27, 36. 

10 Hodgins, op . cit ., Tol. Till, 

•^Statutes, Provinee of Canada , 

Secs. 1-2. 

12 

Phillips, op* cit ., p. 245. 

13 IbicU, p. 247-8. 

■*- 4 X.P. Audet, Xe Systems Sctiolaire de la Province 
Quebec (Quebec: Xes Presses Universitaires, Laval, 193*1), 
Yol. 11, p. 263. 

1 5 

Phillips, up. cit . 

16 Ibid. 


p. 246. 

13 and 14 Victoria, 
p. 263. 

18 "Victoria, Chap. 132, 

































i 











< ■ * * “ 


c 


» i; u * C 





146 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER IV (continued) 


-^ Ordinances of the North West Territories . 1$$5, 
No. 3, Sec. 4. 

ia lbid. 


^ Ordinances of the North West Territories . 1$91, No. 22. 

^ Ordinances of the North West Territories . 1901, 

Chap. 29. 

21 

-‘-Hodgins, op . cit., Vol. 22, p. 115. 

22 

Ordinances of the North West Territories , op. cit. 

2 3j. c. Miller, Rural Schools in Canada (New York: 
Teachers 1 College, University of Columbia, 1913), pp. 149-50. 

2 4 Ibid . 


^interview with Mr. ¥. 3. Lloyd, Minister of Educ- 
ation, Saskatchewan, April, 1957. 

Interview with Mr. W. E. Frame, Chief Superinten¬ 
dent, Alberta, March, 1957. 

2°Robt. E. Rees, "Superintendents of Schools in 
Relation to School Division Boards in the Province of Alberta" 
(Unpublished doctoral thesis, Northwestern University, 1947), 
p. 22S. 

2 ?Appendix C., Table 1. 

2 &Appendix C., Table 3. 

29 Units of School Administration and the School 
Inspector and His Work . Report of the CEA-University of 
Alberta Short Course in Educational Leadership, 1955, pp.10-11. 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Report on Principal - 
Superintendent - Hig;h School Inspector Relationships , 1955. 
(Mimeographed) 

•^Byrne, op . cit., p. 253. 

32 

Miller, op . cit., p. 149 ff. 












































CHAPTER V 


SAMPLE AND METHODOLOGY 

Part I of the dissertation is concerned with a discus¬ 
sion of the organizational, structural, and legal contexts 
within which the superintendent of schools discharges his 
duties and responsibilities* Within this frame of reference 
the superintendent is a line officer of the Department of 
Education and a staff officer of the board of trustees. 

Part II of the dissertation is concerned with a dis¬ 
cussion of the superintendent’s interpretation of his actual 
role, his relationships with the Department of Education and 
boards of trustees, and the relative emphasis he places on 
the major functions of the office and the sources of authority. 

The sources of information for Part I are found in 
the histories of educational organization in the several 
provinces, the annual reports of the departments of education, 
and the school acts. The main sources of information on the 
actual role of the superintendent in Part II are the super¬ 
intendents themselves. Most of the information was obtained 
from the superintendents through questionnaires and inter¬ 
views. This is supplemented by reports of the CEA Project 
in Educational Leadership, and several unpublished disser¬ 
tations on the larger units of administration in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. 

























■ • : J, 




' 


* ' 

( 

. 










♦ 






' 







. 






* 














148 


Questionnaire 

The questionnaire which was sent to all superinten¬ 
dents of schools in larger units was in two parts—a manual 
of directions and the questionnaire. The manual of direc¬ 
tions explained the methods of scoring for both functions 
and sources of authority, examples, and other pertinent 
information (Appendix A, Sample 1). 

In the main body of the questionnaire the activities 
of the superintendent were organized under six main cat¬ 
egories; instruction, instructional management, personnel 
management, school community relations, and two aspects of 
business management—policy planning and policy execution. 
All of the categories, except school community relations, 
were further divided into five subcategories. The category 
of school community relations was divided into four parts. 
Each of the subcategories was scored three times; first, on 
the activities which are part of the superintendent 1 s work; 
secondly, on the distribution of emphasis on the functions; 
and thirdly, on the significance placed on each of the three 
major sources of authority. Each of the subcategories con¬ 
tained a short explanation of what activities might be 
included, but the superintendents were asked to consider 
them only as representative. 


(Appendix A, Sample B) 












c 




.f i: • : ‘ : 




„ 

. ' ,"):: i. : J ’i-U : 







149 


A copy of the questionnaire and manual of directions 
was sent directly to the superintendents in British Columbia, 
Alberta, and New Brunswick after permission had been 
received from the chief superintendent of schools or the 
deputy minister. In Saskatchewan and Nova Scotia the 
questionnaires were distributed through the office of the 
chief superintendent of schools. The response to the 
questionnaire is contained in Table I, page l£. 

Interviews 

During the months of April, May, June, and September, 
1957, a total of one hundred and twenty-three superintendents 
from all provinces of Canada, with the exception of Quebec, 
were interviewed. Sixty-three were interviewed during the 
Short Course in Educational Leadership in Edmonton in May 
and the remainder in their respective provinces. Sixty- 
eight of the superintendents were from larger units of admin¬ 
istration. The remainder were from cities and from super¬ 
intendencies which were made up of small districts. 

The chief superintendents of schools in the provinces 
of British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan along with 
directors of school administration, a deputy minister, 
directors of curricula, research, guidance, and vocational 
education were also interviewed for the purpose of obtain¬ 
ing information on the legal role of superintendents. These 



- 


■ v ' ’ o ff 5r' 

. 

c , : ’ 
- 









. 


- 

; , 


, 

' ‘ ■ • • . t - 

r ,=* < ' r . ■ 




. 

* ' 




150 


interviews were partly structured in the sense that certain 
specific questions were asked each person in order to 
obtain information (Appendix A, Sample 3). The summary of 
rank scores contained in Table XI, Appendix B, was based 
partly on information obtained from interviews and partly 
from the school acts* The information contained in Table 
XII, Appendix B, was obtained from the structured part of 
the interviews with superintendents of larger units of 
administration* 

Much of the information obtained from the interviews 
with the superintendents, however, does not lend itself to 
such specific classification as found in Table XII, Appendix 
B. Table XIII has been developed for the purpose of 
reducing lengthy verbal material to the essential facts 
which are pertinent to the dissertation. These statements 
have been quantified to establish the relative importance 
which the superintendents attach to different factors in 
their job and to get the focus of attention. Those who did 
not comment on any one of the categories perhaps did not think 
of it. It could be assumed that if no definite statement 
was made this aspect was of no particular concern at the 
time.'*" This was further confirmed by interviews with the sup¬ 
erintendents of schools who attended the CEA University of 






151 


Alberta Course in Educational Leadership in May, 1957. 

Information obtained from the superintendents through 
interviews and from letters which accompanied the question¬ 
naires when they were returned indicated general agreement 
with the categories selected in all sections of the question¬ 
naire, except that part which asked for a distribution of 
time between the activities connected with the several cat¬ 
egories. Quite a large number of superintendents refused to 
answer this section. Others pointed out that the distrib¬ 
ution was strongly biased by the conditions as they existed 
at the time the questionnaire was completed. All of the 
superintendents interviewed stated that a similar distribution 
of time made six months later would not likely bear a very 
close relationship. 

The validity of these categories further is supported 
by the fact that though provision was made on each page for 
the addition of more sub-categories only seven out of one 
hundred and sixteen respondents found it necessary to make 
additions. Five reported on work in Indian schools which were 
not a part of the larger unit and thus not germaine to the 
study. Only two reported on meetings with principals 1 groups 
which could have been included im a sub-category already 
present in the main body of the questionnaire (Sample 2, 

II, 4, Appendix A). 






d- ii' • & 






■ 
















' 

« 

/ 






. ?•;. ;■ : •..■ ... : - — u , :; 5 






viO.i ;rr..i 

■ •• 1 V : ; ' ‘ ' . • ; ■' ' * . 

















152 


Reliability 

Prior to distributing the questionnaire to all super¬ 
intendents of larger units of administration a pilot study 
was made, A copy of the tentative questionnaire and manual 
of directions was sent to the chief superintendent of schools 
in each province except Quebec and Newfoundland, and practic¬ 
ing superintendents. 

Table IV gives the distribution of the questionnaires 
from the provinces where it was applicable and the number which 
was returned. 

TABLE IV 

DISTRIBUTION OF QUESTIONNAIRES IN THE PILOT STUDY 

BY PROVINCES 



B.C. 

Alta. 

Sask. N.S. 

N.B. Total 

No. Distributed 

4 

5 

5 

2 

2 

18 

No. Returned 

3 

5 

4 

1 

1 

14 


Tables XV to XIX, Appendix B, indicate that the rank 
scores obtained from the summary of data from the question¬ 
naires, pilot study, and interviews agree in most instances. 
Attention is drawn to areas of disagreement in the tables by 
(x). 

In the western zone the major disagreements are between 










153 

the assignment of equal ranks to two functions or two sources 
of authority from one source of data and different ranks by 
the other two. As a general rule, where disagreements occur, 
the ranking upon which there are two agreements is the one 
accepted as the most reliable. 

The greatest amount of disagreement among the data 
from the three sources is found in the provinces of Nova 
Scotia and New Brunswick, partly because the number of replies 
from the pilot study and the number of interviews are very 
small and partly because the short length of time in which 
the larger unit has been in operation in Nova Scotia precludes 
the appearance of any clear-cut characteristics or modes of 
action. New Brunswick, as has been noted before, is in a 
period of transition. 

Validity 

Several drafts of the questionnaire were evaluated by 
members of the Faculty of Education x^ho had had experience 
as superintendents of schools, the high school superintendents 
of Alberta, the chief superintendents of schools in both the 
western and eastern zones, and at least two practicing super¬ 
intendents in each of the provinces. The final draft of the 
questionnaire and manual of directions were developed in the 








154 

light of criticisms and suggestions on the preliminary drafts. 
Before the final distribution, two to four superintendents 
in each province were asked to complete the questionnaires. 

An analysis of those which were returned indicated that the 
categories and subcategories selected were sufficiently com¬ 
prehensive to provide information on the major activities of 
the superintendents. 

The face and rational validity of the instrument was 

supported by an empirical test based upon the non-paramentric 
2 

X test for k independent samples. 

In filling out the questionnaire the superintendents 
were asked to distribute four points in each sub-category 
to indicate the relative emphasis placed on the three functions, 
and another four points to indicate the relative significance 
they placed upon the three sources of authority. The results 
obtained appear as frequencies distributed into discrete cat¬ 
egories under functions and sources of authority. The values 
of X^ distributed approximately as chi-square indicate that 
the probability of an indiscriminate distribution of these 
frequencies is beyond the .001 level in all provinces in both 
functions and sources of authority. From this we can conclude 
that the sources of authority and the functions selected were 


valid in that the distribution between the three functions and 






. 


' 

■ 














. ■ ■ 




1 




' . 






f ■ ■ 



■ 










■« 



■■ 





• 



- 


. 



, 







' 




155 

the three sources of authority was made on the basis of 
conscious discrimination. 

The second test of validity was made by means of 
partly structured interviews with the superintendents and chief 
superintendents. The opinion of the latter was asked as to 
the suitability of the categories, the definition and des¬ 
cription of the functions and sources of authority. The three 
chief superintendents in each of British Columbia, Alberta, 
and Saskatchewan stated they were acceptable. Letters from 
the chief superintendents of British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia, and New Brunswick accepted the 
questionnaire and its content as a valid instrument for use 
in their respective provinces. The superintendents of schools 
were asked to rank their functions and sources of authority 
in relation to each category on the basis of which was con¬ 
sidered the most important and which the least important one. 

The results in the form of ranks obtained from all the question¬ 
naires returned, the pilot study, and the interviews are 
summarized in Tables XV - XIX, Appendix B. 

Copies of the questionnaire and manual of directions 
were sent also to chief superintendents in the provinces of 
Manitoba, Ontario, and Prince Edward Island. Replies by 
letter from each of these provinces stated that the form and 





content of the questionnaire was not applicable to the 
situation in each of these provinces because there were no 
larger units of administration in operation. 



. 









157 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER V 


B. Berelson, Content Analysis (Glencoe: Free Press, 
1952). Table XIII, Appendix B, was organized on the basis 
of information contained in this book. All the pertinent 
information from the interviews is contained in Tables 
XII, XIII. 










CHAPTER VI 


THE SUPERINTENDENT AS A LINE AND STAFF OFFICER 

Within the educational system, as in all large bureau¬ 
cratic structures, there are two major groupings; the staff 
organization which is mainly concerned with service; and 
the line organization which is wholly concerned with produc¬ 
tion processes. The main functions of the line officer are 
supervisory and administrative; those of the staff officer 
are research and advisory.^ The status of the line officer 
is determined by the relative amount of authority attached 
to his position in the hierarchy, while that of the staff 
officer is determined partly by the authority of the admin¬ 
istrator with whom he works and partly by the personal 

2 

authority of knowledge and ability. 

The superintendent of schools in each of the provinces 
in Canada is both a line officer and a staff officer. As 
an agent of the department of education in the field he is 
a line officer and he is expected to use specialized admin¬ 
istrative and supervisory functions to maintain and increase 
the efficiency of the local educational system. As a 
specialist he is attached to the office of the board of 

trustees in an advisory capacity and is thus, in this relation¬ 
ship, a staff officer. 














' 






. 


■ ■ Ini ' 

■ 



Ei 


‘ r; . . , ' 










/>r:o :■ n.l:: 



■ 

. 





' 




* 






? ! 


... ‘ ■ : 










The top level of leadership in the educational systems 
of Canada is centred in the Cabinet, the Council of Public 
Instruction, or the Board of Education, with the Minister of 
Education as its chief officer.^ Below the Minister are two 
main powerholders, the department of education as the superior 
one and the board of trustees as the subordinate* Each of 
these powerholders in itself forms a sub-hierarchy within the 
pyramidal hierarchy of authority and responsibility. In each 
the legitimate authority conferred on the offices is that 
which is more or less specifically defined by law and stated 
in the school acts, or by directive from the minister* The 
school acts spell out the amount of authority delegated to 
an office by defining the extent and degree to which the 
office holder may influence and direct the behavior of others 
in the attainment of the goals of the institution. This 
amount of power may be measured according to two criteria: 
n (l) the number of actions of any given person in each of 
any number of selected types of behavior over which control 
is realized; and (2) the number of persons so controlled* rt 3 
These two criteria determine the extent of institutionalized 
power, or the span of control of authority of the office* 

They are often used to determine the superior, subordinate 


^Quebec and Newfoundland excepted. 



: ' 5 


, . • , ' . . : l bzmJj 






' 1 




. ■■ ■ •'.> ; '• 

' 





< 

* 



' ' 

■ — 


■ 





♦ 










* 



' - ' ■ { 




















. ■ 


' 



. 













160 


and co-powerholders and status positions within a bureau¬ 
cratic structure.^ 

These concepts of line and staff officers, their 
functions, the distribution of authority to the two major 
powerholders, and the criteria by which the amount of auth¬ 
ority exercised by superior, subordinate, and co-powerholders 
are necessary to establish the frame of reference for the 
discussion of the actual role of the superintendent of 
schools in a larger unit of school administration. 

Balance of Power 

The establishment of the larger unit as the basic unit 
of school organization in the provinces of the western zone 
and Nova Scotia greatly reduced the number of local authorities. 
British Columbia had 653 boards of trustees in 1945, 69 after 
the organization of larger units in the province was com¬ 
pleted. ^ Alberta had almost 3500 organized districts in 1935; 
in 1956 there were 725, of which 59 were school division boards.^ 
In Saskatchewan 56 of a possible 60 superintendencies were 
organized as larger units by 1956. Included in these larger 
units were 4406 rural districts, 329 village and 67 town 
districts.^ 7 In Nova Scotia 1665 rural and village school 
sections were placed under the control of 17 municipal boards 

in 1956. S 


















. 

• . ’ 

- 

■- . -no , ■ - ■ 

' - 

; ' . . . 








. 


: . : .. >. 1 ' . . 

•ic. ; j. > .. ‘ :■ • ■ ■ : ' • ' ' .!■ -‘V. < H--. jw'M bXS 

: ' • , ■ ' ■ ■ 

- 




. 




: 














161 


The well known "balance of power" principle which 
Metternich expounded so ably in the nineteenth century as 
the basis for establishing and maintaining political equil¬ 
ibrium in Europe is also inherent in the maintenance of 
stability in a bureaucracy. Theoretically, the relative 
status accorded a position in the hierarchy is determined by 
the ratio of the amount of authority at the command of the 
office holder to that of each of the other status positions.^ 
If the total authority of one position is increased its 
relationship to all other status positions and their inter¬ 
relationships is disturbed and disequilibrium results. 

The concentration of the powers of eighty or more 
small district boards under one board and the increase in 
authority granted the boards of trustees under the statutes 
which established the larger units gave them much more 
control over the behavior of employees and those assoc¬ 
iated with the local educational system. Traditional auth¬ 
ority in relation to employment of staff was greatly expanded 
with the physical expansion in geographic area, school plants, 
and kinds of positions available. Questions of transfer from 
position to position and from area to area—seldom if ever a 
problem in the small district--in the new organization were 
of concern to both staff and board. Centralization was not 
a problem in the small district, but the right of the board 




























■ 




» 


' 




d ; 


■ ■ 








. 

' 


































. 










.... 









' 













162 


to determine the school which children shall attend has 
affected almost every parent in some areas, and some parents 
in every larger unit. 

The increase of the span of control meant the imperson- 
alization of rules and regulations. The necessities of efficient 
operation demand the irapersonalization of authority and of the 
administrative process. In the small district, with few 
people involved, most of the problems were resolved on a 
personal basis; in the larger unit, general overall policies 
concerned with uniformity cannot take into consideration the 
needs of the few at the expense of the majority. The change¬ 
over from the personal, face-to-face relationships of 
trustees, teacher and parents in the small district to the 
impersonal administrative processes of the larger unit 
produced immediate stresses and strains within local school 
systems.Some of these stresses demanded immediate 
attention. 

In the departments of education themselves, the reduc¬ 
tion of the number of local authorities in relation to the 
central brought changes in structure. In Saskatchewan and 
British Columbia the major changes have been in the increase 
of staff positions to provide expert service in areas of 
major concern; in Alberta there has been a restructuring and 
redefinition of the lines of authority and responsibility. 


; 




. 


'J . J . ;> . J • 

* 

• ; • ! • - v ; t i-! 

: • ■ « •. ‘ ' ■' : ' 






p 





‘ 


■ 










* 




* 







. ;• • r v; 1 j 















163 

These are indications of the rearrangement of status positions 
to accommodate the increase in the resources at the local 
level and the growing demands of the populace of the provinces 
for better and more extensive educational opportunities for 
the students. 

The greatest change in the balance of power, however, 
has taken place within the superintendency. The span of con¬ 
trol of a superintendent in a non-unit superintendency is 
much greater than that of the local board administering the 
externa of a one-roomed school. In larger units of admin¬ 
istration, however, the board of trustees administers an area 
which in most instances is co-terminus witlh the superintendency. 
They administer the same amount of authority as the super¬ 
intendent, though not the same kind. As a line officer of the 
department the superintendent is mainly concerned with the 
interna, while, traditionally, the main concern of the board 
of trustees was with the externa. Theoretically, the two 
areas are integrated through the advisory and research pos¬ 
ition which the superintendent occupies as a staff officer of 
the board of trustees of a larger unit. 

British Columbia 

From the information obtained from the respondents 
through the questionnaire and interview,the inspector of 




. 

. 

... ' ' • - - ( 1 

■ 

, 







. ' 

< 

. 










. 







164 


schools—as he is known in British Columbia--has had many 
years of experience as teacher and principal before appoint¬ 
ment to his present position. All superintendents have had 
at least ten years 1 teaching experience; some have had as 
many as thirty-four. Some have had as many as twenty-five 
years 1 experience as inspector (Table XI, Appendix B). 

On the basis of the number of students and teachers 
there are two definite divisions in the inspectorates. Four 
of the superintendencies include cities within their admin¬ 
istrative boundaries. Each has from one to three assistant 
inspectors and from five to fourteen special subject super¬ 
visors, directors, supervisor of special areas such as primary 
and elementary education, and in-service education. 

In other inspectorates from which reports were received 
the number of students ranged from 2,000 to 4,700, and the 
number of teachers from sixty-five to three hundred. Only 
six superintendents reported no assistants, while sixteen 
reported from one to three. 

To judge from the reports received the average inspect¬ 
orate in British Columbia has more pupils and teachers than 
those in Alberta and Saskatchewan, but there are more areas 
with assistant inspectors and special supervisors than in 
either of the two latter provinces (Table XIII, Appendix B). 


■ . 

' 

* 

1 ■■ 

-• ••• 

\ t ‘ " ■ • 1 • 

. 

i ■ 1 ' \ t 

■ • • 


: 

- 



* 

- 









. 







f 1 . j .r.jp 7 • 1 






An examination of Table XX, Appendix B, indicates that 
most of the superintendents have duties and responsibilities 
in relation to all of the subcategories. All were concerned 
with the teachers, their work, training and welfare. All 
aspects dealing with pupils, their progress, promotion, the 
adaptation of the educational program to their abilities, 
their attendance at school,and the development of educational 
policies of the board of trustees to suit the needs of the 
students, came within their purview. While the mechanics of 
administrative details of the purchase and operation of 
busses and the routes which they followed are not within the 
area of responsibility of the inspector in British Columbia, 
problems arising from centralization and the total school 
program affected all inspectors. 

Many of the inspectors interviewed deplored the in¬ 
adequacy of the present public relations programs and the 
replies to the questionnaire indicated similar concern. 

In British Columbia, none of the aspects included in 
any of the subcategories appeared to be of minor or no con¬ 
cern to the majority of the inspectors. Only six of the 
twenty-five respondents to the questionnaire indicated that 
the board of trustees took no part in matters dealing with 
courses of studies, the progress and promotion of students 













♦ 


■ 


, 


S r 



«' 




















* 


\ 






' 











, 

< 










■ - 

■ 




166 


and in-service training programs of teachers. These six, then, 
did not have any responsibilities in relation to this area. 
(Table XX, II, 2) 

Some of the superintendents had no responsibilities 
in connection with the employment or the work of the non¬ 
professional staff, such as caretakers, bus-drivers, or of 
the office staff. To them the principal was mainly res¬ 
ponsible for the wd rk of the caretaking staff and the quality 
and effectiveness of the work of the office staff was the 
sole responsibility of the secretary and the board of trustees. 

Sources of Authority 

All inspectors, except those in the city of Vancouver, 
are employed by the provincial government. Their duties 
and responsibilities as line officers are defined in the 
Manual of School Law and School Regulations published under 
the authority of the Council of Public Instruction. 1 These 
regulations also direct the inspector ”to advise the trustees 
on matters within their jurisdiction” and ”to attend all 
meetings of the board of trustees when convenient, "^-3 thus 
placing them in the position as staff officers to the boards 


of trustees 










. 

' 

. 

t/ : 

. - t • t 

- 




















. 

, 





. 

- 















167 


The Department of Education ^ 

The inspector of schools identifies himself with the 
Department of Education in the improvement of instruction in 
the classroom and the technical and administrative aspects 
concerned with the progress, promotion,and attendance of 
students. As an officer of the Department of Education he 
accepts the responsibility for evaluating the work of the 
teacher and the effectiveness of the methods and techniques 
used. He is interested in assisting the teacher toward per¬ 
sonal improvement through providing assistance and guidance 
to the individual and through in-service training programs 
which include the entire staff. 

In British Columbia the Department of Education 
exercises close and direct control over all aspects of adult 
education, the centralization of school facilities, con¬ 
struction of new buildings, the purchase and operation of 
school busses and the routes they are to travel. Very close 
administrative and supervisory controls are exercised by 
departmental auditors over the budget and through it over the 
finances of each school district in the province. The 
Department of Education does not expect or encourage the 
inspectors to accept any responsibility in these areas .^ 
(Table XV, I, Appendix B) 













. 


■ 





. 

* 

' 

- 

. 

' ' ■ : , ' i.Jp . 

, . 

. 





168 


Boards of Trustees 

Inspectorates in British Columbia may include from 
one to four larger units of administration. In addition to 
the two or more school districts—as the larger units of 
administration are known—an inspectorate may also have 
several small, isolated districts attached to the area. In 
some areas the number of inspectorates containing more than 
one larger unit is being reduced gradually as more inspectors 
are successful in obtaining agreement between the boards to 
merge and unite into one unit which is co-terminus with the 
boundaries of the inspectorate. 

Where there is more than one school district in an 
inspectorate the inspector finds it necessary to adjust his 
work to the kind of board and the problems to be dealt with. 

In many cases the members of the board in one school district 
are from rural areas, while the members of another board may 
be predominantly business and professional men. In one, the 
problems connected with centralization may be of immediate 
concern, while, in the other, poor relationships between the 
board of trustees and the teaching staff demand the full 
attention of the inspector. All of the inspectors inter¬ 
viewed who had more than one district in the inspectorate 
indicated the necessity for adjustment in behavior in relation 






' 

. 

•• 

. ... "v 


! J ' }■ '■ 

■ ■ ■ . • 


, ' 


' 

/ 1 ::nt, . / . or vr;.. ‘ <.J. ?.«'• :> -ll. 


■ .od " h • 

. 

- 


. ' ' ■ 




■ 


t ' < 

• ■ 


• ' - 



d. : i/ i ■ 









169 


to each board as one of their major problems. 

A rapid or continuous change in board membership 
posed problems to the inspectors. New members on the boards 
of trustees were not familiar with, and often were unsym¬ 
pathetic to, aspects of the program in operation and plans 
for future development. To ensure the continuity of devel¬ 
opment, or often to protect the program in operation, the 
inspectors find it necessary n to educate” the new board 
members. 

Rapid changes in board membership may also lead to 
a reversal in policies which have been in operation over a 
period of years. This is particularly evident in areas 
where industrialization is rapid and extensive. Previous 
to the industrial development, many boards of trustees had 
a preponderance of farmers as members. These boards were 
vitally interested in the development of agricultural pro¬ 
grams in the schools. As industrialization of the area 
increased, however, membership on the boards came largely 
from the business and professional men who were indifferent 
to the program for agricultural education. These inspectors 
report that, in such instances, agriculture is disappearing 
from the school program. 

In the main, boards of trustees give no direction to 



* 


V\: 








« 












. 






a t •. ■ v . hi 

' 




' 




; 


' •: i 




X 't 




* 

















170 


the inspector in the field of education. As their chief 
executive officer and the employee of the government, they 
expect him to manage the educational program of the area 
effectively. Many inspectors accept the fact that boards of 
trustees have a right to expect efficient management of the 
educational program. In this sense, the inspector of schools 
is primarily responsible to the board of trustees. In 
another sense, legislation by the board of trustees is neces¬ 
sary to implement educational programs in the area. 

Initiatory legislation by the boards of trustees is 
necessary before anything beyond the foundation program can 
be developed. Courses in agriculture, technical and vocational 
education, as well as special classes for the atypical child¬ 
ren, library facilities, and many other necessary aspects of 
the modern educational program require direct board approval, 
or implied approval through the vote of funds. Through the 
control of items included in the budget and the general 
distribution of monies available the boards exercise direct 
control over many aspects which are essential to the instruc¬ 
tional program in the classrooms. 

In fields such as personnel management, policy planning, 
and the efficient execution of policies, the inspectors rec¬ 
ognize the boards of trustees as the primary source of 
authority. 




* 

•. €. J 

'< ■ ■ ■ ( ■ 








. 


-• 1 ' . . ■ . 










Y : J' :] Y 


; . : .• 3 ... 

•;: i r .*■;r or: j . ;'; .■* 

„ 

: . ‘ . : 1 ^ Y ; ; ; ' ‘ Y .. . 

■ ■ • ■ 





, 


171 


Own Initiative 

Under the column, Tt own initiative 7 * in the question¬ 
naire, the inspectors were asked to indicate the degree to 
which they carry on activities which are not specifically 
required by either departmental or board regulations and dir¬ 
ectives. The distribution of scores in these three columns 
under sources of authority, then indicates the degree to which 
the inspectors feel that they are line and staff officers of 
the department and board of trustees and the degree to which 
they accept the responsibilities of educational leadership 
over and above the minimum requirements established by law 
and regulation. 

An examination of the distribution of these scores in 
Table XX, Appendix B indicates that the inspectors in British 
Columbia place the major emphasis on their own initiative 
in most of the categories and sub-categories. In the field 
of instruction the inspectors indicate that most of the 
activities carried on in relation to the pupil in the class¬ 
room, in-service education of teachers, and special classes 
are due to the initiative of the educational leader. Only in 
the activities related to the evaluation of the work of the 

teacher in the classroom, adult education, pupil accounting, 



. j ■ 










. ■ OJ1 





















< 

, 

' 








r ' ' 

















172 


working conditions of teachers, and matters of finance and 
centralization does the inspector recognize the Department 
of Education as the superior source of authority. The board 
of trustees is accepted as the superior source of authority 
in such matters as personnel management and in both aspects 
of business management—policy planning and policy execution. 
The relative distribution of the scores among the three 
sources of authority gives an indication of what the inspec¬ 
tors interpret as to what must be done to provide for the 
minimum program in operation in the district and what is done 
by the educational leader to exploit all resources for 
purpose of improving and extending the educational opportun¬ 
ities available to the students in the area. 

Functions 

As a line officer the inspector is responsible to the 
department for the effective utilization of administrative 
and supervisory functions assigned to the office. As an 
expert and as the chief executive officer the inspector of 
schools in British Columbia is expected to be prepared to 
advise the boards of trustees on all educational matters which 
come within their area of responsibility. Because the 
inspector has legal status as the chief executive officer, 
the board of trustees seems to expect the inspector to take 



. 

* 

' 

.... . . : . ... . . ' . 1 . : . '/ 

• . 






. 

* 

' 




a more active part in co-ordinating department-board relation¬ 
ships. A large proportion of the inspectors interviewed 
reported that the boards of trustees expected them to act 
as the chief spokesman for the district, interpreting the 
needs of the local area to the department. As the educational 
leader in the area the inspector was usually held responsible 
by the board of trustees for obtaining as many concessions 
from the department as possible, particularly in the way of 
grants. Thus, on one hand, as a line officer the major 
emphasis should be upon the administrative and supervisory 
functions of the officer, and on the other hand, as staff 
officer, the advisory function should be given the most con¬ 
sideration. The question, then, is, ”In the actual working 
situation, which of the functions receives the most emphasis 
and to what extent?” On the basis of data obtained from the 
questionnaire the advisory function is considered by the 
inspectors as their most important. This is closely followed 
by the supervisory function. The administrative function is 
rated as the least significant in their work. 

Advisory Function 

Most of the inspectors of schools who were interviewed 
stated that their most effective work was done on the basis 
of long-range planning. After the planning stage was 




■ o,; - - ■ ■ ■ 

* 

; 

• 3 Hi e ’ 




* 

• ' <■;. :• " ”io 


t s 

, 

« 

* 

. 





174 


completed the next step was to get the plans into operation. 
This always necessitated support from the board of trustees 
and often a definite motion being placed on the minute book. 

As many of the inspectors pointed out, ,T the chief function 
of the inspector is advisory in the sense that it is through 
the use of this function that he gets his plans in operation 
either directly through the development of effective board 
policies, or through working with the principals and the 
staff.” (Table XV, I, Appendix B) 

The emphasis placed on this function in all categories 
in the questionnaire reinforces its significance in theses 
of the practicing inspectors in British Columbia. Only in 
the sub-categories relating to classroom procedures, special 
classes (Table XX, I, 1 and 5),research (II, 5), working 
conditions of teachers (III, 5), and the execution of board 
policies relating to the educational program (VI, 5) is the 
advisory function given a secondary place. 

The Supervisory Function 

Many of the inspectors indicated that the supervisory 
was equal in importance to the advisory function in many areas. 
Once the plans had been approved the inspector had to share 
equal responsibility with the teaching in order to implement 









175 


the policies. They pointed out that where a policy was more 
or less permanently established, the advisory function of the 
superintendent often was no more important than the super¬ 
visory and in some instances was less so. Some of the inspec¬ 
tors felt that supervision would tend to become more and 
more important as change became less rapid and the educational 
system stabilized itself. Others felt this would be offset 
by the improvement in staff qualifications and the increase 
in professional abilities of the teaching staff as a whole, 
and the principals in particular. In such a situation, the 
advisory function of the inspector would tend to increase 
proportionately. (Table XV, I, Appendix B) 

The emphasis placed upon the supervisory function is 
particularly evident in the categories of instruction and 
instructional management. This function is recognized as 
most important in classroom instruction, special classes, 
and working conditions of teachers. It is in these areas 
that the need for the integration of the personal needs and 
objectives of the individual teacher and those of the local 
educational system is most noticeable. It is through this 
function that the adjustment between the impersonal laws and 
regulations of the administrative process and the personal 
problems and desires is accomplished. It is also by means 


. , J~ 









176 


of this function that the plans for improvement and exten¬ 
sion of educational opportunities are put into effective 
action* 

The Administrative Function 

To the inspectors in British Columbia much less 
emphasis is placed upon the administrative function than on 
the other two* Only in those fields of activity where the 
department and board have enunciated clear and definite laws 
and regulations, and where definite evaluation of the program 
is requested, do the inspectors place major emphasis on this 
function. In classroom instruction the administrative 
function is as important as the advisory. Only in relation 
to the employment, transfer, and dismissal of teachers and 
the execution of board policies is major emphasis placed upon 
the administrative function. 

Summary 

Figure 11 illustrates the significance which the 
inspector in British Columbia places upon three of the sources 
of authority in the determination of his activities and the way 








• 





- 

























- 

. 

- 

* 

< l 

„ 











































Percentage 


in which he discharges his duties and responsibilities 
Figure 12 gives a graphic illustration of the relative 
emphasis he places upon the three functions. 


177 


70 

60 


*\ 

I \ 



Category 


BRITISH COLUMBIA 



1 2 3 4 5b 

Category 


FIGURE 11 


FIGURE 12 


Sources of Authority x 


1. Instruction 

2. Instructional 
Management 

3. Personnel 
Management 


Dept. Directive 
Board Directive 
Own Initiative 


Distribution of Functions 


Categories 

4 

5 

6 

Legend 

XXXXXXXXXXXX 


School-Community 
Relations 
Business Manage¬ 
ment: Policy 
Planning 
Business Manage¬ 
ment: Policy 
Execution 


Advisory 

Supervisory 

Administrative 

















■ - 




























. 

: 






* 

* 

* 











* 





173 


Alberta 

Like his compatriot in British Columbia, the super¬ 
intendent of schools in Alberta has had many years of exper¬ 
ience as a teacher and principal before he was appointed as 
superintendent. The "average" superintendent in Alberta has 
had about fifteen years of experience as teacher and about 
eight to nine years as superintendent. He has about eighty 
classrooms to supervise and twenty-two hundred students in 
attendance in the schools in the area. In a few areas many 
of the students still attend one-room rural schools. However, 
the Alberta superintendent is much less likely to have an 
assistant than are superintendents in either British Columbia 
or Saskatchewan. Only seven of the thirty-eight superin¬ 
tendents who answered the questionnaire reported having a 
helping teacher or an assistant superintendent. Unlike 
British Columbia, very few superintendents have more than 
one larger unit of administration within their superintendency, 
although many have within the superintendency towns and 
villages which are not part of the school division (Tables 
V, VI, VII, Appendix B). 

While all of the categories in the questionnaire were 
of concern to all the superintendents who reported, there 
were two or three sub-categories which were not part of the 





* 

' ■ 

. 




. r • •- 








- 


. 






■ 




< ■ / 

r 






179 

work of many (Table XXI, Appendix B). Less than a quarter of 
the reporting superintendents indicated that adult education 
was a part of the program in the school division and only 
about one-third reported special classes for atypical children. 
In several instances special attention was paid to atypical 
children as a group within a classroom, rather than as a 
separate class. About one half of the superintendents 
reported that they had responsibilities concerning the office 
staff and the care, maintenance, and use of school buildings. 
All, or most, of the superintendents 1 duties and responsib¬ 
ilities are in relation to the other sub-categories. 

Sources of Authority 

In most instances the duties and responsibilities 
of the superintendents of schools in Alberta are similar to 
those in British Columbia. Unlike either British Columbia 
or Saskatchewan, however, the superintendent in Alberta is 
the attendance officer for the superintendency. J In the 
other two provinces he supervises and advises attendance 
officers appointed by the boards of trustees. 

The Department of Education 

In British Columbia the superintendent of the larger 
unit is responsible for the public, junior high, and senior 
schools in his area. In Alberta, the high school inspectoral 







ISO 


staff is responsible for all inspections in high schools* 
However, they also assist the superintendents in the school 
divisions in institutes, workshops and in zone meetings. In 
many ways they act in a liaison capacity between the super¬ 
intendents in the school division and the Department of 
Education.^ 

The superintendents of schools in Alberta consider 
themselves as agents of the Department of Education in the 
local area. While considerable emphasis is placed upon the 
position of the superintendent as the chief executive officer 
in British Columbia, there is no legal provision for such a 
position in Alberta. In the latter province the department 
looks upon the man as the educational leader in the area and 
expects him to establish himself as such through his own 
qualifications and superior ability.17 

In British Columbia the central authority is concerned 
about maintaining close control of the interna of education 
and a clear distinction between the superior and subordinate 
authority. Many of the superintendents in Alberta report 
that the main stress in this province is upon the joint 
responsibility of the provincial and local authorities for 
the achievement of common ends. Much of the responsibility 
for the co-ordination and integration of the aims and object¬ 
ives of the provincial department and the local boards of 



. 










- 










■ 

. 


• ■ 


.. ;. ' J o ; 




f i 






U< 


f 






















■ 11 ! 








:•{«■* : : 


' 


' 






■ 

' 




' 


onJ-ifs h *w»o,l : ;h\ 





,! 




i 








■ 








■ 










trustees thus rests with the local superintendent. This 
approach to joint responsibility is also apparent in the 
emphasis given the program of group supervision in most of 
the superintendencies of the province. In the Annual Report 
of the Department of Education in 1956, the chief superin¬ 
tendent reports that in thirty-six of the superintendencies 
the superintendents and the principals 1 associations meet 
together frequently during the year for the purpose of 

1 A 

developing a group approach to the problems of supervision. ° 
While the authority of the department is recognized 
by all superintendents in relation to all categories, it is 
most significant in directing the activities of the super¬ 
intendent in evaluating the work of the teacher in the class¬ 
room and in pupil accounting, (Table XXI, II, 1). In these 
two areas the superintendents are guided almost wholly by 
the requirements of the Department of Education and their own 
initiative. In neither is the board of trustees accorded 
significant authority. From this it can be assumed that the 
Department of Education in Alberta feels that it can guarantee 
a uniform foundation program to all students in the province 
through the emphasis on instruction in the classroom, the 

courses of study, and the direct enforcement of attendance 
laws. From the viewpoint of the superintendents, the 






i ! 


. 




- 




: 




‘ 




r 




... • ■ . • . £ 





' . . . 

■ 

~ 


, . f . j i . ;.! /;:■ ■ <1.. ; .: . '■■■■• . j .. : - r . • 








■ 


. 































182 


department has the least authority in matters dealing with 
non-professional staff such as caretakers and bus drivers and 
office staff in the local school division* 

The Board of Trustees 

The importance of a close working relationship with 
the board of trustees was stressed in one way or another by 
most of the superintendents who were interviewed. Several 
letters attached to questionnaires mentioned difficulties 
which arose when there were poor relationships between the 
superintendent, the board, and the secretary of the school 
division. Others mentioned that despite this they found the 
present arrangements between board, secretary, and super¬ 
intendent quite satisfactory. 

As in British Columbia, a number of the superintendents 
expressed concern over the difficulties which arose when the 
membership in the board of trustees was changing constantly 
and at times rapidly. The instability in board membership 
was often reflected in instability of staff and constant change 
in policy. The men who reported being in this position felt 
that, until some measure of stability was obtained, their 
main concern was to hold the present organization together. 

All the superintendents contacted agreed that one of the 
major responsibilities of the superintendent in situations 











■ ' 










» 




' 




v 





< 


' r • 
























* 




r; : ■ x 










,. r :,_. ') •; ; J. '• 




















183 


such as this is to educate the board members in the major 
objectives of the program and attempt to obtain the estab¬ 
lishment of long-range and permanent policies. (Table XIII,Appendix B) 

The main areas of authority ascribed to the board of 
trustees were in relation to the employment and working 
conditions of staff, or in personnel management, policy plan¬ 
ning and execution. None of the superintendents accepted the 
board of trustees as a significant source of authority in any 
of the aspects connected with instruction, work with committees 
of teachers, or in fact finding and research activities. 

(Table XXI) 

The approach of the superintendents in Alberta to the 
question of the use of their own initiative was quite similar 
to that in British Columbia. As one person put it, n the 
Department of Education and the local board lay out in specific 
terms what they consider the minimum program to be. From 
there, I am expected to do the best I can with the resources 
and money available to obtain a better education for the 
children in the area.” 

Functions 

The superintendents of schools in Alberta give more 
emphasis to the necessity of long-range planning based upon 
accurate information than to other aspects of their work. 







) l J O ! 


' 

• V.. -V . • 




















' 


. 

■ ,, i‘< ' j, < 

■ 


■ 


t 


















' 







. : • ■ 

. 






( 





' - • 

. ! • i 
















18k 


Many of them agree that the emphasis upon the relative 
importance of one function in comparison with the other two 
depends upon the conditions existing in the local area. 
During periods of rapid and extensive change new policies 
must be developed to meet the problems which appear. In 
such a situation the planning and advisory functions of the 
superintendent are the most important until the policy is 
well established. After this the main concern of the super¬ 
intendent is with supervision. 

The Advisory Function 

In the questionnaire the superintendents placed the 
main emphasis on the advisory function in those categories 
which were not concerned directly with instruction, such as 
personnel management, school community relations, and both 
aspects of business management. In the two major categories 
of instruction and instructional management, the advisory 
function is placed second to supervision. Since the larger 
units of administration have been in operation in Alberta 
since 1936»-ten years longer than in British Columbia and 
nine years longer than in Saskatchewan—the hypothesis that 
there is a close relationship between change and the use of 
the advisory function, and conversely stability of operation 
and. the emphasis upon the supervisory and administrative 






: . ' • ‘ f YJ. A 

■ . ■ . on&fr rc q 

r :AJ TO<<H 

: 







. . 1 1 : vY . 

;■ tfr. . 

. . 



j no. .. . 

:j i 

yyh,. M 

■ ■ . ■ drifYY : - 

' ' 


. 

a s*r 




.’ . ■■": . " i i 


' 




: , , ; !"[:;; f •> y: . j : >:Y.< t A. JI VJ AOJlitf 

, r . f '■ ■ e< 

■ . ' y' 




*AO;j 


' 


t i ■ ■ 


i A ■ ' • ■ 





• ‘ ir ; • - • • A i ; y. 1 © 
:■.». .•/•- > ; ;<n ! A. . .' ,I 1 1 • ff,t y r;yio 1 a J x,; 




. 




■ 




. j.. 











functions demands closer investigation than it has received 
in the past. 


The Supervisory Function 

More emphasis is placed on the supervisory function 
by the superintendents in Alberta than in British Columbia. 

The Annual Reports of the Department of Education and many 
of the statements made by the superintendents stress the 
development of co-operative supervisory programs by super¬ 
intendents and principals. The first mention of this type 
of supervisory procedure in an Annual Report of the 
Department of Education is made in 1953. In summarizing the 
major activities of the superintendents for the year the 
report says: 

It is significant that many of the administrative 
changes involve, in a rather direct way, the increase 
and improvement of co-operative relations and action 
among trustees, principals, teachers, and lay groups. 
Principals 1 meetings are called by the superintendents 
and periodic meetings of principals* associations have 
become widespread and through them an increasing num¬ 
ber of administrative responsibilities are assumed by 
principals.19 

Three years later the progress in group supervision is 
given greater emphasis. Speaking of principals* associations, 
the Annual Report of the Department of Education, 1956, states: 

Principals* associations. . . meet from four to 
ten times per year, giving valuable aid to the super¬ 
intendents in school administration, testing programs, 
promotion policies, direction of special projects, and 
public relations. ^ 




m 



: 


,.t‘ 



1 1 . : . 



















, 


c t 







t. 





186 


The Administrative Function 

As many of the superintendents stated in several ways, 
the administration of the laws and regulations of the Department 
of Education is an underlying function of the superintendent. 

It is used mainly in dealing with things and policies, but 
not with people unless they seriously interfere with the 
effective operation of some part of the school system. 

Many of the policies which have been developed for 
the effective operation of the externa of the school system 
have become reasonably stable and operate within the frame¬ 
work of laws and regulations. In most instances the boards 
of trustees and the teaching staffs are reasonably stable 
and the administrative function of the superintendent is 
rarely brought to the fore. In all of the categories and 
sub-categories, this function was ranked the lowest in all 
except the execution of board policies in relation to the 
educational program, where it was given only slightly higher 
emphasis than the advisory function and much less than the 
supervisory one. (Table XXI, Appendix B) 

Summary 

Figures 13 and 14 summarize the significance which the 
superintendents place upon the sources of authority, and the 













relative emphasis which is placed upon each of the functions. 
Generally speaking, the superintendents of schools in Alberta 
place the emphasis on their own initiative as the main source 
of authority in all fields except policy execution, and upon 
the advisory function in all fields except instruction and 


instructional management. 














; h ; , ' . : ■ ’ ■ 3 ^ 

■ 

. 



' 







































Percentage 




ALBERTA 




FIGURE 13 FIGURE 14 


Sources of Authority* 


Distribution of Functions 


Categories 


1. Instruction 

2. Instructional Management 

3. Personnel Management 


4* School-Community Relations 
5. Business Management: 

Policy Planning 
6* Business Management: 

Policy Execution 


Dept. Directive 
Board TT 
Own Initiative 


Legend 




Advisory 

Supervisory 

Administrative 
















189 


Saskatchewan 

In years of experience as teacher, qualifications for 
the position, and type of area for which he is responsible, 
the superintendents of schools in Saskatchewan are very 
similar to those in Alberta. The "average” superintendent 
of schools in Saskatchewan has had eighteen years of exper¬ 
ience as a teacher and nine years as a superintendent. He 
is employed by the Department of Education and placed in 
charge of an area containing eighty to ninety school districts 
with ninety to one hundred classrooms in operation and 
approximately two thousand students in attendance. In many 
of the superintendencies there are towns or consolidated 
school districts which are not part of the school unit, but 
which are within the boundaries of the superintendency. 

(Tables V, VI, VII, Appendix B) 

The larger school units act is patterned closely on 

the school act in Alberta. The close legal relationship 

between the two acts has been reinforced by the exchange of 

information and ideas by senior officials in the departments 
21 

of education and between the superintendents in the two 
provinces; through exchange of representatives at provincial 
conferences, and joint meetings of superintendents from both 
provinces at points near the border. With a common beginning 



* 

- 

* 

;j I . .: 

. . 

. { . t .... . i . . < ’ 







'■ 1 ; 

* 








190 


under a single government in the North West Territories, 
common geographical features, and the close relationship in 
school organization it is not surprising to find a similar 
approach to problems among the superintendents in both 
provinces. In almost every respect Saskatchewan is following 

the lead of Alberta in the development of various aspects of 

22 

the larger unit of administration. 

As in Alberta, only a small proportion of the super¬ 
intendents indicated on the questionnaire that adult education 
and special classes for atypical children were included in 
the educational program in their superintendency. Half the 
superintendents, or less, reported that they had any respons¬ 
ibilities for the work of the non-professional staff, or the 
office staff. Twenty-nine superintendents of a total of 
fifty-three indicated that they had accepted no responsib¬ 
ilities in connection with the negotiation or determination 
of salary schedules for teachers. Only about two-thirds of 
the superintendents reported any responsibility for the proper 
and effective execution of board policies. 

Sources of Authority (Table XXII) 

The duties and responsibilities of the superintendent 

of schools in Saskatchewan are very similar to those in 




; : ' ; • ' j ' ■' C, J : ■ ; • i . ■ 

' 

' 

. 

: : ■ . 

- : ' i ' ; , . j 

. 

< < ■. ■ 

* 


* 






■ 




' i 

' 




■ 

. 

















191 


Alberta and British Columbia. Unlike the Alberta practice, 
the superintendent does not act as the attendance officer, 
but he has general supervisory and administrative duties over 
the attendance officer. 

There are few differences in the significance placed 
on the sources of authority. In Saskatchewan the superinten¬ 
dents interviewed placed an emphasis on the need for clar¬ 
ification of the position of the superintendent in the larger 
unit in relation to the board of trustees and the secretary 
treasurer. A second noticeable difference is the greater 
emphasis placed on the initiative of the superintendent in 
the field of personnel management. In Alberta the super¬ 
intendents place the main emphasis on the board of trustees 
as the senior authority in this field, while in Saskatchewan 
equal or primary emphasis is placed on the initiative of the 
superintendent. In all other categories even the percentage 
distribution of the scores is very similar. 

Functions 

The functions of the superintendent as a line and staff 
officer are interpreted in much the same way in both provinces. 
In Saskatchewan more emphasis is placed on the advisory, less 
on the administrative functions than in Alberta, with about 
the same emphasis on supervision. 




1 • ' ■ <■ 






Percentage 


192 


Summary' 

Figures 15 and 16 when compared with those for Alberta 
illustrate the close relationship there is between the super¬ 
intendents in the two provinces, if one takes into con¬ 
sideration the differences which have been noted in the category 
of personnel management under authority and the different 
emphasis placed on the advisory and administrative functions. 


SASKATCHEWAN 




FIGURE 15 


FIGURE 16 


Sources of Authority x 


Distribution of Functions 


x Categories 


1. Instruction 

2. Instructional Management 
3• Personnel Management 


4. School-Community Relations 

5. Business Management: 

Policy Planning 

6o Business Management: 

Policy Execution 


Dept. Directive 
Board TT 
Own Initiative 


Legend 




xxxx 



Advisory 

Supervisory 

Administrative 




























193 


The Eastern Zone 

In the eastern zone superintendents place less emphasis 
on the board of trustees as a source of authority than they 
do on departmental regulation. In view of the fact that 
Nova Scotia has had larger units in operation for six months 
and New Brunswick is going through an intermediate stage, this 
is understandable. 

In British Columbia the significance given the 
Department of Education as a source of authority is almost 
the same as in Nova Scotia. In both provinces considerable 
emphasis is placed upon the importance of central control of 
the foundation program. In both provinces the superintendent 
is designated by law as the chief executive officer, or the 
director of education. The Report of the Roya l Commission on 
Finance in Nova Scotia sums up the attitude of the central 
government in both provinces when it states that "the legal 
and financial responsibility for education in Canada rests 
on the provinces. The municipalities . . . are in fact 
creatures of the province ."23 

Chapter Summary 

In a superintendency with a large number of small 
autonomous school districts the superintendent exercises 


















194 


control over a much greater number of people than does any one 
local board. On the basis of the criteria that the amount of 
power exercised can be measured according to the degree of 
control over the behavior of any one person and the number 
of persons so controlled, the span of control of the super¬ 
intendent was much greater than that of the local board of 
trustees. 

However, the board of trustees of a larger unit having 
boundaries co-terminus with that of the superintendency has 
the same span of control as the superintendent since it 
exercises control over the same people. Traditionally, the 
superintendent as a line officer is concerned mainly with 
the interna of education and the board of trustees with the 
externa. In this sense, the kind of control is different. 

Thus, with the establishment of larger units of administration, 
the balance of power between superintendent and board was 
altered from one which was based on a superordinate-subordinate 
to a co-authority holder relationship. 

Table XIV, Appendix B, summarizes the information 
obtained from the questionnaire on the percentage of super¬ 
intendents in each province who reported duties and respons¬ 
ibilities in relation to each of the categories and sub¬ 
categories of activities. As will be noted in the table those 










* 


. 




. ' ' 

. 

« : 

r 






' 

• ■ ■ ; • .• . ■ • • • ■ •- 

. 

< 

- 

iii 



195 


activities on which there is full consensus in the three 
provinces are closely related to the traditional expectations 
of the work of the superintendent and his relation to the 
foundation program. 

In all of the provinces with larger units of admin¬ 
istration the superintendent of schools acts in the capacity 
of a line officer in his relationship with the Department 
of Education and as a staff officer to the co-authority 
holder, the board of trustees. In the three provinces in 
the western zone, however, the superintendents place more 
emphasis on the board of trustees as a source of authority 
than they do on departmental directive. 

The range in the distribution of emphasis on functions 
is much less than that in the distribution of authority. 

The emphasis on the advisory function as a necessary part 
of short and long-range planning indicates instability and 
change and the need for the development of permanent pol¬ 
icies by the board of trustees. On the other hand, the 
emphasis placed on the supervisory functions arises from the 
presence of permanent and stabilized policies by both the 
department and the board of trustees. 

Implied in the patterns appearing in functions and 
and acknowledgement of sources of authority is the change 









, 




. . 






- 














1 




< 








4 













■ 


, 


















in the role of the superintendent as a line and staff officer. 
The superintendent advises the central authority on local 
needs and goals and supervises the educational policies 
of the board of trustees; he advises the board of trustees 
on provincial regulations and goals and supervises the 
educational policies of the central authority. 












































































197 


cO 

r <3 


# 

aS 

p* 

• 

• 

cd 

o 

-P 

CO 

co 

PQ 

£ 

+ 

rH 

cd 

• 


cd 

PQ 

<4 

CO 

a 

s 

o 


Q) 

> 

Td *H 
U -P 
cd o 
O <D 
PQ U 


o 





-4- 







o 


-4 



UN 


in 

R R 





R R 





Jx! R 





R R 





R R 





R R 





R R 





R R 





R R 





R R 


R R 



R R 


R R 



R 


R R 



R rH 


R R 


RR 

R ON 


R R 


R R 

R 


R R 


R R 

R R 


R R 


R R 

R R 


R R 


R R 

R R 


R R 


R R 

R R 


R R 


R R 

RR 


R R 


R R 

R R 


■ 


R R 

R R 


R O 


R 

R R 


R ON 


R -4 

R R 


R 1 


R CN 

R R 


R R 


R 

R,R 


R R 


R R 

Ss 


R R 


R R 

w 


k A k-4 
r r 


R R 

RN 


R R 


R R 

X\ 


R R 



SN 


R R 


'^\ s 

\\ 


R R 


X" 





\\ 



XN 


XX 

\N 


W 


\X 

R 


XX 


' X ■ > 

NO\ 


XX 


XX 



XX 


XX 

N 

^NN, 





\N 


X 


-xC\2 



NO 


X 



\CM 


w 

SN 




■ - 

>s 


XX 


XX 

W 




XX 

\X 


XX 


Xx 



£X 

H 


W 


3 


M 

ft. 


pin 

O 

CO 

M 

o 

p£ 

pp 

o 

GO 


o 

a 

o 

H 

Eh 

Pp 

PQ 

H 

PS 

Eh 

CO 

H 

Q 

O 

*4 

Eh 

a 

w 

o 

& 

w 

P-, 

pc, 

o 


R 

P4 


P3 

CO 


AUTHORITY BY PROVINCE 

























19S 


BO 

ctf 


co 


CQ 




ir\ 



CO 

W 

o 

s 

M 

> 

O 

Ph 

PQ 

co 

S 

o 

H 

E-t 

O 

S 

P 

ft, 


to 


W 

pc! 

B 

H 


O 

s 

o 

H 

Eh 


P 

m 

H 

PS 

Eh 

CO 

M 

Q 

M 

O 

<=r| 

Eh 

S 

P3 

O 

P=5 

W 

Ph 

Ph 

o 


P=3 

<u 

i 


P 

co 






























199 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VI 

-'-Robert Dubin, Human Relations in Administration 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1951), p. 128. 

2 Ibid., p. 159. 

3Ibid., p. 185 

A -Ibid .. p. 188. 

^British Columbia, Department of Education, Annual 
Report , 1950, p. 16>7. 

^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 

1956, p. 35. 

^Saskatchewan, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
1956, p. 71. 

$Nova Scotia, Department of Education, Annual Report , 
1956, p. 168. 

^Dubin, op . cit ., p, l$5o 

^ Statutes , Saskatchewan, 1953, Chap. 170, Sec. 51 (8). 

Hw.B. Baker, Speech given to members of CEA-University 
of Alberta Short Course in Educational Leadership, May, 1957. 

■^British Columbia, Manual of School Law and School 
Repulations , op , cit . 

^ Ibid ., p 0 56. 

l^The discussion of the role of the superintendent as a 
line officer is based mainly on information obtained from 
interviews, supported by that contained in the questionnaire. 

statutes, Alberta, Chap. 80, Sec. 401. 

l^Byrnes, op. cit . 


l?Rees, op. cit . 





























K 




* 



t 








« ' ■ ■ - t 





yjjj 



* 









t 






t 









200 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VI (continued) 

l^Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Report, 
1956, p. 30. 

19 Ibid, 1953, p. 27. 

2( \)p. cit . 

^Interview with Mr. Allan McCallum, Deputy Minister, 
Department of Education, Saskatchewan, August, 1957. 

22 Ibid . 

^^Nova Scotia, Report of Royal Commission on Finance , 
op. cit., p. 13. 













CHAPTER VII 


THE ACTUAL ROLE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT 

The data which were obtained by means of questionnaire 
and interviews will serve as the basis for studies which com¬ 
prise this chapter. The degree of agreement or consensus on 
the perception of expectations is either explicit or implicit 
in the emphasis which the superintendent places on the admin¬ 
istrative, supervisory, and advisory functions in each of the 
educational activities for which he is responsible. 

Actual School Practice 

It is in the field of actual school practice that the 
superintendent is faced with the challenge of specific con¬ 
ditions, of what to do in this or that situation. He is 
forced to assess, often to improvise, and always to adjust to 
conditions as they are. What can be done in a certain 
specific situation is controlled by his perception of the 

apparent needs and abilities of the students, the teachers, 

1 

and the community. 

The n needs, interests, and abilities** of the community 
are formally expressed in the curriculum designs and course 
of studies; the laws, regulations, and directives of the 
provincial authority; and in the policies, minutes and recom¬ 
mendations of the board of trustees. They are expressed in 
a less direct--though none the less effective—way in the 






202 


election of members of the legislature and boards of trustees 
in the demands of pressure groups; the recommendations from 
ratepayers 1 meetings; and in the problems of parents in Home 
and School Club groups struggling to understand what the 
school is doing for their children. The community--either 
province-wide or superintendency-wide--expresses its needs, 
desires, and abilities in the results it expects; the kind 

of buildings it erects; the quality of teaching it will 

1 „ . 2 
accept; the amount oi money it will pay. 

Categories of Activities 

The percentage frequency distribution of activities of 
superintendents of larger units in the western zone is 
presented in Table XIV, Appendix B. This table supplies 
information on the degree of agreement in each province and 
among the three provinces on what activities the super¬ 
intendents perceive as part of the job. The percentage dis¬ 
tribution provides information on the different amounts of 
consensus on different expectation items. The letter (a) 
before items in the categories indicates that the degree of 
agreement in the three provinces Is the same. The letter 
(b) indicates the same degree of agreement in two of the 
three provinces. The groups of activities arranged under 
the percentage distribution categories in descending order of 
magnitude can be considered to indicate the relative order of 








. 








203 


expectations perceived by the superintendent and the import¬ 
ance of participation in the activity from the provincial and 
local viewpoints. They can also indicate the variation in 
the local expectations and perceptions of the superintendent. 

Functions 

The definitions of functions given in the manual of 
directions which accompanied the questionnaire and also used 
during interviews are stated in Sample I, Appendix A. These 
same definitions have been stated in Chapter I under definition 
of terms. They are an important part of the frame of 
reference for the discussion in this chapter. 

From the viewpoint of the superintendent as an incum¬ 
bent of a position within a formal organization his primary 
orientation is to the achievement of tasks for which his 
position is created and for which he is held accountable. In 
order to carry out his tasks the superintendent elects to 
advise, to supervise, or to administer laws and regulations 
according to his perception of the requirements of the task 
and the expectations present. In this chapter the major focus 
of interest will be on the functional definition of the role 
of the superintendent. Most of the factual data for the 
chapter are contained in Tables XIII and Tables XX-XXII, 

Appendix B. 






204 


I. INSTRUCTION 

In the category of instruction all superintendents 

indicate they have responsibilities for classroom instruction 
procedures, methods and techniques of instruction, teacher 
evaluation (Table XIII, Appendix B), in-service education and 
pupil progress and promotion. The amount of consensus on 
perceived expectations in the fields of adult education and 
special classes varies considerably within each province and 
from province to province. In British Columbia consensus 
on adult education is 92 per cent and on special classes $$ 
per cent. In Alberta and Saskatchewan consensus is less than 
40 per cent in both areas. (Table XIV, Appendix B) 

The Teacher and Classroom Instruction 

The distribution of emphasis on the three functions is 
found in Table XX (British Columbia), Table XXI (Alberta), 
and Table XXII (Saskatchewan), Appendix B. An examination of 
these tables shows that the superintendents in the three 
provinces place the major emphasis on the supervisory function. 
In British Columbia equal emphasis is placed on the advisory 
and administrative functions. In Alberta slightly more emphasis 
is placed on the administrative than on the advisory function, 
while in Saskatchewan the reverse is true. 






' 

c ' : ' ••• - • ' r . ! <' ■* / .< :• •• -;i 'v iq 

s • : • ' c . ' < / ‘ V V*j 

■ 

j hr. > i - ■■ i 



; ■ • ' 


. , ■ i< .> ; J.,:-;' < . . . . ■ : - • i 






205 


Current educational literature would have us believe 
that the superintendent exercises only supervisory functions 
in relation to classroom instruction. Harold Spears goes 
so far as to say: 

There is danger of raising supervisory sights so 
far above the mechanics of classroom operation that the 
only view available will be one of the clouds. It 
behooves the school worker to be idealistic in his 
endeavour, to the extent of ever reaching for improved 
school conditions, but at the same time to be ever 
realistic, ever cognizant of the actual setting in 
which the improvement must take place.3 

Both the provincial and the local authorities are held 
responsible by statute for the quality of instruction in the 
classroom. To discharge this stewardship, both authorities 
demand from the superintendent an evaluation of the educative 
processes in the classroom. The superintendent must inspect 
in order to satisfy himself that the regulations of the 
Department of Education and the policies of the board of 
trustees are not being ignored or misinterpreted. If 
necessary, he must be prepared to direct the implementation 
of all the regulations which apply to the instruction of 
pupils. Each authority expects to receive from the super¬ 
intendent the answers to such questions as:Are the basic 
requirements of the foundation program being met as to cur¬ 
riculum and methods of instruction? What is the quality of 








. 

: 




„ 

' 

« 

■ t 





. 








< . 






* 










. 






* 




















206 


instruction? Is the quality of teaching sufficiently high 
to be acceptable to the provincial and the local authorities? 
The administrative function of the superintendent is primarily 
directed toward the maintenance of the present standards of 
instruction. 

On the other hand, the supervisory function is prim¬ 
arily concerned with the improvement of instruction. 

The focal point of supervision . . . becomes the 
optimum growth of each pupil, yet this in turn can be 
attained only to the extent that the teacher’s poten¬ 
tial in instruction and pupil guidance is released to 
the full. To this end it becomes the responsibility 
of the supervisory staff to stimulate, to encourage, to 
assist, to guide and even direct teachers so that they 
will experience the maximum professional development 
and thus make available to their pupils the richest 
educational experiences.4 

Since 1953 fifty to seventy superintendents repres¬ 
enting all provinces of Canada have been selected by their 
respective departments of education to attend the Short 
Course in Educational Leadership, jointly sponsored by the 
Canadian Education Association, the W. K. Kellogg Foundation, 
and the University of Alberta. One of the purposes which this 
project was to serve was T, to provide an opportunity for 
further exploration of the problem areas, including the 
formulation of definite plans for later local action.in 
each of the Short Courses the problem of the supervision of 
instruction has been included as a major problem area. 






' 

. 

, , . 




» 


' 

■ 












. I . ■ ■ ' 

. 

■ 

l ' ■ 















207 


During the past five years almost 70 per cent of Canadian 
superintendents have been given the opportunity to discuss 
and explore the possibilities of this function. In almost 
all of the reports emanating from this project, lists of 
purposes, definitions, techniques, and their practical 
application, and criteria and methods of appraisal are included 
in the reports of one or more of the groups. Questions put 
to superintendents during interviews (Table XIII, Appendix B) 

elicited views as to purpose and practice which are similar 

6 

to those expressed in these reports. 

In discharging his responsibilities associated with 
the supervisory function, the superintendent of schools is 
expected to provide for the improvement of instruction and 
learning by 

• . . securing common agreement between teachers 
and supervisory officers on 

(a) the general objectives of the school 

(b) the goals of instruction in the several 
curricular areas 

(c) the procedures of planning, preparing, and 
appraising lessons or units of work in 
keeping with these goals.7 


Lastly, even though supervisory procedures are 
democratically organized, the principal and the 
superintendent are held responsible for the success 
of the program.$ 

School administration can to a degree establish the 
boundaries within which the instructional effort must operate. 







20 $ 


Supervision can use all of the preferred procedures for 
stimulating teacher growth and increasing competency, but 
there is still a large area in which the teacher must take 
independent action for which she alone is responsible. In 
this the superintendent can assist only with advice. 

Current literature says little about this part of the 
work of the superintendent, although considerable importance 
is attached to the advisory function by the superintendents, 
in all of the provinces. Quite a large number of the super¬ 
intendents look upon the individual conference as an excel¬ 
lent opportunity for the teacher and the superintendent to 
talk informally about professional and personal difficulties. 
The willingness and ability of the supervisor to help the 
teacher through advice can bring significant improvement in 
instruction.^ 

The Pupil 

The tasks of the superintendents in relation to the 
pupils in this category (instruction) are concerned with 
the determination of abilities, the administration of tests, 
guidance, and the control of progress. Superintendents in 
all three provinces place considerable emphasis on the 
advisory function, with supervisory ranked a poor second, and 
the least emphasis on the administrative function. 








c 

• 













■ 






< 

' ‘ • 1 ■ 

. 




. ! ' : A| 


. 

, i .. ' , 




■ 







. • 










* 

• t •• • . 











209 


The increasing emphasis upon guidance, the necessity 
for more objective methods in determining the abilities of 
the students, and the control of the progress of the students 
through streaming, or homogeneous grouping, has made necessary 
the use of experts or specialists who have special training. 
These staff services often can be supplied only to many of 
the teachers in the smaller schools by the superintendent of 
schools. 

In many instances the administration of ability tests 
is done directly by the superintendent; in others, by trained 
personnel such as assistant superintendents, supervisors, or 
helping teachers. The main purpose of all such staff ser¬ 
vices is to provide the teacher with accurate information and 
advice and assistance to put into effect the necessary cor¬ 
rective procedures. The final decision on how, when, and 
where this additional information and knowledge is to be put 
into force still remains largely with the teacher in the 
classroom. The staff service provided is mainly advisory in 
all the provinces. 

In-Service Education 

The tasks of the superintendent in relation to in- 
service education of teachers are concerned with institutes, 




' 


t 








? A : ' sri• *o ■ ?>r.&h sij 

r 








4 


- 

- 





210 


workshops, conventions, and other meetings and procedures 
for the training of teachers in service. The orientation of 
new teachers to staff and to the educational program in the 
superintendency was mentioned by a large number of super¬ 
intendents during interview sessions. (Table XIII, Appendix B) 

The superintendents in British Columbia place the 
major emphasis on the advisory function in the field of in- 
service education, with supervisory and administrative 
functions ranked second and third respectively. Super¬ 
intendents in Alberta and Saskatchewan, on the other hand, 
place the major emphasis on the supervisory function, with 
the advisory function ranked second and the administrative 
ranked third, (Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B). During the 
interview sessions many of the superintendents expressed the 
view that they tended to place more emphasis on the advisory 
function as the staff of teachers improved in quality and 
experience. Only a relatively small percentage of the super¬ 
intendents interviewed in British Columbia (25 per cent) 
commented on this aspect, but a much larger percentage in 
Alberta (40 per cent) and in Saskatchewan (50 per cent) 
interjected this or a similar comment into the discussion. 

Prior to World War II, local efforts directed toward 

the professional improvement of the teacher were largely 
centred on the classroom visit of the superintendent, the 


C ' < 

. 


• - 




c 






? 

* 

C ' i 

. -i ' t ' 








. 

5 . 

t ■ •- ■■■■: . o •. : . : 






211 


staff meeting in a local school, and the annual convention 
when all the teachers in a superintendency met together for 
one or two days. Here and there local study groups were 
organized by the provincial teachers T association, but only 
in a few instances were such activities sufficiently well 
organized to be effective. 

In a larger unit of administration, however, with all 
or most of the teachers employed by a single board, the super¬ 
intendent is in a position to plan and coordinate the program 
of in-service education effectively. Follow-up assistance 
can be provided for the teacher who puts into practice pro¬ 
grams which have been developed as a result of the co¬ 
operative efforts of staff and superintendent. 

Adult Education 

Some of the superintendents of larger units in all the 
provinces reported that adult education programs were in 
operation in their superintendencies. The percentage of res¬ 
pondents who reported that adult education was an aspect of 
their work was; British Columbia, 92 per cent; Alberta, 23 
per cent; Saskatchewan, 30 per cent. (Table XIV, Appendix B) 

In the three provinces in the western zone the res¬ 
ponsibility of the superintendent for the program is primarily 







. 

■ 

; 

. t \ U 8 As 

• < 

■ 

- 

- 


. i 

• : . ■ ! ■: . ;.w J'..:' i J' 

; ! ' t 



. V 


- 

< 

; v. l 

• : < 




■ ; ■ 1 . 













* 






' 







' 





t 

, r '> > f 




■ 











t 


* 

, 


r i 


• 


- 





212 


advisory. (Table XX-XXII, Appendix B) In Nova Scotia and 
New Brunswick equal, if not more, emphasis is placed on the 
administrative responsibilities of the superintendent. This 
is due in the main to the direct responsibility Wiich the 
provincial departments of education take for the program. In 
neither of these provinces has the local board of trustees 
any authority to deal with the program while in the western 
zone the local boards have definite responsibilities. 

Exclusive of the universities and the technical schools, 
there were few places in Canada prior to World War II which 
provided systematic instruction for adults in night or day 
classes. In many provinces the departments of education 
assume direct responsibility for the programs, such as the 
Folk Schools of Nova Scotia and the Lighted School program 
in Saskatchewan. Some of the cities have extensive adult 
programs in night classes; others have only a few. In the 
1956-57 term the city of Vancouver had over 25,000 adults 
enrolled in night classes offering systematic instruction in 
over five hundred different classes. 1 ® 

From the information supplied by the superintendents 
(Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B) it would seem that the larger 

units are assuming some responsibility in most provinces, and 
a great deal in British Columbia, for providing systematic 


• 

. 

. 








„ 

' ; * ' 












■* 

. 
































213 


instruction for adults. If such is demanded by the people, 
the public school system is the logical agency, particularly 
in the rural areas. Schools are geographically accessible to 
nearly everyone. Numerically, the staff of teachers represents 
the largest collection of educational competence in the country. 
The staff, facilities, and financial resources of the schools 
give the adult education a firm base. 

The increase in enrolment in adult education programs 
in the United States since 1945 has been phenomenal. Homer 
Kempfer reported in 1951 that TT evidence is clear that adults 
interested in further education outnumber all the children 
and youth now enrolled in schools of all kinds.He 
ascribes this tremendous increase in interest and enrolment 
to the development of the idea of the community-centred 
school, life-long education, and rapid change. 

In a world of rapid change, problems multiply too 
fast to be postponed indefinitely. Since their 
solution cannot wait the growing up of a new gener¬ 
ation of children equipped to handle them the present 
generation of adults must find the answers .^ 

Special Classes 

Special classes for atypical children, particularly 
for the physically handicapped, have been the prime respons¬ 
ibility of the provincial departments of education for many 






I ' 













j 




. 

, 






, ' 










. ■ ' ' ' i- 










0<' : . J ■ J >■ c ■ 

* ■.. 

•• 


















. 














214 


years. Since the larger units were established, however, there 
is a growing interest in the special provision being made for 
exceptional children who can be classified as either retarded 
or gifted. Eighty-four per cent of the superintendents in 
British Columbia, 34 per cent in Alberta, and 19 per cent of 
those in Saskatchewan reported that there are special classes 
in the superintendency, or special provision is being made 
for groups of these children within the regular classrooms, 
(Table XIV, Appendix B). In British Columbia and Alberta 
the main function of the superintendent is supervisory, 
with considerable emphasis on the advisory responsibilities. 

In Saskatchewan the advisory responsibilities were given 
more emphasis than either the supervisory or administrative 
(Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B). 

II. MANAGEMENT 

A characteristic feature of a larger unit of admin¬ 
istration in all provinces is the dual administration of 
educational affairs. The board of trustees deals with the 
superintendent of schools for educational affairs and with a 
secretary treasurer for financial affairs and business oper¬ 
ation. The management function is further complicated by 











































* 














' } n. 














« 


























215 

the fact that the superintendent is employed by the Department 
of Education and attached to the board as a staff officer. 

The secretary is employed by the board of trustees and is their 
senior line officer. 

Data for this section, as well as the section on 
instruction are contained in Table XIII and in Tables XX-XXII, 
Appendix B. The amount of consensus on expectations which 
superintendents in the three provinces of the western zone 
perceive as part of their job in Table XIII, Appendix B, 
supplements the data obtained from the questionnaires. 

A large percentage of the superintendents stated during 
interview sessions that the provincial authority expected them 
to provide efficient management of the educational program 
in the local area. These expectations are supported by the 
board of trustees (Table XIII, Appendix B). 

Instructional Management 

Included within the category of instructional manage- 
ment are those things which are closely related to, but not 
an actual part of, classroom instruction. In such areas as 
pupil accounting, working with committees of teachers, and 
fact finding and research the superintendent accepts respons¬ 
ibility primarily as an officer of the department and as an 
educational leader acting on his own initiative. In activities 






. 

' 









t . 

Q 


















' . .1 


. 

■ 





. 



1 oi l 












t 



, 



• c 














. t 

t < & 'st ■ •' ■ i l .s .. i y ' 0 . f ijiOJ 0 0 & J 
















: . . ' • ' 





216 


connected with the execution of board policies such as the 
promotion and progress of students, in-service education, and 
the purchase, distribution and use of instructional materials, 
the board of trustees occupies an important position (Tables 
XX-XXII, Appendix B)♦ 

The control and direction of classroom instruction as 
a basic part of the foundation program lies wholly within the 
area of control of the department and the superintendent• In 
none of the provinces is any authority in this area delegated 
to the local board of trustees. However, where the local 
school system includes instruction in special fields such as 
adult education and special classes for atypical children, 
the board exercises considerable control. Through its control 
of the externa it decides what instruction and what classes 
over and above the foundation program will be offered. Through 
the provision of buildings and equipment, or by withholding 
them, the board decides on whether technical education shall 
be a part of the school program or not. The amount of salaries 
it is prepared to pay teachers determines to an important 
degree the quality of teaching in the classrooms. The board 
also decides on special instructional services which shall be 
provided to assist the teachers and students, such as con¬ 
sultants, special subject supervisors, helping teachers, and 


, •• •' t 

- t " 























. 

c"- 

. 




. 






... 

r . • 






217 

librarians. Through its control over the budget in all prov¬ 
inces except British Columbia the school board decides on 
the emphasis and where it shall be placed in the instructional 
program. Even in the latter, where the department decides 
what the foundation program in each area shall be and what 
grants shall be paid by the department, the local board of 
trustees has the right (which they often exercise) to provide 
services and personnel on which no grant is received,^3 

A large number of boards assign the responsibility to 
the superintendent for the execution of board policies which 
directly affect instruction (Table XIII, Appendix B). In 
the provinces in the western zone, permission is needed from 
the board to use school time for staff meetings, institutes 
and workshops. Special provisions for individual differences 
in the classroom which involve changes in grading, "streaming", 
homogeneous grouping, usually need the joint approval of the 
board of trustees and the Department of Education. 

As the instructional program in a school system becomes 
more and more complex the variety and complexity of instruc¬ 
tional materials which are needed to implement the curriculum 
increase in almost direct ratio. The materials needed in the 

modern, complex instructional program, as compared with those 
when reading, writing, and arithmetic were the only things 






» 

. 

<■ 

* 


- 


|l ; •• c • 

. . 


- 


* 

: < •. • ' ! t ofl fl 





218 


taught are numerous, varied, and expensive. 

In most of the larger units in the western zone policies 
dealing with the purchase, distribution, and use of instruc¬ 
tional materials have become stabilized and reasonably perm¬ 
anent. As a result there is less emphasis on the staff 
services of the superintendent and more on the supervisory 
and administrative functions (Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B). 

In all of the provinces, except British Columbia, the 

responsibilities of the superintendent of schools for fact 

finding and research are chiefly advisory and supervisory. 

In British Columbia the superintendent has detailed and 

specific responsibilities to the Research Branch of the 

Department of Education for research and fact finding activ- 

14 

ities in the local superintendency. As a result the super¬ 
intendents in this province place the main emphasis on the 
administrative aspects of their responsibilities. 

The research and fact finding activities of the super¬ 
intendents cover all aspects of the educational system. School 
population surveys supply the information which becomes the 
basis for advice on long-range plans for school buildings, for 
financing, for centralization, and for the development of 
library facilities. Surveys are made of student abilities as 
the basis for recommendations concerning adjustment of the 
instructional program for individual differences (Table XIII, 
Appendix B). 






219 


Problems in the field of instructional management 
place many demands on the superintendents effort and energy. 

All schools in the superintendency usually receive the same 
kind and quality of materials and equipment for the basic 
program. In addition, special equipment for science labor¬ 
atories, shops, household science rooms, agricultural 
laboratories, commercial rooms, are supplied to schools 
where these courses are offered. Central library facilities, 
books, remedial materials, audio-visual materials, and repair 
and maintenance of books on hand, are problems which come before 
the superintendent when the services rendered by the library 
are available to all the schools in a superintendency. The 
policies controlling the distribution and use of many of 
these instructional materials are those of the board of 
trustees. Since the superintendent is the only one in a 
position to know what is needed and how it should be used, the 
responsibility for administering the rules and regulations 
dealing with instructional materials is usually given to the 
superintendent. In accepting such responsibilities, the 
superintendent agrees to act as a line officer for the board 
of trustees (Table XIII, Appendix B). 

Personnel Management 

Employees of the larger unit are often classified into 
two main groups, the non-professional and the professional— 








. ? . ■ 

' 















' ■■ ■ ■ ■ t ■ 




* 

t . .■ : i' -• ••-»*« ', • 

„ 







« 












■ 




4 






















, 


















220 


a classification which is often not too well accepted. In 
most instances the distinction between the responsibilities 
of the superintendent and the business administrator in the 
field of personnel management is made on the basis of their 
relationships to these two groups. Although a few superin¬ 
tendents report they have responsibilities in connection with 
the employment, placement, and working conditions of the non¬ 
professional groups such as bus-drivers, caretakers, office 
staff, and maintenance crews, these responsibilities are 
usually assumed by the business administration. The main 
concern of all of the superintendents is with the employment, 
placement, and working conditions of teachers, principals, 
assistant and special supervisors (Table XIV, Appendix B). 

Personnel practices which involve the welfare and 
morale of the teaching body have a direct effect on the instruc¬ 
tional program. Any practice which contributes to the 
competence and security of the classroom teachers is reflected 
in better teaching and learning. Anything in personnel 
practice which reduces the sense of security and worthwhile¬ 
ness interferes with the ability of the teacher to do effect¬ 
ive work as an individual and raises barriers to participation."^ 

The main responsibility of the board of trustees is 

to adopt sound policies, to insist on adequate information 


- 

- t 

< ' , ' 

' .‘ < < 


. 

. . < • ‘ < • 

„ 

' 


. 


. 























- 






221 


before passing on recommendations, and to require periodic 
reports from the superintendent on the results achieved. 

The main responsibilities of the superintendent are to make 
recommendations based upon accurate knowledge and information 
of the work to be done, the factors necessary for good morale, 
and good working relationships (Table XIII, Appendix B). 

The selection of professional personnel is a profes¬ 
sional task and because of his professional training and 
experience and his responsibility for the instructional pro¬ 
gram over the whole of the larger unit, the superintendent is 
usually in the best position for selecting the proper personnel. 
In practice this means the superintendent nominates the 
candidates for the positions and the board appoints (Table 
XIII, Appendix B). 

The personnel practices about which most of the super¬ 
intendents are concerned are those which affect the instruc¬ 
tional program directly; the selection,placement, orientation, 
and in-service education of personnel; the teaching load; and 
the promotion, rating, and evaluation of the work of teachers. 

In British Columbia and Alberta the superintendent of schools 
legally has the right, or can be given the right by resolution 
of the board of trustees, to select, place, and transfer 

teachers in the name of the board. Actions taken are 






222 


confirmed by resolution of the board. In Saskatchewan there 
is no legal provision whereby the boards of trustees may 
delegate these responsibilities to the superintendents, 
though in practice the recommendations of the superintendent 
have the same effect as those made by compatriots in Alberta 
and British Columbia. For this reason the superintendents 
in the two latter provinces can report that their responsib¬ 
ilities in this field are mainly administrative, while those 
in Saskatchewan consider this to be primarily an advisory 
function of their work. 

Personnel practices which affect salaries, sick leave, 
sabbatical leave, and tenure affect teaching and learning 
more indirectly. They are important factors, however, in 
establishing the kind of relationship which exists between 
the superintendent and the staff. One of the built-in dif¬ 
ficulties of the position of superintendent is the ever¬ 
present possibility that the teachers will look upon him as 
oriented in sympathy and outlook to the board, while the 
board places him with the teaching body—his professional 
associates. The superintendent who takes an active part in 
salary negotiations between boards of trustees and teachers 
usually confirms the suspicions of both parties. Consequently, 
many superintendents report that they have no responsibilities 




. 




» 


■ 



■ . 


















■ 
















a ■ ■ 

. 

: ) . i c i; 




- 
























223 

in connection with salary schedules, (Table XIV, Appendix B). 
Those who do emphasize the advisory aspects. (Tables XX-XXII, 
Appendix B) 

The difficulties faced by boards in obtaining qualified 
teachers—or even in obtaining teachers—of keeping those 
they have in the face of the attractions of urban centres and 
of other occupations have made them and the superintendents 
realize the importance of good working conditions. The main 
factors which affect staff effectiveness are: overcrowded 
classrooms, special curricular and extra-curricular assign¬ 
ments, excessive number of pupils per teacher, lack of suit¬ 
able and adequate materials for instruction, inadequate salary 

17 

schedules, and lack of a sense of satisfaction on the job. 1 
Practically all of the superintendents of larger units in 
each of the provinces considered the working conditions of 
teachers as a part of their responsibility. 

Business Management 

Educational administration and financial administration 
in the larger units of administration in Canada are under 
separate direction. The secretary of the board of trustees 
is responsible for financial management, while the educative 
processes are considered to be the domain of the superintend¬ 
ent, (Table XIII, Appendix B). The financial and 








. 

t ' 












■ 








. • , • 

.. 

. , 1 ' < - - • : 






■ 













■ ■ 


< < 











224 


educational phases of the local school system are expressed 
in common terms through the building and the administration 
of the school budget. The relationship of the superintendent 
to the construction and development of the budget is some¬ 
what different from that of the administration of the budget. 
The accounting of school funds and the computation and 
analysis of school costs should be based upon the information 
made available. If the services which the superintendent 
considers important in education are to be maintained and 
expanded, he is expected to see that the board is properly 
informed, (Table XIII, Appendix B). As a staff officer he 
has a direct and continuing responsibility to provide sound 
advice in the form of recommendations. In Saskatchewan the 
proposed budgets are submitted to the Director of School 
Administration, who follows a procedure similar to that in 
Alberta. However, the municipal councils in Saskatchewan are 
not accorded any right to challenge the budgeted expenditures 
or the mill rate struck by the unit board which they are 
required to collect. 

In Nova Scotia the provincial government includes 
within the school act a detailed statement of the foundation 
program, including the amount of teachers’ salaries and the 
proportion of the costs which will be borne by the provincial 


* 

, 

' 

t 

. 

t * * '• 

• < • ' olj 


225 


government and that borne by the municipality. The budget 

of the county school board is submitted to the municipal 

council as a recommendation. In Nova Scotia the school board 

cannot acquire debts nor surpluses. The amount of money 

required for the operation of the schools is paid to the 

county board by the municipal council. Any surpluses at 

the end of the year become part of the general reserves of 

the municipality. The amount of planning needed in preparing 

the budget and establishing the basic policies which determine 

the amount and the ways in which the necessary money is raised 

depends upon the amount and speed of change. The establishment 

of the larger units of administration demanded a whole new 

approach to educational finance by people who had little or 

no experience. Along with the changes brought about in the 

basic unit of administration, rapid changes in rural and urban 

populations in the provinces in the western zone, technological 

change, the increasing complexity in the number and types of 

courses offered in technical, agricultural, and vocational fields 

19 

have demanded constant and long-range planning. 

In all of the provinces the superintendent of schools 
is attached to the board of trustees in an advisory capacity, 
with the understanding that it is part of his responsibility 

to do much of the planning, and through recommendations and 





























. 


. .; 

• 




■ 






* 









* 

■ 


* 








t • 




' 















Q 


< • 




C ? 








, 






• ' .■ . ■ :i ■ > OJ 


















226 


influence, to see that the business and financial management 
is focussed upon the promotion of the educational program in 
the area. The degree to which the superintendent indicates 
that his responsibilities are supervisory, or administrative, 
indicates the degree of stability which has been achieved 
through the establishment of permanent policies. The pro¬ 
portion of his responsibilities which is advisory indicates 
the relative amount of planning which he feels he must do 
to keep the financial management of the unit coordinated with 
the changing educational demands. The least emphasis upon 
the advisory function is found in British Columbia, (Table 
XX, Appendix B), but here, as has been previously discussed, 
the Department of Education relieves the superintendent of 
any responsibility for financial management in the local 
school district. The functions which the superintendents in 
this province have indicated they perform in relation to 
business management are almost wholly connected with their 
position as the chief executive officer of the board of 
trustees. In both Alberta and Saskatchewan considerably more 
emphasis is placed on the advisory function than on the other 
two, (Tables XXI, XXII, Appendix B). In neither of the two 
provinces have the superintendents much responsibility for 
administrative aspects of policy planning and less for policy 






























~ ■ 












, 







' t • : : ' 4 














* 





' " * ' i ■■ : ' ‘ 

' ' •> 









227 


execution. Almost the same emphasis is placed upon the 
supervisory functions in each of the three provinces of the 
western zone. 

Conditions of management in the provinces in the east¬ 
ern zone vary so considerably from those in the west that 
there are few points of comparison between the two. In both, 
the municipal council has the major control over the finances 
at the local level. The provincial government exercises 
direct control over all management, through the definition 
of the foundation program and the clear definition of the 
bases upon which grants will be paid. In addition, the central 
authority also appoints three members to the controlling 
board, the other four being appointed by the municipal council. 

In both provinces the superintendent of schools is 
named in the school act as the educational administrator for 
the area and an adviser to the board of trustees. However, 
the relationship of the superintendent to business admin¬ 
istration is strongly determined by the appointive character 
of the board of trustees and the financial control by the 
municipal council with whom he has no direct and close 


association 









* 

' ■ 


- 




. 






* 












































223 


III . SCHOOL COMMUNITY RELATIONS 

"The schools belong to the people" is as trite and 

obvious a saying today as in any period in the past century, 

but it carries with it problems in public relations which are 

of major concern to almost every superintendent of larger 

units in Canada. During periods of stability the people know 

what the school is doing as it hasn’t changed noticeably since 

the day they went to school. But when the change alters the 

organization and structure, the methods of teaching, the 

types and kinds of schools, people insist upon knowing what 

is going on and why. The amount and rapidity of change to 

meet the needs of modern education are determined in a large 

measure by the amount of support which the people in a local 

20 

area will give to the new developments. As the person in 
the best position to do the most about it, the superintendent 
has been given the responsibility of providing the leadership 
in developing and establishing the channels of communication 
between the school and its administration and the public 
who will support or oppose changes necessary for improvement 
in instruction. In discharging the responsibilities attached 
to maintaining and improving school community relations, does 
the superintendent administer policies which are established 
by the board of trustees and the Department of Education? As 























- 















. / ■ , ' 



t ■ 































* 










229 

a leader does he work as a member of a team with others such 
as teachers, principals, board members, secretary of the board, 
in developing good public relations programs? What media of 
communication does he use? To what extent does he work for 
better school community relations because he is an agent of 
the department, or of the board of trustees? To what extent 
does he consider it a responsibility borne by him as the 
educational leader in the area and expected to act on his own 
initiative? 

The superintendents in all the western provinces place 
the main emphasis on their advisory function, although a 
considerable emphasis is placed on the supervisory and admin¬ 
istrative functions, particularly in British Columbia and 
Alberta (Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B). Much of the reason for 
taking part in the program of interpreting the policies of 
the board the superintendents ascribe to their own initiative, 
and secondly to requests from the boards of trustees them¬ 
selves, (Table XIII, Appendix B) 

More important in the eyes of many of the superintend¬ 
ents is the interpretation of the work of the schools, the 
objectives of the educational program, and the quality of 
work being done by the teachers. The effectiveness of the 

work of the superintendent to increase the worth of the 

















^ : 










. 

< . 

t 




* 




educational program in the eyes of the public is very closely 
related to the morale of the teaching staff and quality of 
instruction. What Johnny says when he comes home after 
school, and how well the teachers are accepted in the com¬ 
munity often has more effect on public acceptance and support 
of the school program than hours of talking, or reams of 
writing, done by the superintendent (Table XIII, Appendix B). 
The public wants facts and they are entitled to them. It is 
the responsibility of the superintendent to give them the 
truth. The key position of the staff in this field makes 
it essential that the public relations program has their full 
support and participation. To obtain this the superintendent 
must ensure that they know what the objectives of the local 
educational program are; how they are being achieved; and how 
well the teaching staff as a whole is doing. In this field, 
as well as in the board of trustees-community relations, one 
of the main functions of the superintendent is the integration 
and co-ordination of all towards the attainment of commonly 
known and supported aims (Table XIII, Appendix B). In the 
provinces of Saskatchewan (Table XXII, Appendix B) and 
Alberta (Table XXI, Appendix B) the superintendents who 
reported indicated that the major emphasis was on advice and 

the supervision of co-operative programs. Those in British 


* 


' 

' ' ’ . / ‘ l \ J 

* 



< 

* 

■ < ' 




. ■ , , ' 




. 

j. •• 

• ■ ■ 


- 

; ■ , . ■ ■ v 



■ 



. . 

< 

i 






. ' - : 




231 

Columbia placed more emphasis on the advisory function (Table 
XX, Appendix B). In all three provinces the superintendents 
indicated that they considered it an expression of their 
leadership responsibilities by the emphasis they placed on 
their own initiative. (Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B) 

While practically all of the superintendents in the 
three provinces indicated that they worked with Home and School 
and other groups interested in education, few of them indicated 
satisfaction with the results achieved. In most cases the 
groups were interested in a particular aspect of the instruc¬ 
tional program such as the teaching of reading, and showed 
little concern with the over-all picture. As would be 
expected, the superintendents stressed that they carried on 
these activities chiefly from an advisory standpoint and on 
their own initiative. 

In the main, the only media available to superintendents 
in larger units is the weekly—in a few places, daily—news¬ 
paper. Many worked with groups which issued bulletins or 
reports on what was going on in the larger unit to teachers 
and members of board of trustees. If there was information 
in the bulletin of interest to parents it was sent home 
occasionally with the students from school. Probably the 
channels most used are talks and discussions at ratepayers 1 


' 




232 

and parents’ meetings, informal discussions with parents, and 
people in his office and on the street. The superintendents 
in all of the larger units who were interviewed expressed 
dissatisfaction with the means available to get information 
out to the public and opinions back in. 

Chapter Summary 

The perception of expectations by the superintendent 
is explicit or implicit in the emphasis which he places on 
the administrative, supervisory, and advisory functions in 
his tasks connected with actual school practice. As a 
position incumbent the primary orientation of the superin¬ 
tendent is to the achievement of tasks for which his position 
was created. 

The major emphasis is placed on the administrative 
function by superintendents in British Columbia in the 
execution of policies of the board of trustees on education 
and in Alberta on board policies dealing with instructional 
materials. Alberta superintendents also stress the admin¬ 
istrative function in those tasks dealing with the employ¬ 
ment, transfer, and dismissal of teachers. Saskatchewan 
superintendents did not stress this function in any of the 


activities 





X 


, : . T -V. 'i: 










' : .W <. . 


( 








. . • •, 

■ . 


. 

, 1 ... o : :;. ■ i .' • . : • . ■ . vi ■ 1:.j >. > 'jp.J 


- 








233 


The supervisory function is stressed by all super¬ 
intendents of larger units in connection with the work of the 
teacher in the classroom. British Columbia superintendents 
place the major emphasis on this function in tasks connected 
with working conditions of teachers. 

Alberta superintendents place major emphasis on the 
supervisory function in tasks connected with in-service educ¬ 
ation of teachers, special classes for atypical children, 
committees of teachers and principals, and fact finding and 
research activities. In the area of business management, 
major emphasis is placed on this function in the planning and 
execution of board policies which affect the educational 
program. 

With the exception of tasks in connection with the 
execution of board policies which affect the educational 
program, Saskatchewan superintendents place the same emphasis 
on the supervisory function in the same activities as do those 
in Alberta. 

In all other activities connected with the position 
superintendents place the major emphasis on the advisory 
function. 

In interviews many of the superintendents in all prov¬ 
inces state that the advisory function is an essential aspect 


- 1 . 










■ . : , • . 










J 









■ i j ■ 




. 






c . 

1 


ivjo: 

. 

j Ilea ' 



' ; ' <?, • -' ’ ‘ - ' ' ’ ; ) I 

: ■ 'X • '■ < • ' 























234 


of planning in all areas of activity. The superintendent 
alone, or jointly with others, plans, recommends, or advises, 
and then supervises and administers the policy which is 
placed in operation. One aspect of the emphasis on the advis¬ 
ory function is that it indicates the degree of adjustment 
to environmental change which is going on. A second aspect, 
which was pointed out by several superintendents, is that the 
increasing competence of the staff places greater demands on 
the advisory function and less on the supervisory and admin¬ 
istrative functions. 

Emphasis on the supervisory and administrative functions 
indicates the degree of stability in policy and operation 
within the larger unit and the province. Further research 
is needed to provide empirical evidence for this opinion or 
hypothesis expressed by many superintendents. 



235 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VII 

^Harold Spears, Improving the Supervision of 
Instruc tion (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1956), 

p. 16. 

2 

The High School in a Changing World . Thirty-Sixth 
Yearbook, American Association of School Administrators, 
(A.A.S.A.) (Washington: National Education Association, 

1953), p. 13. 

3 

^Spears, op. cit .. p. 13. 

^Canadian Education Association, Report of the 1954 
CEA Short Course . University of Alberta, Part I, p. 33. 

^Canadian Education Association, Report of the Pilot 
Course . 1953 . p. 3. 

^ Supra .. p. 7. 

^Canadian Education Association, op. cit . ? p. 39. 
^Ibid., p. 54. 

^The Superintendent as Instructional Leader . Thirty- 
Fifth Yearbook, A.A.S.A., op. cit., p. 35. 

^British Columbia, Vancouver Sun , issue of September 
3, 1957. 

H-Homer Kempfer, Adult Education (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1955), p. 5. 

12 Ibid., p. 13. 

-^British Columbia, Report of the Advisory Committee 
to the CEA - Kellogg Project , op. cit., p. 106. 

Hibid, p# 90. 

^^School Board - Superintendent Relationships . Thirty- 
Fourth Yearbook, A.A.S.A., op. cit., p. 175« 

^Interview, L. F. Titus, Chief Superintendent, August, 

1957. 

17 

Staff Relations in School Administration . Thirty- 
Third Yearbook, A.A.S.A., op. cit., Chapter 6. 







































I 




. 






236 


FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VII (continued) 

lg 

Nova Scotia, Regulations of the Governor in Council , 
1956 Consolidation, Secs. 6-22. 

-^ Report of the Royal Commission on Agriculture and 
Rural Life, op. cit., pp. 76-133• 

^Q Public Relations for America^ Schools t Twenty- 
Eighth Yearbook, A.A.S.A., op. cit., p. 101 ff. 






















CHAPTER VIII 


DE JURE AND DE FACTO ROLES OF THE 
SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS 

In Chapter VI the focus of attention was on the 
relationships between the focal position of the superinten¬ 
dent of schools and the counter positions of board of 
trustees and the Department of Education. In Chapter VTI it 
was on the relationships between the functional role and the 
categories of activities or tasks which the superintendent 
performs. 

In the present chapter the focus of attention will be 
on the degree of agreement or disagreement between the 
behavior expected of the superintendent as an incumbent of a 
position in a formal organization with duties and respons¬ 
ibilities fixed by provincial law and regulation (de jure 
role) and the actual behavior which the superintendent per¬ 
ceives as necessary to attain the objectives of the organiz¬ 
ation (de facto role). The degree of agreement between the 
de jure and de facto roles is discussed under the heading of 
role consensus, while the degree of disagreement between the 
two is dealt with under role conflict. 













' 






I - ; . ■ ■ v. . 

• v . ' : .:■■■' ' ■ : • ■ ' : .1. t 

■ 


; . 


■ 









■ 

- 

- 

- 




. 








, 





23S 


I. ROLE CONSENSUS 

Relationships Among Superintendent of Schools , Department 
of Education t and Board of Trustees 

In all of the provinces the superintendent is prim¬ 
arily the agent of the government* His manifest sources of 
authority reside in the department as the superordinate 
authority and the board of trustees as the subordinate. The 
functions he is to perform are: 

1. to administer and interpret the laws and regul¬ 
ations of the central authority 

2. to assist the department in providing a uniform 
system of education as defined by the school act and the 
regulations of the department 

3. to exercise supervisory authority in all matters 
relating to organization, instruction, and discipline 

4. to attend all meetings of the board and advise 
them on all matters within its jurisdiction. (Chart III, 
p. 143) 

In order of importance the legally recognized and 
manifest sources of authority which control and direct the 
work of the superintendent are the Department of Education, 
and the board of trustees. No recognition is given in law 
to initiatory authority to take independent action on the 
part of the superintendent. Also, in order of importance, 














« 






• . 


: , ' 



- 

. 

' 

, 

■ 

. * 

- 

' 

. 


* 

, 






. 


* 







239 


the functions as defined in law are administrative, super¬ 
visory, and advisory (Chart III, p. 143)* The superintendent 
is first and foremost a line officer of the central authority 
and responsible for discharging the administrative and super¬ 
visory functions of his office. Secondly, as a staff officer 
of the board of trustees he is responsible for advising them 
on matters within their jurisdiction. 

In British Columbia the superintendent of schools is 
the chief executive officer of the larger unit of adminis¬ 
tration and discharges his duties on the basis of authority 
delegated to his office TT directly by the central authority 
or indirectly through the board of trustees.Officially 
the superintendent of schools is the agent of the central 
government at all times. Any responsibilities which the 
superintendent assumes in relation to the local authority are 
secondary to this. 

In Alberta, as an agent of the central authority, the 
superintendent exercises "supervisory authority in all matters 
relating to educational organization, instruction and dis¬ 
cipline", but he may also assume those functions performed 
by the secretary or chairman "if he is authorized by resol¬ 
ution of the board.” 2 This section of the act permits a 
flexible adjustment and a maintenance in equilibrium between 


■ ■ r . : . .. 

• " * ; C 

- 

; < . * 


. 


- 






Ji 




' . O' ’ ■ > ■ •' • -'.l. '■ 0 \ \ ,0 ■".*O 












. 






x 








■ 


. 




240 

authority exercised by the secretary, the superintendent, and 
the board. Alberta is the only province which makes legal 
provision for this flexibility of adjustment among the power- 
holders in a local superintendency. 

Unlike other provinces, the superintendent in 
Saskatchewan has the legal right TT to exercise general super¬ 
vision . . . over the work of the secretary treasurer" and 
"to confer with the unit board on the work of the unit office. 
The superintendent has the legal power to supervise the work 
of the secretary treasurer, but use of this power in practice 
has met with so much opposition from the secretaries that it 
cannot be enforced. Where action is necessary, the respons¬ 
ibility for investigation and discussion with the board of 

4 

trustees is borne by the central authority. 

During the course of interviews all superintendents 
who commented stated that they considered themselves ultim¬ 
ately loyal to the Department of Education and a large per¬ 
centage would oppose any move to make them employees of the 
board of trustees rather than the Department of Education 
(Table XIII, Appendix B). A small percentage of the super¬ 
intendents restricted their sense of responsibility to those 
aspects only which are specifically indicated by the depart¬ 
ment as part of the job. An even smaller percentage expressed 


■■ '■ < 

, 

. ' : . . • •' 

. , . 


■ 












i 

t 

c 







. 





■ 

• 

- 


? . ■ 

b •). i; '.ftfi’oo 'odsr 



. 

. 











• 





- 


. 

: 

. 





- 




■ ■ 

* 




241 

the opinion that their responsibilities to the board of 
trustees were wholly advisory, (Table XIII, Appendix B) 

The replies to the questionnaire indicate that 
agreement between the legal definition of behavior expec¬ 
tations and the actual recognition of the Department of 
Education as the superordinate authority was restricted to 
a small number of the tasks performed by the superintendent. 
The superintendents in British Columbia, Alberta, and 
Saskatchewan perceive the Department of Education as the 
most significant source of authority only in those tasks 
connected with the teacher and classroom instruction, pupil 
accounting, and attendance (Tables XX-XXII). In addition, 
the superintendents in British Columbia indicate the auth¬ 
ority of the department as the most significant in those 
tasks connected with working conditions of teachers, plan¬ 
ning of policies in relation to buildings, and finance 
(Table XX, Appendix B). 

Functions 

The summary of rank scores from legal sources (Table 
XI, Appendix B) outlines the role expectations of the super¬ 
intendent as an incumbent of a position in the formal educ¬ 
ational organization. In all of the provinces in the western 

zone the legal definition of the functional role of the 



C ' 

.■ ; - ' ; :• ' . . i . ' / ■ J i ■ ' ■ ‘ ' 

■ . • ' ' - ; 

. , ■ ' ; . rj.f . • 5*1 ■ ' ' ' : : 

• ' ' 

c c 


■ 


t ' J" . i 










c ' 




■ 






















* . < 


. 

- 




. • : ■ v< . ■ ' : ‘ 








superintendent places the main emphasis on the administrative 
function in the category of instructional management and on 
the supervisory function in the categories of instruction and 
school community relations. In Alberta and Saskatchewan the 
advisory function is expected to receive the major emphasis 
in the areas of school community relations and the policy 
planning aspects of business management. In the area of pol¬ 
icy execution superintendents in both provinces are expected 
to place equal emphasis on the advisory and supervisory 
functions. Superintendents in British Columbia are expected 
to place most of the emphasis on the supervisory function 
in the categories of personnel and business management. 

Except in the tasks connected with the category of instruc¬ 
tional materials, the superintendents of all three provinces 
are expected to place the least emphasis on the administrative 
function in those tasks connected with personnel and bus¬ 
iness management (Table XI, Appendix B). 

The greatest amount of consensus between the expected 
behavior of the superintendent and the perceived role is in 
the tasks performed in the area of instruction (Table IX, 
Appendix B). The superintendents in the three provinces 
place the major emphasis on supervision in the tasks they 
perform in relation to the teacher and classroom instruction. 




' 




' 


■ 


■ 

: 

, 

' • ■ i 

» 

- 






- 

, 





























243 

Superintendents in British Columbia place the major emphasis 


on the supervisory function in discharging their duties and 
responsibilities in relation to special classes while those 
in Alberta and Saskatchewan place the main emphasis on 
supervision in relation to in-service education of teachers 
(Tables XX-XXII, Appendix B). 

In the tasks connected with instructional management 
superintendents in British Columbia place the main emphasis 
on the administrative function in relation to research while 
those in Alberta emphasize this function in relation to board 
policy connected with the purchase, distribution, and use of 
instructional materials. In Saskatchewan superintendents 
also place the major emphasis on the supervisory function 
in connection with their tasks related to committees of 
teachers and research. 

In their tasks in connection with personnel management 
the superintendents in British Columbia place the major 
emphasis on administrative function in relation to the employ¬ 
ment, transfer, promotion and dismissal of teachers, and on 
the supervisory function in the area of working conditions 
for teachers. In Alberta the superintendents also place the 

major emphasis on the administrative function in relation to 






244 


the employment, transfer and dismissal of teachers, but 
emphasize the advisory function in relation to non-profes¬ 
sional and office staff, salary schedules, and the working 
conditions of teachers. 

Consensus between the legal and actual roles of the 
superintendents in Saskatchewan is about the same as that 
in Alberta. In both provinces the stress is on the advisory 
function in relation to the employment, transfer and dismissal 
of teachers, and their working conditions, and on the work of 
the non-professional staff. 

In the tasks related to school community relations all 
superintendents in the western zone place the main emphasis 
on the advisory function. In policy planning and policy 
execution the superintendents of schools in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan place the main emphasis on the advisory function. 
There does not seem to be any consensus between the legally- 
expected and actual role behaviors of the superintendents 
of schools in British Columbia in these latter two categ¬ 
ories. 

In the main, there is consensus between the legal and 
actual role behaviors of the superintendents in British 
Columbia in the tasks connected with instructional manage¬ 
ment, school community relations, and both aspects of 


J > . 

■ — 0 ‘ . ■ 

' r 

) f . . . j ' . 

■ 


' 


I 






. t ' , 

* 

# 

' 









' 












. C 











2 45 

business management in relation to the administrative func¬ 
tion. 

In Alberta there is agreement between the two role 
definitions of the supervisory function in the tasks related 
to personnel management and policy planning. There is also 
consensus on the advisory function in relation to instruction, 
personnel management, and policy planning } as well as on the 
administrative functions in all categories except instruc¬ 
tional management. 

In Saskatchewan there is agreement between the two 
role definitions in the supervisory function in the tasks 
related to personnel management and policy planning, in the 
advisory function in relation to instruction, personnel 
management, and policy planning, and in the administrative 
function in relation to all categories except instructional 
management. 

II. ROLE CONFLICT 

The concept of role conflict in this section is restric¬ 
ted to the exposure of the superintendent of schools to con¬ 
flicting sets of legitimate role expectations. The legitimate 
role expectations are viewed as institutionalized role 
expectations. T| 5 The fact that both sides of the conflicting 

expectations are institutionalized means there is a basis 

6 

for claims of legitimacy for both patterns. As an 


; ,, ■ : 




; , . 1 

l-J 

. 

? 1 ' • • ■ • - ? ' 

. 













0 




. 













246 

incumbent of a position in the formal educational structure 
the superintendent of schools has legal obligations to both 
the Department of Education and the board of trustees. 

The analysis of role conflicts in the following pages 
will be concerned with situations in which the observer 
notes what appears to be conflicting sets of expectations 
between the de jure and de facto roles, or the potential 
sources of difficulty for the superintendent.^ These 
difficulties are potential in that the superordinate auth¬ 
ority acquiesces in the actual behavior and thereby suspends 
or reduces the effectiveness of the external sanctions 

against behavior which deviates from the legally-defined 

S 

expectations. 

Sources of Authority 

The variability between the sources of authority and 
their relative importance as indicated by state and regul¬ 
ation is much greater than that between legal and actual 
definitions of the functional role. The superintendents in 
all of the provinces which have larger units of administration, 
including Nova Scotia, place the most emphasis upon their 
own initiative, directives from the board of trustees as 
second, and the statutes and regulations of the Department 
of Education as third (Table X, Appendix B). 














. ■ ' " ■ j J V . ■ ' ■. ■ ' ; "-.i .• * r 












' 

, 






: ' 












« 


, 





. ' 


< •' 


M 

< ■ ' • 


c 














247 


The superintendents who reported from New Brunswick, 
on the other hand, follow the legally expected order very 
closely. There the departmental directives are the most 
significant source of authority, while board directives are 
third (Table X, Appendix B). Those who were interviewed 
stated that they acted on their own initiative chiefly in 
forwarding the interests of the Department of Education. 

Much of the initiative lay in advising local boards on 
maintenance of buildings, on teachers, and in their work 
to obtain local acceptance of consolidated schools. 

Generally speaking, the superintendents imply that 
the effectiveness of their work depends more upon their 
willingness and their ability to persuade people to move in 
the direction they wish them to go than because of depart¬ 
mental or board directive or regulation. In all cases, 
however, the superintendents who were interviewed state 
that what they achieve through the use of their own init¬ 
iative has the blessing of the department (Table XIII, 
Appendix B). 

All of the superintendents place prime importance on 
their own initiative in the fields of instruction, instruc¬ 
tional management, and school community relations. In the 
field of personnel management superintendents in Alberta and 


Wfi 

' * % ■ ' • ' . 

: ■ ' 

• r- j. ' ■ t ' • •/!.' O ■: '..)' -'DC ■: >..! I ' fc 

■ ■ ■ : • •• , . ’ . < .* 

• I.fi::; OYjJj'/j' ‘ £'"• 'i : : ; :■ ... i"' - 1 ' ' VClU h'-r.JBJil 



. 





> * ' ' 

: % ?. 






< 











* 













* 

c 

* ■ ■<■ a / : :. . i ... & t 








Nova Scotia indicate this source as the most important, while 
those in Alberta and Saskatchewan give it a similar place 
in policy planning. Only the superintendents in Saskatchewan 
give it first place in the category of policy execution 
(Table X, Appendix B). 

Board directives are the main determinants of action 
for the superintendents of schools in British Columbia and 
Saskatchewan in the area of personnel management, for the 
superintendents of Nova Scotia in policy planning, and for 
the superintendents of British Columbia, Alberta, and Nova 
Scotia in policy execution. Saskatchewan provides no way 
in which the superintendent can be made the chief executive 
officer of the board. In all probability this is the 
reason why the superintendents in this province place 
greater significance upon their own initiative than upon 
board directive in the field of policy execution. 

More emphasis is placed on board directives than on 
departmental regulations in personnel management by the 
superintendents in Alberta and Nova Scotia, in school com¬ 
munity relations by those in British Columbia and Alberta; 
and in policy planning activities by the superintendents of 
all the provinces in the western zone. In Saskatchewan equal 
emphasis is placed on board and departmental regulations in 













t - 










- 




. 





, 




, 


249 


the field of school community relations (Table X, Appendix B). 

Departmental regulations are second only to their own 
initiative in the eyes of the superintendents in all the 
provinces in the fields of instruction and instructional 
management, in personnel management by the superintendents 
in British Columbia, and in policy planning and execution by 
those in Nova Scotia, 

In contrast to this, the superintendents in New 
Brunswick recognize the authority of the department as sen¬ 
ior in all categories except that of school community 
relations. In this they feel that the initiative taken by 
the men in the field is more significant. In all of the 
categories the authority of the board of trustees plays 
little part in determining their behavior (Table X, Appendix B). 

Functions 

The emphasis which the superintendents put on the three 
functions in discharging their responsibilities in con¬ 
nection with the major fields of activity bears little 
relation to their legal responsibilities as a line and staff 
officer. Alberta and Saskatchewan superintendents place the 
major emphasis on the supervisory function in instruction 
and instructional management and secondary emphasis on 
advice. Superintendents in all other provinces place the 



i . .l ••: : ) o:. 

' 

< 

, 


.. 

, 

. 

. 

* 








250 


major emphasis on the advisory function in all fields. In 
all other aspects, except instruction and instructional 
management, Alberta and Saskatchewan superintendents place 
supervision as second to advice, while the administrative 
functions are considered to be of least value in determining 
actions and behavior. Superintendents in British Columbia 
place the major emphasis on administrative functions in the 
field of personnel management, but in all others, supervisory 
functions follow advisory in importance. In Nova Scotia the 
supervisory functions are considered to be next in importance 
to advice in instruction, instructional management, and 
both aspects of business management. In the fields of per¬ 
sonnel management and school community relations the super¬ 
intendents of Nova Scotia make use of their administrative 
functions, while in New Brunswick they report the same dis¬ 
tribution of emphasis on their functions as those in Nova 
Scotia (Table IX, Appendix B). A comparison of the rank 
scores in Table XVII obtained from the questionnaire and those 
in Table XVIII which are based on the summary of the legal 
distribution of the functions in Chart III, pp. 141-43, 
shows the main areas of disagreement between the legal 
expectations and the perceptions of the superintendent in 
his day-to-day work in the superintendency. 













' 


> * ‘ : . . - 

. ; 




| J iJ ‘V ; '"f 1 ■■l.'M'Iv.i’O 




« 1 •' 
















■ 
















• . ’' 




- 

' 

: 1 51 : i i 

t - ' ' / * c 








, ' 


251 


The Concept of Leadership 

The essence of leadership, to Barnard, lies in the 
creative function, a sense of personal responsibility, and the 
identification of personal codes with organization codes.^ 

To Tead, the effectiveness of the leader is T, a qualitative 
matter of the intensity and vigor of the influence exerted 
on all with whom he normally is required to associate. Tr ^ 
Urwick defines leadership as "the form which authority assumes 
when it enters into the process with the scalar chain, 
hierarchy or T line ! and takes effect in the assignment and 
integration of functions."-^ To carry out the obligations of 
his position, then, the leader must identify himself with the 
organization, have a strong sense of personal responsibility, 
and be able to influence in an effective way the behavior of 
others with whom he normally is required to associate. The 
degree to which he is able to influence the behavior of others 
is partly dependent upon the authority of his position, and 
partly upon the power he wields because of superior ability. 
Implicit in the emphasis upon the creativeness as the essence 

of leadership is flexibility in use of functions and willing- 

, ... .12 

ness to take initiatory action. 

Consensus Between Theory and Practice in the Leadership 
Role of the Superintendent 


The findings of the investigation contained in Chapters 













• 




: 









C 




' 






' 




. 

• '■ . «'••• 

. 



t ' . 

































252 


VI, VII, and VIII indicate that the superintendent of schools 
of larger units of administration looks upon himself as an 
educational leader. He is loyal to both the Department of 
Education and the board of trustees and is closely identified 
with the educational system through training, experience, 
and personal choice. He accepts the responsibility for act¬ 
ing on his own initiative in order to achieve effectively the 
goals of the educational system. He influences the decisions 
of those with whom he is required to associate as a position 
incumbent in a formal organization,mainly through the advisory 
function. He accepts responsibility for the effective and 
efficient operation of the educational policies of the 
Department of Education and the board of trustees. Within the 
concept of leadership, the superintendent of schools is 
attempting to resolve the apparent conflict between the 
de jure expectations as line officer of the Department of 
Education and staff officer of the board of trustees, and the 
de facto role of line and staff officer to both the Department 
of Education and the board of trustees. 

Chapter Summary 

The focus of attention in this chapter has been on the 
degree to which the de facto behavior conforms to or deviates 
from the de jure expectations. The findings based on data 




l ' ' r ’■ 

. 

; ■ ' .. 

' 

f 





O . ■: t :.'i ■ . ' ■■ ■ '• r 

■ 







253 

obtained from the questionnaire and interviews were compared 
with the legal definition of the sources of authority and 
functions which the superintendent of schools was to perform 
as position incumbent in the provinces of British Columbia, 
Alberta, and Saskatchewan, 

As the agent of the Department of Education the 
manifest sources of authority reside in the Department of 
Education and the board of trustees. The functions which he 
is expected to perform are to administer and supervise the 
laws and regulations relating to the uniform standard of 
education for the province and to advise the board of 
trustees on all matters within their jurisdiction. 

The greatest amount of consensus between the expected 
behavior and the perceived role of the superintendent is in 
the tasks performed in the categories of instruction and 
instructional management. The consensus on the sources of 
authority was restricted to a small number of tasks, but 
the degree of agreement on the emphasis to be placed on the 
advisory, supervisory, and administrative functions was much 
greater. The greatest degree of consensus on the de jure and 
de facto roles is found in British Columbia in all categories 
of activity. In Saskatchewan and Alberta the greatest amount 
of consensus on the functional role definition is found in 




■ 






> 

■ 

, ■ l 

' <.) . 






, 

* 

J J i : ■ t : ' ' 

r ;dJ i c. •:?/.../ ■. •: ' 


• . ' ■ • .. . 




' : ■ ! * ■ 






- ' ■ • 




In* rici >nir 













254 

the categories of instruction, instructional materials, some 
aspects of personnel management, and school community relations* 

The analysis of role conflicts was restricted to a 
consideration of the potential sources of difficulty because 
of the lack of conformity between the de jure and de facto 
expectations* The difficulties were considered potential 
because the superordinate authority acquiesced in the actual 
behavior and thereby suspended the use of external sanctions 
against deviant behavior. 

The greatest amount of conflict between sets of 
expectations is in the significance placed on sources of auth¬ 
ority. The superintendents in all provinces place the most 
emphasis upon their own initiative, with the board of trustees 
as second, and the authority of the Department of Education 
as the least. This is in contrast to the significance given 
the authority of the Department of Education in the province 
of New Brunswick, where there are no larger units of admin¬ 
istration as defined in the western zone. The superintendents 
in all provinces indicate that the effectiveness of their 
work in a particular superintendency depends more upon their 
own ability to persuade and influence people to suspend their 
critical judgment and follow the leadership of the super¬ 
intendent than upon the presence of rules, regulations, and 


■ : I . ; . . . C.v.r; tza ' c 

v ‘ , 

* 

* 












* "• ' 

* 


- { 

* 





t r . 






255 


policy directives from either the Department of Education or 
the board of trustees. 

In discharging the obligations of the position super¬ 
intendents place the main emphasis on the advisory function 
in practically all categories of activities in all prov¬ 
inces. Only in Alberta and Saskatchewan is the main emphasis 
placed upon the supervisory function in the tasks connected 
with instruction and instructional management. 

The amount of consensus between the theoretical require¬ 
ments of leadership and the de facto role of the super¬ 
intendent of schools is much greater than the consensus between 
the de jure definition of the obligations of the superinten¬ 
dent as line officer of the Department of Education and staff 
officer of the board of trustees. Within the frame of ref¬ 
erence of the leadership role the superintendent is resolving 
the potential role conflicts between de jure expectations and 


de facto behavior 



FOOTNOTES TO CHAPTER VIII 


^"British Columbia, Report of the Advisory Committee 
to the CEA - Kellogg Pro.ject . op. cit., p. 42. 

^Statutes, Alberta, Chapter 69. 

^ Statutes t Saskatchewan, Chapter 170, Sec. 91 (2). 

^Interview, R. J. Davidson, Director of School Admin¬ 
istration, April, 1957. 

^Talcott Parsons, The Social System (Glencoe: The 
Free Press, 1951), p. 280. 

^N. Gross, W. S. Mason, A. ¥. McEachern, Explor ¬ 
ations in Role Analysis (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 195&), 
p. 247. 

7 Ibid., p. 245. 

^ Ibid ., p. 249. 

^Barnard, o£. cit., p. 2&1. 

10 0. Tead, The Art of Administration (New York: McGraw 
Hill, 1951), p. 63. 

^L. Urwick, Elements of Administration (New York: 
Harper Bros., 1943), p. 43. 

12 

H. P. Fairchild (ed.), Dictionary of Sociology (New 
York: Philosophical Library, 1944), p. 174. 































c 









c 



? 1 t V 











CHAPTER IX 


SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
I. SUMMARY 


Historical Background 

During the past one hundred and fifty years school 
systems in Canada have changed from church to local to prov- 
incially dominated systems. The most recent stage in adjust¬ 
ment is characterized by the development of larger units of 
administration. 

Egerton Ryerson, while he was Superintendent of 
Education, developed a highly centralized system of education 
for Ontario. He was able to resolve the conflict between 
local and central control of education by delegating power to 
local boards to administer the externa and by retaining con¬ 
trol of the interna under the provincial Department of 
Education. 

The right of the provincial government to sovereign 
power in education was incorporated in the British North 
America Act of 1$67. With the exception of Quebec and 
Newfoundland, all other provinces in Canada have adopted the 
system of education which was developed in Ontario. In all 
of these provinces the administration and supervision of the 



















* 






■* 

<' 

* 

* 

, 

« • 

t 

. 






25S 

regulations concerning the interna are implemented by a corps 
of provincially-appointed superintendents or inspectors. 

The Problem 

The introduction of larger units of administration 
involved a significant change in the basic unit of educational 
administration. On the assumption that changes in admin¬ 
istrative organization affect the obligations and behavior 
of the provincially-appointed superintendent of schools in 
larger units of administration, this inquiry is concerned 
with the effect which these changes had on: 

1. the legal role of the superintendent as defined by 
statute and regulation 

2. the actual role as defined by the superintendent himself 

3. the amount of agreement and disagreement between the de 
jure expectations and the de facto behavior. 

The focus of attention in the investigation of the 
legal and actual roles has been on the emphasis placed on 
the functions assigned to the position and the significance 
of the sources of authority. 

Considerable attention has been devoted to an analysis 
of the organization and structure of the provincial systems 
of education in Canada in order to develop a conceptual frame 
of reference for the inquiry into the behavior of the 











. 

t ■ ' ' . ' ■' ■ ' • : . ' 







* 

* 

* 

. . 



259 


superintendent. The position of the provincially-employed 
superintendent has no meaning apart from other positions 
to which it is related. 

The Legal Role 

1. Data . Information on the legal role of the superintendent 
has been obtained from school acts, annual reports of depart¬ 
ments of education, unpublished dissertations, and histories 
of education. 

2. Findings . 

(1) The amount of agreement among provinces on structure, 
lines of authority and professional expectations is much 
greater than the differences. 

(2) The professional expectations of the superintendent 
of schools, as expressed in statute and regulation, are 
similar in all provinces. 

(3) The sources of authority expected to determine 
the actions and official behavior of the superintendent 
are the Department of Education and the board of trustees. 
The superintendent of schools is expected to act as a 
line officer for the department and as a staff officer 
for the board of trustees. 

(4) The superintendent is expected to administer and 
supervise the uniform program of education for the 







. 


» 














>■. . '■■■■' < ■ 

\ . 

* 






■ 




. 






. 










* 











260 

province and to advise the board of trustees on matters 
which come within their jurisdiction. 

The Actual Role 

1. Data . Information on the actual behavior of the super¬ 
intendent has been obtained from questionnaires distributed 
to all superintendents of larger units in Canada and from 
interviews with sixty-eight superintendents and several 
senior directors in departments of education in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan. 

2. Findings . 

(1) Role Consensus. 

(a) Qualifications and experience. The similarity 
job specifications among the provinces is matched 

by similarity in qualifications and experience reported 
by the superintendents. 

(b) Activities. The amount of consensus is greatest 
in those activities which are closely related to the 
foundation program. 

(c) Sources of Authority. Role consensus between de 
jure expectations and de facto perception of the 
significance of sources of authority is found only in 
a small number of tasks associated with instruction 
and instructional management. 











' 

! ■ ■ ' ■ * 

- t t • 




. 

. 












■ 

, 


. 








261 

(d) Functions* Role consensus between de jure expect¬ 
ations and de facto functional role definitions by the 
superintendent is found in the majority of tasks. 

(2) Role Conflict. Role conflict arises from the exposure 
of the actor to conflicting sets of legitimate role 
expectations which are actual or potential sources of 
difficulty* Role conflict between the superintendent and 
the law as role definers is potential in that the super¬ 
ordinate authority acquiesces in the actual behavior. 

(a) Sources of Authority. The superintendents of 
schools in each of the provinces rely more upon their 
own ability to influence the decisions of those with 
whom they work than upon authority delegated to the 
position. 

(b) Functions. The emphasis on the advisory function 
as a necessary part of planning indicates conditions 
of instability and change. The emphasis on the sup¬ 
ervisory function and its relationship to both board 
and departmental policies arises from the presence 

of stabilized and permanent policies. 


- 







- 

. 

* 

. 

* 










* 















262 


II. CONCLUSIONS 


1. Line and Staff Officers 

Implicit in patterns of behavior appearing in func¬ 
tions and sources of authority is the change in the role of 
the superintendent as a line officer of the Department of 
Education and a staff officer of the board of trustees. The 
superintendent advises the central authority on local needs 
and supervises the educational policies of the board of 
trustees. He advises the board of trustees and supervises the 
educational policies of the central authority. In his 
actual role the superintendent looks upon himself as a line 
and staff officer for both the Department of Education and 
the board of trustees. 

2. Balance of Power 

Superintendents of schools in Alberta and Saskatchewan 
are concerned about the relative amount of authority which 
they exercise in comparison with that of the board of 
trustees and the secretary of the larger unit. Superinten¬ 
dents of schools in Saskatchewan are particularly concerned 
about the lack of definition of lines of authority. The 
problems inherent in the balance of power relationships 
between superintendent and board of trustees, or their 
























: 1 . C-.;' j . ! 






* ■ 



. 











« 








- 











* 





















263 

employees, is related to the conflict between de jure expect¬ 
ations and de facto behavior. 

3• Leadership 

The amount of consensus between the theoretical require¬ 
ments of leadership and the de facto role of the superinten¬ 
dent is much greater than that between the de jure and de 
facto definitions of the obligations of the superintendent as 
a line and staff officer. Within the frame of reference of 
the leadership role, the superintendent is attempting to 
synthesize the potential role conflicts in relationships 
between his position and those which are counter. 

4. Alternatives 

Resolution of the major problems depends in part, at 
least, on decisions to be made in relation to three alter¬ 
natives : 

(1) The superintendent is to remain as the line officer 
of the Department of Education 

(2) The superintendent is to be employed by the board 
of trustees and become a line officer directly 
responsible to the local authority 

(3) The position is to be legally defined in terms of 




< ' 
























- 








, 






i 






















264 


leadership with formal recognition given to the 
right of the superintendent to act on his own 
initiative. 

The first alternative is the present legal definition 
of the role of the superintendent. If this alternative is 
selected it should be enforced. The necessary sanctions 
should be employed to re-establish the office, and not the 
person, as most important. 

If the second alternative is selected, the amount of 
authority exercised by the superintendent in the local 
hierarchy would be determined by the board of trustees. 
Theoretically, difficulties which are apparent in many 
areas would be resolved by assigning a definite status pos¬ 
ition to the superintendent. The selection of this alter¬ 
native would demand a definite relaxation in central control 
of educational development in the province. 

A decision to accept the third alternative has many 
implications. It would mean clear definition of the relation¬ 
ship between the focal position of the superintendent and 
such counter positions as secretary, board of trustees, 
principals, staff, and directors of branches within the 
Department of Education. It has many implications for the 
selection, education, in-service education and placement 
















- 

* 




- 

* 

* 

<Y ? . 



t ' ■ c 







265 

of superintendents. The definition of relationships between 
these focal and counter positions, however, needs to rest on 
more research findings than are available at the present 
time. 


III. FURTHER RESEARCH 

The field of role analysis in educational adminis¬ 
tration in Canada is unexplored territory. Findings from 
this investigation are subject to review and reconsideration 
in the light of further research. 

Before any definitive conclusions can be reached con¬ 
cerning the role of the superintendent, consideration must 
be given to such problems as: 

1. a role analysis of the position of the super¬ 
intendent from the viewpoint of incumbents of counter pos¬ 
itions—helping teachers, board members, secretaries of 
larger units, principals, teachers, directors of branches 
in the departments of education 

2. the degree to which there is consensus and con¬ 
flict between the role definers in focal and counter 
positions 

3. a role analysis of other positions as focal from 
the viewpoint of the superintendent. 


■ 

' 

: < ! 















■ 



- 

* 

' < 

* 




? ’ ■ 










- 








- 




. 










266 


Research is also needed to clarify the balance of 
power relationships among boards of trustees, Department of 
Education, superintendent, principal, secretary, and teachers. 
Examinations of expectations and behavior are needed to 
determine interrelationships among these positions in terms 
of role consensus and role conflict. 










. ■ 



t t t 




























































APPENDIX A 




























268 


SAMPLE 1 

MANUAL OF DIRECTIONS FOR QUESTIONNAIRE ON 
"The actual role and functions of the provincially appointed superintendent 
of larger units of administration in Canada 


Purposes 

1* to discover the extent to which the superintendent makes use of his 
functions as advisor, supervisor and administrator in meeting the 
situations and problems which confront him 

2* to discover the extent to which the superintendent carries on his 
activities because of department regulation, board directive, on 
his own initiative 

3* to discover how the superintendent distributes his time and energies 
through these functions to the major fields of the education structure. 


General Statement 

A larger unit of administration is defined as an area established by- 
provincial statute which replaces or indludes under a central board a 
comparatively- large number of formerly autonomous school districts or 
sections. 

Superintendent is synonymous with inspector or supervisor, that is, the 
official appointed by the province as the senior educational officer in 
a larger unit of administration. 

Page one is divided into two sections. The first part asks for information 
of a general nature, while the second is concerned with the distribution of 
your time on a percentage basis. 

Page two is concerned with instruction and instructional management. 

Page three asks for information on personnel management and school community 
relations. 

Page four is concerned with two aspects of business management, the planning 
of policies, and the execution of policies. 

Basis for Answers 

The year 1956 is to be the basis for judgment on conditions and work. 









J ' L< > 




rruovL.o 


* 

■ i ' 


.1 iiiyJ 

ilb > r 


f. .u 




.... 


■ 




o;.-.. 


O'" 1 :'. 


: ■ ' . 


im . ; ,/v V- ! :? 

.[■ )0 l.A'l •J.rL--. O'". 




.7 ■ no o:i' 


‘ 









269 


Turn to page one of the questionnaire, and fill in the General Information 
section* 


Before doing pages Z 9 5 and 4 of the questionnaire study the next two pages* 


DIRECTIONS FOR SCORING PAGE TWO OF QUESTIONNAIRE 


1* There are two parts, each scored in the same way* Each part has five 
sections. Each section is to be scored three times on the basis of: 
i. the activities performed — Oon the left hand side of each page), 
ii* the distribution of functions — (used colored sheet) 
iii. the distribution of sources of authority — (fold back the colored sheet). 

Turn to page two of the questionnaire 

1# The activities performed : on the left hand side of the page place a check 
mark opposite the activities which are a part of your work. 

11. The distribution of functions : before scoring this section please study 
the following: 


Definitions of functions 


Guide questions 


Advisory : to give advice * The advisor has no Do I advise on how the 

responsibility after the advice has been given* work should be done? 


Supervisory : a sharing co-operative function * Do I supervise? Do others 

The supervisor is part of the process as leader share the responsibility 

guide, and perhaps director, but he shares with me? 

responsibility with the person or the group for 
the work. 


Administrative: a law administering function * 

In this you are held responsible by law as set 
forth by statute or board regulation. Inspection 
and reporting are part of the administrative 
function. 


Do I administer a law or 
regulation for department 
or board? 

Do I inspect and report? 


A sample and illustration of scoring for functions is given on the opposite 
page. It will assist you in follovdng the scoring information. 


Scoring (Use the colored sheet). Since you probably exercise more than one 
of the above functions when carrying out the activities described in each 
section, it has been necessary to develop a scale which permits you to show 
this. 
















1 




•> 






o 






0 


1 







270 


Scoring (continued) 

0 — means no emphasis is placed on this function in this activity. 

1 — means that about 1/4 of the emphasis is placed on this function. 

2 — means that about 1/2 of the emphasis is placed on this function. 

5 — means that about 3/4 of the emphasis is placed on this function. 

4 — means that the whole emphasis is placed on this function. 

(See illustration on next page) 

III. The distribution of sources of authority . Fold back colored score sheet. 
Before scoring the sections, study the following; 

Definitions of sources of authority Guide questions 

What is ray source of auth¬ 
ority for advising, super¬ 
vising, or administering 
in relation to this section? 


Do I do this because of 
board or department regu¬ 
lation, or on my own? 

board or the department. 

(See illustration on next page) 


Department regulations: as set forth in printed 
memoranda or statutes. 

Board directives ; as stated in minutes or policy 
statements of the board, or as a member appointed 
to a committee by the board. 

Own Initiative : those activities carried on 
which are not specifically designated by the 


Scoring : use the same scale as fcr functions except replace the word functions 
with sources of authority . 


Do each part on pages three and four in the same manner. 


SAMPLE AND ILLUSTRATION 


The following is a sample of how Superintendent A 
scored his sheet. Below the sample is an illust¬ 
ration of how he went about it. 


x 


3MSTHDCTICK 

This area is concerned with activities directly 
related to the classroom. Read the instructions 
and definitions carefully. The detailed activities 
in each section are representative only and are not 
intended to be exhaustive. 


1. The Teacher : classroom instructional procedure, 
methods and techniques of instruction, super¬ 
vision of wcrk and play activities. 

2. The pupil : guidance in the classroom, determin¬ 
ation of abilities, control of progress, admin¬ 
istration of tests. 

3. In-service education: institutes, workshops, 
and other meetings and organizations for the 
purpose of training teachers. 

4 Adult education: systematic instruction in 
schools or through the use of school personnel 


Distribu tion of Function. 

Advisory* Super- Adminis- 
visory trative 


! 3 





































































270 


Scoring (continued) 

0 — means no emphasis is placed on this function in this activity. 

1 — means that about 1/4 of the emphasis is placed on this function* 

2 — means that about 1/2 of the emphasis is placed on this function. 

3 — means that about 3/4 of the emphasis is placed on this function* 

4 — means that the whole emphasis is placed on this function. 

(See illustration on next page) 

III* The distribution of sources of authority * Fold back colored score sheet. 
Before scoring the sections, study the following; 


Definitions of sources of authority 

Department regulations: as set forth in printed 
memoranda or statutes. 

Board directives ; as stated in minutes or policy 
statements of the board, or as a member appointed 
to a committee by the board. 

Own Initiative : those activities sarried on 
which are not specifically designated by the 
board or the department. 

(See illustration on next page) 


Guide questions 
Wh^t' is my source of auth¬ 
ority for advising, super¬ 
vising, or administering 
in relation to this section? 

Do I do this because of 
board or department regu¬ 
lation, or on my own? 


Distribution of Source 


Scoring ; use the same scale as for functions except replace the word functi 
with sources of authority * 

Do each part on pages three and four in the same manner. 


SAMPLE AND ILHJSTRATXCB 

The following is a sample of how Superintendent A 
scored his sheet. Below the sample is an illust¬ 
ration of how he went about it. 

INSTRUCTION 

This area is concerned with activities directly 
related to the classroom. Read the instructions 
and definitions carefully. The detailed activities 
in each section are representative only and are not 
intended to be exhaustive. 

1. The Teacher ; classroom instructional procedure, 
lit hods and techniques of instruction, super¬ 
vision of work and play activities. 

2. The pupil ; guidance in the classroom, determin¬ 
ation of abilities, control of progress, admin¬ 
istration of tests. 

3. In-service education: institutes, workshops, 
and other meetings and organizations for the 
purpose of training teachers. 



)ept. 

regula 

bion 

Board 

■direc¬ 

tive 

Own 

Initiative 

2 

0 

2 

1 

0 

3 

1 

0 

3 


4 Adult education: systematic instruction in 
schools or through the use of school personnel 
























































271 


I. Activities 

Superintendent A puts check marks opposite sections 1, 2, and 3. The 

board of trustees did not make provision for the education of adults and 

there were no special classes far exceptional children. 

II. Distribution of Functions 

1. The Teacher : Superintendent A feels that most of his responsibility is 
supervisory, but since he does advise the teacher in the operation of 
the classroom and he does inspect to see that departmental and board 
regulations are carried out in respect to classroom instruction he must 
give some emphasis to each. He marks the colored score sheet as follows: 
1 under advisory, 2 under supervisory, and 1 under administrative. 

2. The Pupil : He feels that his chief function in relation to the pupils in 
the classroom is to advise the teacher. At the same time he also has 
some responsibility for the general progress of the student, and is the 
final authority on questions of promotion. He feels that 3 is the proper 
rating under advisory, 1 under supervisory, and 0 under administrative. 

III. distribution of Authority 

1. The Teacher : Superintendent A feels that the department expects him to 
supervise the work of the teacher in the classroom, and to administer 
the laws and regulations thereto. No specific directive has been given 
him by the board. He does feel that he does more than is required of 
him by the department so he places 2 under department regulation, 0 
under board directive and 2 under own initiative. 

2. The Pupil : Since the superintendent is the final authority in promotions 
Mr. A has some administrative duties directly assigned by the department. 
However, he administers several tests and places considerable emphasis on 
working with teachers in adjusting the program to pupil needs. Therefore 
he places 1 under department regulation, 0 under board directive, and 

3 under own initiative. 















GENERAL INFORM ATION 

N 4 ® e -------Address 

,lame(s) of Larger Unit(s) in Superintendency or Inspectorate: 


|o. of classrooms in L.U.A . 1 __ Outside L.U.A. __ 

So. of pupils in L.U.A. __Outside L.U.A. 

So, of classroom visits in 1956 _ 

year in which you became superintendent in this superintency 

Jears of experience as superintendent in other areas 

years employed in education in all branches _ 

Special Supervisors: such as helping.teachers, assistant superintendents, 
guidance directors, special subject supervisors, librarians, whose work is 
toncerned with all the schools in the L.U.A. 

list by Title __ 


1 . L.U.A. -- Larger Unit of Administration. 


DISTRIBUTION OF TIME 

He table below can best be filled out after the remaining pages in the questionnaire 
are completed as all of the parts, except the last two, are those with which the 
liestionnaire is concerned. 


h Column A enter the distribution of your time as between categories on a percentage 
tosis: In Column B. the distribution of the time on a percentage basis of special 
•apervisors, if any. 


Category A. 

Instructional 
fenagement _ 


Personnel 

Management 


t School Community 
Relations 

Business 

Management 

a. Professional 
Duties 

b. Office Duties 


a. Professional Duties: those duties 
requiested or assigned by the depart¬ 
ment, over and above those expected 
in the superintendency, such as 
preparing examinations, teaching, or 
inspections outside of L.U.A. 

b. Office duties: correspondence, writing 
reports, meeting delegations and other 
of the many duties concerned with 
office work. 



































INSTRUCTION 

This area is concerned with ac+l-<H+-i D „ ji 

to the classroom. Read the inotr irectly related I 


1. The Teacher: classroom instruction procedures 

methods and techniques of instruction, supervision 
of work and play activities. Revision 


The Pupil: guidance in the classroom, 
ion of abilities, control of progress 
ration of tests. ’ 


determinat- 

administ- 


3 1 2 * * 5 In-Service Education: institutes, workshops, and 
other meetings and organizations developed for 
the purpose of training the'teacher in service. 


Ik Adult Education : systematic instruction in schools 
or through the use of school personnel in night or 
day classes. 


5- Special Classes : for exceptional children, 
retardation and giftedness, special remedial 
classes. 


INSTRUCTIONAL MANAGEMENT 


The following groups of activities are a part of botra 
instruction and management and may have special signij 
ficance for the superintendent. 


1. Pupil Accounting and Records : of examination 
marks, promotions, attendance records, administ¬ 
ration of attendance acts. 


2. Execution of Boar d Policies : on courses of studies 
progress and promotion of students, in-service 
education. 


3* Instruction Materials : workbooks, textbooks, 

library books, audio-visual aids, remedial material 
purchase, distribution and use. 


Committees : organization and work with committees 
of teachers on such things as curriculum, guidance, 
special problems common to a staff. 


5. Fact Finding and Research: conduct of surveys and 
fact finding activities to obtain information for 
| the educational program. 


Indicate below any other major activities in the field 
of instruction or instructional management which could 
not be included in any section above and score them. 


3- 

Do scores in each section add to 4? 


Distribul 

ion of Functions 

Advisory 

Super¬ 

visory 

Adminis- 
trative 


























































































INSTRUCTION 


This area is concerned with activities directly related 
to the classroom. Bead the instructions and definitions 
carefully. The detailed activities in each section below 
are representative only. - LOW 


The Teacher; classroom instruction procedures, 
methods and techniques of instruction, supervision 
of work and play activities. 


2. The Pupil: guidance in the classroom, determinat¬ 
ion of abilities, control of progress, administ¬ 
ration of tests. 


3- In-Service Education : institutes, workshops, and 
other meetings and organizations developed for 
the purpose of training the teacher in service. 


Adult Education : systematic instruction in schools 
or through the use of school personnel in night or 
day classes. 


5• Special Classes : for exceptional children, 
retardation and giftedness, special remedial 
classes. 


INSTRUCTIONAL MANAGEMENT 


The following groups of activities are a part of both 
instruction and management and may have special signi- 
ficance for the superintendent. 


1- Pupil Accounting and Records : of examination 
marks, promotions, attendance records, administ¬ 
ration of attendance acts. 


2. Execution of Boar d Policies : on courses of studies 
progress and promotion of students, in-service 
education. 


3- Instruction Materials : workbooks, textbooks, 

library books, audio-visual aids, remedial material 
purchase, distribution and use. 


*L Committees : organization and work with committees 
of teachers on such things as curriculum, guidance, 
special problems common to a staff. 


5. Fact Finding and Research: conduct of surveys and 
fact finding activities to obtain information for 
the educational program. 


Indicate below any other major activities in the field 
of instruction or instructional management which could 
not be included in any section above and score them. 

1 . 

2 . 

3- 

Do scores in each section add to 4? 
















































- 3 - 

m c pEL MMjACTjMT. VELgMEA Mp MORALE 

The place of the superintendent In 4-4 
welfare and morale of the staff m -n, ® l tlon to the 
different then in „th„ Lew" ^ >* 1 

US' the detailed aetivitie. nndir Sc^ertiST 
.representative »nd.uee_d_to define the aertion' 


1 . Teacher s: employment, promotion, transfer dis 
•iaaal of teaehera, principal,, ™per,?,Sy ° 


Ion of Functions 


Super- jAdminls- 
visory tratlve 


Non-Profes sional Sta ff: employment, promotion, 
transfer, dismissal of bus-drivers, caretakers 
maintenance crews. ’ 


Office Staff : determination of duties, work schedJ 
responsibilities, conditions of employment 
dismissal. 


4. Salary Schedules: negotiations, enforcement, tenuj 
j HUck leave. 7 ■ 


Working Conditions of Teachers : determination of 
class load, extra curricular activities responsib¬ 
ilities, general supervisory duties. 


SCHOOL COMMUNITY RELATIONS 

This is often referred to as public relations. It il 
primarily concerned with public information and 
support of schools. 


1. The Public and the Board : furnishing information 
-onboard policies, finance, statistics, and administ] 
ration through group meetings and other media. 


2. The Public and the Schools : furnishing information 
on the instructional program in the schools, 
improvement of school community partnership. 


3. Working with Groups : P.T.A., Home and School and 
other educational groups for the public support 
and understanding of education. 


Use of Media: use of press, radio, T.V., news- 
JUtters, bulletins to disseminate information on 
the educational program. 


Indicate below any other major activities in the field, 
noted above which could not be included in any of the 
sections and give your score on them. 

1 . 


2 . 

Do scores in each section add to 4? 



























































































3 - 


msmijmsgm* mmummmix 


The place of the superintendent 1, , ! 

welfare and morale of the staff L Ration to the 

different than in other arees 

page the detailed activities und* !i he previou e 


1 , Teachers 


sim- “■ 

s t a ff. ’ princ iP a ls, supervisory 


2 . 


No n-Profes s ional^taf f; employment. 

transfer, dismissal of bus-drivers 
maintenance crews. 


, promotion, 
caretakers. 


3* 


Office St aff: determination 
responsibilities, conditions 
dismissal. 


of duties, work schedule 
of employment. 


‘b Salary Schedules: negotiations, enforcement, tenure 

fll PK I PAVP . 7 


5* Working Conditions of Teachers : determination of 
class load, extra curricular activities responsib¬ 
ilities, general supervisory duties. 


SCHOOL COMMUNITY RELATIONS 


This is often referred to as public relations. It is 
primarily concerned with public information and 
support of schools. 


!• The Public and the Board : furnishing information 

on board policies, finance, statistics, and administ¬ 
ration through group meetings and other media. 


2* The Public and the Schools : furnishing information 
Oh the instructional program in the schools, 
improvement of school community partnership. 


3' Working with Groups : P.T.A., Home and School and 
other educational groups for the public support 
and understanding of education. 


k. 


Use of Media : use of press, radio, T.V., news¬ 
letters, bulletins to disseminate information on 
the educational program. 


Sources of Authority 


Depart¬ 

ment 

Regulat¬ 

ion 

Board 

Direct¬ 

ive 

Own 

Initiat¬ 

ive 





Indicate below any other major activities in the fields 
noted above which could not be included in any of the 
sections and give your score on them. 


2 . 

3- . 

Do scores in each section add to 4? 



















































- 4 - 

BUSINESS MANAGEMENT: DEVELOPMENT OP PmvrrTvq 1 

<l“n, * ere > is the development of policial 

Wha^irth 0 i ^ ySlCal °P eratlon of the school.! 
Inlta * he .Ration ° f the superintendent to the 1 
board and others in the process? 

Distribuli 

on of Functions 

r 

Advisory 

Super- A 

visory t 

dminis- 
native 

1. School Finance: planning and preparing the budJ 
tor presentation of the board. 

2. Materials, Equipment and Supplies:(excent thone 
indicated under instructional management) school 
equipment, desks, teaching supplies. 

3. Centralization: development of mUnisn r>» 
ories, bus purchases, contracts, routes, size of 
attendance areas, traffic regulations. 













4. Construction, Maintenance and Use of Buildings: | 
Plans for construction of new buildings, repair 1 
programs, use of school buildings by the public. 1 




5. Educational Program: development of policies re tl 
central school program, in-service education, 1 

promotion of students, curriculum. 





BUSINESS MANAGEMENT: EXECUTION OF POLICIES 

Putting policies into effect may or may not be of maj 
concern to the superintendent. What is your relatioi 
ship to this? What functions do you perform? Why? 





1. School Finance: 

Control of expenditure, aduit, efficient methods 
of spending, financial strength of the area. 





2. Purchase of Materials, Equipment, Supplies: 

Selection as to quality, kind, price, distribut¬ 

ion, control of use, purchase of buses. 





3. Centralization. 

Maintenance and repair of buses, establishment 
of routes, enforcement of regulations operation 
of dormitories. 

4. School Buildings and Maintenance: supervision of 
construction for the board, repair programs, 
supervision of maintenance. 

5. Education Program: carrying out of policies of 
board re central schools, adapting the educational 
program to the area. 










Indicate below any other major activities in the fiel 
noted above which could not be included in any of the 
sections and give your score on them. 

1 . 

2 . 

3- 

Do scores in each section add to a? 

NOW TURN BACK TO PAGE ONE AND COMPLE 1 : 

d 

DE 













































































- k - 


S^ESS^MGENffiNT: DEVELOPMENT OF POLICIES 


hoard « d +h ^° n ° f the su P er intendent to the 

board and others in the process7 

Sources of Authority 

Depart¬ 

ment 

Regula- 

Board 

Direct¬ 

ive 

Own 

Initiat • 
ive 

i. School Finance: planning and preparing the budget 
tor presentation of the board. 

±ion 



2. Materials, Equipment and Supplies:(exeent +.v, noo 
indicated under instructional management) school 
equipment, desks, teaching supplies. 




3- Centralization: development of noUnl'an ro 

ories, bus purchases, contracts, routes, size of 
attendance areas, traffic regulations. 




k. Construction, Maintenance and Use of Buildings: 

Plans for construction of new buildings, repair 

programs, use of school buildings by the public. 




5. Educational Program: development of policies re the 
central school program, in-service education, 
promotion of students, curriculum. 




BUSINESS MANAGEMENT: EXECUTION OF POLICIES 

Putting policies into effect may or may not be of major 
concern to the superintendent. What is your relation¬ 
ship to this? What functions do you perform? Why? 




1. School Finance: 

Control of expenditure, adult, efficient methods 
of spending, financial strength of the area. 




2. Purchase of Materials, Equipment, Supplies: 

Selection as to quality, kind, price, distribut¬ 

ion, control of use, purchase of buses. 




3« Centralization. 

Maintenance and repair of buses, establishment 
of routes, enforcement of regulations operation 
of dormitories. 




1*. School Buildings and Maintenance: supervision of 
construction for the board, repair programs, 
supervision of maintenance. 

5. Education Program: carrying out of policies of ^ 
board re central schools, adapting the educational 
program to the area. 




Indicate below any other major activities in the fields 
noted above which could not be included in any of the 
sections and give your score on them. 

1 . 

2. ' 

3. , 





Do scores in each section add to k? 


NOW TURN BACK TO PAGE ONE AND COMPLETE DISTRIBUTION OF TIME. 







































































276 


SAMPLE 3 

INTERVIEW SCHEDULE : CHIEF SUPERINTENDENTS 


1. What is the legal relationship of the superintendent of schools to 

a. the department of education 

b. the board of trustees of the larger unit of administration 

c. to the board of trustees of the local district (where applicable)? 

2. Is there any conflict in the loyalties expected of the superintendent 
by the department and by the local authorities? 

3* What aspects of education are of primary concern to the central authority? 

4* What aspects are of primary concern of the local authorities ? 

5* How well do the categories in the questionnaire sent to the superintend¬ 
ents in this province encompass all of his major activities? 

6. Are the definition and scoring methods related to functions and sources 
of authority satisfactory? 

7* How would you rank the emphases which you think the superintendents 

should place on the functions in each of the categories? 

8* As an agent of the department how do you think he should rank the 
sources of authority? 

9. Are there any major problems concerning organization facing the department 
at the present time? 







277 


SAMPLE 4 

INTERVIEW SCHEDULE: SUPERINTENDENTS OF SCHOOLS 

1* Were the definitions of functions and sources of authority used in the 
questionnaire understandable and acceptable? 

2. What is the most important function and the least important function 
which you perform in relation to each of the categories? 

3o What do you consider are the most important aspects of your work? 

4. Does what the department expect of you and the duties and responsibil¬ 
ities defined in the school act agree? 

5o Does the department send you many directives on what, how, or when you 
should do your work? 

6« Do you keep the board of trustees informed on all matters relating to 
all aspects of education such as improvement of instruction, in-service 
education, principals* meetings? 

7* Do you do many things in the local area because the board of trustees 
expect you to do them? ask you to do them? 

8. To what extent are your activities determined by what you think should 
be done? 

9* What do you think the comnunity expects of you as educational leader? 

1CL What is your relationship to the staff of teachers? to the principals? 










; ft • - i 


. . : . • ; 


I' . 






■ ■ 


! • ! *. or ■■■!■. 








; . —- . . 


. 

1 ': - • • 


... , ; , u 

.0' ■ v s 0;f 0& ryv tfoerp!* ^ 







APPENDIX 


B 



















879 


I 

r 4 


& 


03 


Total 

O 

o 

02 


00 

19 

a 


02 

Teach- 
. ins. _ 

o 

o 

02 

rH 

02 

CM 

14 

LO 

o 

O 

O 

i i 

© O 

P-i V. 

at 

14 

14 

15 


to 

o 

o 

O 

O 

rH 

4! 

o 

E- 

o 

. 

H 

60 


05 

10 

00 

02 

O 

Teach- 
ing_ 

i 

o 

LO 

10 

3 

LO 

to 

o 

O 

o 

it 1 

n 

15 

to 

CO 

CO 

60 

o 

o 

O 

o 

r- 

et 

1 

E- 

o 

O 

o 

O 

05 

co 

co 

to 

rH 

Teach¬ 

ing 

o 

O 

to 

lO 

3 

02 

rH 

o 

o 

Super- 

visorv 

1 

00 


05 

02 

02 

o 

o 

o 

o 

V. 

& 

s2 

1 

o 

05 

1 

|L0 

3 

3 

15 - 19 

02 

1 

O 

02 

05 

02 

l 

LO 

02 

30-54 

05 

to 

LO 

to 

- 1 

40 plus 










































TABLE VI 


NUMBER OF PUPILS IN SUPERINTENDENCY 


Number of Superintendents 


Number of 

British 


Saskat¬ 

Nova 

New 

Pupils 

Columbia 

Alberta 

chewan 

Scotia 

Brunswick 

500 - 999 

.. 

1 

2 



1000 - 1499 

— 

4 

3 

— 

— 

1500 - 1999 

— 

6 

13 

— 

— 

2000 - 2499 

2 

14 

19 

— 

— 

2500 - 2999 

2 

5 

6 

3 

-- 

3000 - 3499 

3 

4 

5 

— 

— 

3500 - 3999 

5 

1 

3 

— 

•— 

4000 - 4499 

3 

2 

— 

1 

— 

4500 - 4999 

2 

— 

2 

— 

2 

5000 - 5499 

— 

— 

— 

— 

3 

7000 - 7999 


mmmm 


1 


8000 - 8999 

— 

— 

— 

1 

— 

9000 - 9999 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10000 - 10999 

1 

— 

— 

— 

2 

11000 - 12999 

1 

■mmm 



1 

13000 - 14999 

1 

■— 

— 

— 

— 

Over 15000 

1 

— 

— 

~ 

1 























































881 


TABLE VII 


NUMBER OF CLASSROOMS IN SUPERINTENDENCY 
Number of Superintendents 


Number of 
Classrooms 

British 

Columbia 

Alberta 

Saskat¬ 

chewan 

Nova 

Scotia 

New 

Brunswick 

0-49 


2 

(ammm 

•mm* 

__ 

50 « 99 

2 

18 

24 

_ mm 

mmmm 

100 - 149 

8 

15 

25 

4 

__ 

ISO - 199 

9 

2 

4 


1 

200 - 249 

MOW 

_ r 


1 

2 

250— 299 

1 

«««» 

_ 

arnmm 

1 

300 - 349 


.. 

M mm 

mm^m 

1 

350 - 399 

1 

„ 


*m*m 

mmmm 

400 - 449 

1 

.. 

mmmn 

•mmm 

1 

450 - 499 

1 

.. 


•mmm 


500 - 549 




•mmm 

2 

550 - 599 

1 




~ 













































TABLE VIII 


ZQZ 


NUMBER OF SPECIAL SUPERVISORS IN SUPERINTENDENCY 
Number of Superintendents 


Number of 

British 


Saskat- 

Nova 

New 

Supervisors 

Columbia 

Alberta 

chewan 

Scotia 

Brunswick 

0 

6 

31 

35 

3 


1 

9 

6 

16 

3 

6 

Z 

5 

1 

1 

__ 

1 

3 

1 


1 



4 

1 





5 plus 

Z 
















■Vv 









: ■, ’7' . s > :■ J ' .. ' . ! ■ '£ 0 , 



’ 


















283 


TABLE IX 

SUMMARY OF RANK SCORES FROM QUESTIONNAIRE BY PROVINCE: FUNCTIONS 


Functions 

British 


Saskat¬ 

Nova 

New 


Columbia 

Alberta 

chewan 

Scotia 

Brunswick 

Advisory 






1. 

1 

2 

2 

1 

1 

2. 

1 

2 

2 

1 

1 

3. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

4. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

5. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

6. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

Supervisory 






1 . 

2 

1 

1 

2 

2 

2. 

2 

1 

1 

2 

3 

3. 

3 

2 

2 

3 

2 

4. 

2 

2 

2 

3 

3 

5. 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

6. 

2 

2 

2 

2 

3 

Adrainistrative 






1 . 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2* 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

3* 

2 

3 

3 

2 

3 

4. 

3 

3 

3 

2 

2 

5. 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 

6 * 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2 


Legend 

!• Instruction 4* School Community Relations 

2. Instructional Management 5* Business Management: Policy Planning 

3. Personnel Management 6. Business Management: Policy Execution* 



































284 


TABLE X 

SUMMARY OF RANK SCORES FROM QUESTIONNAIRE BY PROVINCE: 
SOURCES OF AUTHORITY 


Sources of 
Authority 

British 

Columbia 

Alberta 

Saskat¬ 

chewan 

Nova 

Scotia 

New 

Brunswick 

Department 

Directive 






1. 

2 

2 

2 

2 

1 

2. 

2 

2 

2 

2 

1 

3. 

2 

3 

3 

3 

1 

4. 

3 

3 

2.5 

2 

2 

5. 

3 

3 

3 

2 

1 

6 . 

2.5 

3 

3 

2 

1 

Board 

Directive 






1. 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3 

2. 

5 

3 

3 

3 

3 

3. 

1 

2 

1 

2 

3 

4. 

2 

2 

2.5 

3 

3 

5# 

2 

2 

2 

1 

3 

6 . 

1 

1 

2 

1 

3 

Own 

Initiative 






1* 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

3. 

3 

1 

2 

1 

2 

4. 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

5. 

2 

1 

1 

5 

2 

6 * 

2.5 

2 

1 

3 

2 


Legend 

1. Instruction 

2. Instructional Management 
3* Personnel Management 


4* School Community Relations 
5* Business Management: Policy Planning 
6. Business Management: Policy Execution 






























285 


TABLE 21 

SUMMARY OF RANK SCORES FROM LEGAL SOURCES BY PROVINCES 




•Ymction 


Sources of Autho 

pity 

Catesorv 

Advisorv 

Super¬ 

visory 

Adminis 

trative 

Dept. 

Directive 

Board 

Directive 

Own 

Initiative 

British 

Columbia 







1. 

3 

1 

2 

1 

3 

2 

2. 

3 

2 

1 

1.5 

1.5 

3 

3. 

2 

1 

3 

2 

1 

3 

4. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

2 

3 

5. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

2 

3 

6. 

2 

1 

3 

2 

1 

3 

Alberta 







1. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

3 

2 

2. 

3 

2 

1 

1 

2 

3 

5. 

1 

2 

3 

2 

1 

3 

4. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

2 

3 

5. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

6. 

1.5 

1.5 

3 

2 

1 

3 

Saskatchei 

lo 

^an 

2 

1 

3 

1 

5 

2 

2. 

3 

2 

1 

1 

2 

3 

3. 

1 

2 

3 

2 

1 

3 

4. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

2 

3 

5. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

6 . 

1.5 

1.5 

3 

2 

1 

3 

Nova Scot: 

1. 

La 

3 

1 

2 

1 

3 

2 

2. 

3 

2 

1 

1 

3 

2 

3. 

3 

1 

2 

1 

2 

3 

4. 

2 

1 

3 

1 

3 

2 

5. 

2 

1 

3 

2 

1 

5 

6 . 

1 

2 

3 

2 

1 

3 

New Brunsi 

la 

idck 

1 

2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

2. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

3. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

4. 

1 

3 

2 

1 

3 

2 

5. 

1 

2 

3 

1 

3 

2 

6 . 

1 

3 

2 

l 1 

3 

2 


Legend 

1. Instruction 4. School Community Relations 

2* Instructional Management 5* Business Management: Policy Planning 
5 # Personnel Management 6* Business Management: Policy Execution. 
















































TABLE XII 


286 


PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION OF RANK SCORES FROM INTERVIEWS BY PROVINCE 


Category 

Functions 


Sources of Authority 

Advisory 

Super- 
vis ory 

Adminis¬ 

trative 

)epartment 

)irective 

Board 

Directive 

Own 

Initiative 

British 








Columbia 








1. 

47 

33 

20 


40 

10 

50 

2. 

40 

37 

23 


37 

20 

43 

3o 

51 

19 

30 


48 

32 

20 

4. 

45 

30 

25 


14 

26 

60 

5. 

57 

22 

21 


30 

50 

20 

6. 

62 

27 

11 


30 

40 

30 

Alberta 








1. 

35 

45 

15 


35 

5 

60 

2. 

32 

39 

19 


32 

20 

58 

3* 

55 

24 

21 


10 

60 

30 

4. 

40 

32 

28 


12 

26 

62 

5o 

50 

40 

10 


15 

35 

50 

6* 

54 

28 

18 


50 

30 

20 

Saskatchewan 







1. 

40 

50 

10 


40 

0 

60 

2. 

88 

42 

20 


37 

15 

48 

3. 

58 

32 

10 


30 

30 

40 

4* 

55 

35 

10 


20 

5 

75 

5. 

55 

25 

20 


20 

30 

50 

6. 

60 

30 

10 


20 

40 

40 

Bova Scotia 







1. 

45 

35 

20 


40 

0 

60 

2. 

50 

30 

20 


30 

10 

60 

3. 

40 

35 

25 


20 

10 

70 

4. 

50 

20 

30 


20 

10 

70 

5. 

60 

30 

10 


35 

40 

25 

6. 

75 

20 

5 


30 

50 

20 


Legend 

It Instruction 4« School Community Relations 

2. Instructional Management 5* Business Management: Policy Planning 

3* Personnel Management 6* Business Management: Policy Execution<» 
























4 




V ■ 




- 




















TABLE gill 


287 


DISTRIBUTION OF RESPONSES OBTAINED DURING INTERVIEWS BY PERCENT 


Number of superintendents interviewed by province . 

Categories of Responses 


"Alta. 

8asK* 

19 

20 

24 




Relationships with Department of Education 




1* As an employee of the Department of Education I; 




a* am satisfied with present arrangements . 

51 

60 

30 

b* would like clarification of relationships with 




board of trustees and secretary .. 

16 

40 

65 

c. would like to be officially designated as the 




chief executive officer of the larger unit *••••• 

— 

30 

65 

d* am responsible for interpreting local needs to 




the department. 

86 

95 

80 

e. am responsible fcr co-ordinating provincial and 




local needs in education .... 

100 

100 

89 

2• I consider myself; 




a. loyal to both the department and the board .. 

66 

60 

33 

b. ultimately loyal to the department but mainly 




concerned about the welfare of the local area 

92 

92 

86 

c* mainly the executive officer of the board. 

76 

95 

50 

3* I feel I am responsible for; 




a* the efficient management of all aspects of the 




dducational program in the area .. 

51 

80 

65 

b* all aspects which are not going well .. 

17 

75 

70 

c* only those aspects which are specifically indicat 




ed by the department as part of the job .. 

21 

20 

41 

Relationships with Board of Trustees and Secretary 




1* The board of trustees affects my work because 




a. the membership is very unstable.. 

51 

60 

42 

b. the membership changes from farmers to business 





41 

15 

21 

c. the board is not interested in educational aspect 

3 26 

35 

37 

d. the board is not working together ..• •• 

36 

45 

47 

e* the secretary is opposed to the educational 

24 

35 

35 





Z . My responsibilities to the board of trustees are; 





10 

15 

15 

b. advisory in planning stage and supervisory in 




relation to permanent policies ..1 

52 

75 

70 

c. to act as liaison officer between board and the 





80 

70 

50 

d. to act as spokesman for the board in relations 





85 

90 

90 














































£88 


TABLE XTTT (continued) 


Functions 

1. The emphasis placed upon a function depends upon;.. 

a. conditions in the area . 

b. personality of the superintendent.. 

c. personality of the secretary. 

d. personalitjr of the board of trustees. 

e. stability of the board of trustees .. 

f. stability of the teaching staff . 

Instruction 

In the field of instruction the superintendent is 
responsible for; 

a. providing accurate information for the teacher . 

b. evaluating the work of the teacher. 

c. as the staff improves in quality the superintend 

ent tends to advise more than supervise . 

d. providing means for the orientation of teachers 
to the area and to the program 

Management 

1. Ine provincial authorities expect the superintend¬ 
ent to use his own initiative in 

a. ensuring efficient management of the educational 

program.... 

b. co-ordinating and integrating the objectives of 

both province and local area . 

c. maintaining a co-operative partnership between 

all interested parties .. 

2. The boards of trustees expect the superintendent to 
provide; 

a. accurate information on all matters within the 

jurisdiction of the board . 

b. adrainistaative or supervisory reports of the 

effectiveness of their policies .. 

c. information on provincial policies in education 

3. The board of trustees expects the superintendent to 

a. take an active part in making recommendation re 

the budget . 

b. make recommendations re placement, transfer and 

employment of teachers ... 

Co take charge of the public relations program ... 

d. to interpret the policies of the board to the 

public and the staff of teachers ... 


B.C. 

Alta. 

Sask. 

72 

80 

90 

30 

45 

36 

15 

60 

50 

65 

75 

75 

90 

85 

80 

85 

70 

75 

80 

35 

20 

100 

95 

90 

25 

40 

50 

42 

55 

57 

60 

75 

70 

75 

80 

65 

60 

75 

50 

75 

65 

80 

65 

55 

40 

80 

76 

80 

65 

80 

75 

90 

95 

80 

50 

60 

35 

55 

65 

80 

























































TABLE XIV 


CONSENSUS ON CATEGORIES OF ACTIVITIES: PERCENTAGE DISTRIBUTION 


Cate, 


or y Bri ti s h C olumbia 


Alberta 


Saskatchewan 


I. 


Consensus Distribution — I1D0 percent 


(a) Teacher I Teacher 

(a) Pupil I Pupil 

(a) In-Service Education In-Service Education 


Teacher 

Pupil 

In-Service Education 


II. 


(a) Pupil Records 

(b) Instructional 
Materials 


Pupil Records 
( b )C cramittee s 
Research 


Pupil Records 
Instructional Materials 
Coramittees 


III. 


(a) Teachers 


Teachers 
(& )l'I orking C ond itions 


Teachers 

Working Conditions 


IV. 


(b) Public & Board (b)WorkLng with Groups 


Public & Board 
Public & Schools 
Working with Groups 


V. 


(a) Materials & 
Supplies 

(a) Education Policies 
Centralization 


Materials & Supplies 
Education Policies 


Materials & Supplies 
Education Policies 


I. 


Consensus Distribution — 90 - 99 percent 


Adult Education 


II. 


(b) Fact Finding & 
Research 


Fact Finding $ Research 


III. 


IV. 


Working Conditions 


Working with Groups 


Public & Board 
Public & School 


V. 


VI. 


I. 


II. 


(a)Finance 
(a) Buildings 


Finance 
Buildings 
(b) Centralization 


(a) Education Program Education Program 


Finance 
Buildings 
Centralization 
Materials & Supplies 


Education Program 


Consensus Distribution — SO - 89 percent 


Special Classes 


Committees 


Board Policy 
Fact Finding & 
Research 










































J U.\ 





:■ : F 




V ) 

X J 

- < __ v •) 





1 




o 

J 


V-IJ 


V J 





0 


J 



{ *!/ 







■ J 


'J 



o 



V'J i 


v ; 











TABLE XIV (c ontinued) 


290 


Category British Columbia 

Alberta 

Saskatchewan 

III* 

(b)Salary Shhedules Salary Schedules 


IV. 

r 

(b)Use of Media 

Use of Media 

V. 




VI. 

(b)Finance 

(b)Materials and Supply 
(b Centralization 

Finance 

Materials and Supply 
Centralization 


II. 

Consensus Distribution — 70 - 79 p 

ercent 

(b)Board Policy 


Board Policy 

III. 


Office Staff 


VI. 


Buildings 

Finance 

Centralization 
Materials and Supply 

III. 

Concensus Distribution — 60-69 

percent 

Non-Professional Staff 
Office Staff 

Salary Schedules 


III. 

Consensus Dis 

tribution — 40 - 59 

percent 



Non-Professional Staff 
Office Staff 

Salary Schedules 

1. 

Consensus Dis 

tribution — 20 - 39 

percent 

(b ) Special Classes 

(b) Adult Education 

Special Classes 

Adult Education 


Legend 


Category 

1* Instruction IV* School Community Relations 

II* Instructional Management V* Business Management: Policy Planning 
III. Personnel Management VI. Business Management: Policy Execution 

(a) Common consensus in the three provinces in the western zone 

(b) Common consensus in two of the three provinces in the western zone. 

































J 


t - 


* 


X l 






. ) ' 











•h-M 











. 
















TABLE XV 

SUMMARY OF RANK SCORES 


£91 


BRITISH COLUMBIA 


A. Functions 


B.Sources of Authority 


Advis Super Admin Dept. Board Own 


Category 

U 

c 

visory 

_ 2 j 

istra 
, tive3j 

• Direc. 
tivel; 

Direc'Initia 
tive 2 . tive 3 

I Instruction 


i 

i 

i 

• 



Questionnaire 

1 

2 

3 

1.5 i 

3 ; 1.5 

Pilot Study 

1 

2 

! 3 » 

2 I 

! 3 | 1 

Interview 

1 

2 ! 

| 3 | 

; 2 x i 

i 

3 j l x 

I T Instructional Management 


j 

t 

1 • 

i 

\ 

1 

[ | 

Questionnaire < 

1 

2 

! 3 ! 

i 

i 2 

! 1 

1 3 ; 1 

Pilot Study 

1 

2 ! 

1 3 , 

1 2 

3 i 1 

Interview 

1 1 

2 

! 

i ? • 

i 

! 2 

i 

i 3 ! i 

i 

III Personnel Mana ement 

f 

i 

! 

1 

1 

i 

i 

; i 

1 1 

Questionnaire 

i ! 

1 

3 

! ! 
2 ! 

\ 

j 2 

! 1 | 3 

Pilot Study 

l : 

O 

2 ! 

| 2 

! i ! 3 

Interview 

l j 

3 

2 ! 

j 2 

i 1 ’ 3 

IV School Community 1 



! 

i 

j 

| | 

Relations ; 

1 


| 

| 

j 1 

1 1 

Questionnaire : 

l ! 

; 2 

3 

| 3 

jail 

Pilot Study 

l 

! 2 

! 3 j 

! 3 

I 2 i 1 

Interview 

l 1 

1 2 

I 

3.3 

i ! 

j 2 | 1 

V Business Management: 


i 

! 

i 

1 

i i 

Policy Planning 


[ 

i 

! \ 

} 

] ! 

! 1 

Ques tionnair e 

i 

1 

2 

! 3 : 

: 3 

i 1 | 2 

Pilot Study j 

i 

2 

! 3 1 

! 3 

12,1 

Interview 

l 

2 

3 ! 

: 3 

| 1 | 2 

VI Business Management: 



\ \ 

j 

! ' 

) 

Policy Execution 




| 

| j 

Questionnaire 

i 

2 

3 i 

: 2* 5 

1 : 2o5 

Pilot Stud)/ - 

l 

2.5 X 

2.5 : 

c 2 

• 1 ; 3 

Interview 

l 

2 

3 

2 

1 3 

Summary ^ 2* 3 

( 1 

3. ^ No* of Respondents 

Questionnaire 1 2 3 

3 

2 1 

Questionnaire - 25 

Pilot Study 123 

3 

2 1 

Pilot Stud 

- 3 

Interview 123 

3 

2 1 

Int< 

srview 

- 19 











































































TABL2XVI 

SUM!''.ARY OF RANK SCORES 


29 2 


ALBERTA 


Category 


A. Func tion s B. So urces of Authorit y 
Advis Super Admin Dept. Board Own 
ory ' visory istra Direc. Direc'Initia 
1 2 , tive3j tive 1 tive2 tive 3 


I Instr u ction 

Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


;x 


1.5 X 

1 

1 


II Instruct ional Ma nagement 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


! 2 . 
2 
i 2 


2 

3 x 

2 


2 

ix 

2 


II Personnel Management 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 

IV S chool Community 
Relations 


1 

1 

1 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 

V Bus i ness Managem ent: 
Policy Planning 


: 1 
1 
1 


Que s tionnair e 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


: l 
• l 
l 


VI Business Management : 
Policy Execution 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 

Su mmary 


A. 


1 2 


QuestionnairelT 
Pilot Study 123 
Interview 123 


B. 

1 2 

fr^r 

; 3 2 1 
'321 


1 

2x 

1 


2 

ix 

2 


No, of R e spond ents 

Questionnaire - 3$ 
Pilot Stud^ r 6 
Interview 20 
























TABL3CVTI 

SUMMARY OF RANK SCORES 


295 


SASKATCHEWAN 


Category 


A. Function s B. Sources of Authorit y 

Advis Super Admin Dept. Board Own 
ory visory istra : Direc. Direc'Initia 
1 2j tive3, tivel tive2 tive3 


I Instruction 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


2 1 ; 3 2 j 3 i 1 

2 1 ; 3 t 2 s 3 1 

2 1 I 3 2 2 ! 3 i 1 


II Instructi onal Man agement 

Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 

III Personnel Management 


* 2 
2 

; 2 


3 ; i 

3 ! l 

3 ! 1 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Stud}/' 
Interview 


IV S chool Community 
Relations 


ii i 

ii 3 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 

V Bus i ness Management : 
Policy Planning 

Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


2 

2.5 X 

2 


;! 3 
ii 3 

!; 3 


3 1 

2.54 

3 


VI Business Ma nagement : 
Policy Execution 


Questionnaire 
Pilot Stud 3 r 
Interview 


Su mmary A. B. 

12 3 12 3 

Questionnairel~2 3 ”3 2 I 

Pilot Study 12 3 3 2 1 

Interview 123321 


No, of Re spond ents 

Questionnaire - 53 

Pilot Stud’- 
Interview _ 24 



































TABLE XVIII 

SUMMARY OF RALK SCORES 

NOVA SCOTIA 


294 


Category 
I Instruction 


A ♦F unction s B.So urces of Authorit y 

Advis Super Admin Dept. Board Own 
ory visory istra Direc. Direc' Initia 
1 _ Z tive j tive 1 tive2 ; tive 3 


Questionnaire 


1 


2 

! 3 2 j 3 

1 1 

Pilot Study 


1 


2 

: 3 '2 ! 3 

, 1 

Interview 


1 


2 

! 3 !| 2 j 3 

1 1 

Instructional Management 




i! 

\ \ i i 

1 ‘1 i 

i 

Questionnaire 

j 

1 


2 

j -i i 

13 3 2 S3 

; i 

Pilot Study 


1 


2 

1 3 2 2 ,3 

j l 

Interview 


1 


2 

i 3 1! 2 i 3 

! l 

Personnel Management 

I 

j 



1 ; j I 

! ii i 

i 

! 

i 

Questionnaire 


1 1 


3 

12 H 3 ! 2 

i 

| l 

Pilot Study 


1 


3 

2 'j 3 | 2 

! 1 

Interview 


1 

j 

3 

J 2 3 12 

: 1 

School Community 

| 




I j j 

: 

Relations 

I 


| 


• » 

j : j 

| ? 

j 

Questionnaire 

| 


t 

3 

t j J j 

j 2 ij 2 | 3 

\ ■ 

i 1 

Pilot Study 


1 

| 

3 

2 "'2 » 3 

| 1 

Interview 


1 

I 

j 

3 

| 2 jj 2 | 3 

i 1 

Business Management: 





! 

l 

i 

Policy Planning 



! 

I 


;] j 

j 

Que s tionnaire 


1 

; 

2 

' 3 2 i 

3 

Pilot Study 


2x 


3 x 

l x : 2 | 1 

3 

Interview 


1 


2 

3 : 2 I 1 

« *■ \ l 

: 3 

Business Management: 





: ; ■ j 


Policy Execution 





1 !i i 

H ! 

i 

Questionnaire 


1 


2 

3 2 1 

: 3 

Pilot Study 


1 


2 

3 2 1 

‘ 3 

Interview 


1 


2 

3 2 1 

3 

Summary 

A. 

B. 


No, of Respondents 


1 

2 3 

1 2 

3 



Questionnaire! 

2 3 

45 4 5 

1 

Questionnaire 

- 6 

Pilot Study i 

2 3 

45 2.5 

1 

Pilot Stud^ 

- 2 

Interview 1 

2 3 

2.5 2.5 

1 

Interview 

- 2 





















































TABLE XIX 

SUMMARY OF RAi.K SCORES 


295 


NEW BRUNSWICK 


A• Fun ction s B. 
Advis Super Admin 


So urces of Authorit y 
Dept. Board Own 


Category 

ory 

1 

visory 
_ 2 

istra ; Direc. Direc' Initia 
tive 3 tive 1 tive 2 tive 3 

I Instruction 

• 


i 1 

i 



Questionnaire 

1 

2 

3 5 1 ; 

3 

2 

Pilot Study 

2 X 

l x 

3 . 1 

3 

2 

Interview 

I 3 X 

2 X 

V Ij l 

3 j 

2 

II Instructional Management 



: i j ! 

1 i j i 

i j | 

i 

; 


Questionnaire 

i 1 

3 

| 2 jj 1 | 

i 

3 : 

2 

Pilot Study 

1 

3 

2 ill 

3 j 

2 

Interview 

l : 

3 

2 Hi i 

: i j 

3 i 

2 

III Personnel Management 

I 

! ! 

1 

1 ;! 

i !j | 

! 

1 i 


Questionnaire 

1 : 

2 

1 1 

3 H 1 

3 

: 2 

Pilot Study 

1 

2 

3 1 i 

! 3 

2 

Interview 

1 

2 

3 Ml 

I 3 

2 

IV School Community 

i 

| 

j ! 

1 1 


Relations 

j 


; j) 

1 jj i 

| ! 


Questionnaire 

: i 

| 3 

| 2 jj 2 

3 | 

! 1 

Pilot Study 

i 

3 

j 2 ii 2 

3 

; 1 

Interview 

i 

! 3 

! 2 li 2 

3 i 

1 1 


V Busines s Management 
Policy Planning 


Ques tionnai r e 
Pilot Study 
Interview 


VI Business Management : 
Policy Execution 

Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 


Interview 


Summary 


1 
: i 
i 


3 

2 X 

3 


3 

2 X 

3 


! 2 

I 3 X 


2 

3 X 

2 


A. 

1 2 


B. 

2 2 


Questionnaire! 32 132 

Pilot Study i 2 X 3 X 1 3 2 

Interview 13 2 13 2 


No_j_ of Re spond ents 

Questionnaire 
Pilot Study 
Interview 















































296 





TABLE X X 

DATA FROM QUESTIONNAIRES 
BRITISH COLUMBIA 


: 


lategory 1 

Respon 

ses 

i 

Advis« 
ory j 

functions 
Super . Admin- 
; visory j istrai 
!tive \ 

Sources of P 
Dept. Board. 
Direc Direc: 
itive itive i 

Luthority 

Own 

Initia 

tive 

i 

Instruction 

i 



| 

i 

j 

i 

i 

1 1 

i i 



jl. The Teacher 

25 

31 

33 

31 ! 

j 53 

5 

42 

2. The Pupil 

25 

45* 

. 34 

21 

39 ! 

2 ! 

59 

3. In Service Education 

25 

51 

29 

20 ! 

23 ; 

8 i 

69 

|4. Adult Education 

23 

53- 

j 21 I 

18 

35 ! 

29 I 

1 27 

5. Special Classes 

21 

29 

35- j 

20 

28 

19 

38 

Total j 

119, : 

209 

157 

i 110 

178 

63 1 

! 236 

Per cent (N -j 

- 460) 

44 

33 

23 i 

38 | 

13 , 

; 

49 

[ 

I Instructional 



| ! 


! 


! 

Management I 



I 





1. Pupil Records 

25 

1 41 

j 

i 34 

25 

49 

13 

38 

2. Board Policy 

! 19 

29 

j 23 

24 

24 

18 

34 

3 . Instruction Material 

25 

33 

l 35 

27 

35 

25 

40 

1 4. Committees 

22 

; 39 

5 33 

16 

19 

5 

64 

5. Research 

23 

25 

i 30 

j 37 

31 

20 

41 

Total 

114 

172 

! 155 

129 

158 

81 

217 

Per cent 

_ 44A 1 ) 

37 

34 

1 29 

35 

18 

47 

I Personnel 



\ 

I 




Management 



i 

| 




,1. Teachers 

25 

: 29 

t 25 

46 

33 

42 

20 

2. Non-Profes. Staff 

17 

■ 56 

! 9 

3 

4 

55 

9 

3. Office Staff 

15 

; 34 

! 12 

14 

i j 

4 

32 

24 

4. Salary Schedules 

22 

: 53 

! 14 

16 

24 

51 

13 

5. Working Conditions 

24 

37 

i 33 

21 

43 

18 

35 

Total 

103 

214 

98 

i 100 

i 113 

198 

101 

Per cent (N- 

-412) 

i 

52 

j 24 

9 

} 

2 

! * 

1 | 

; 28 

1 

j 

48 

! 

22 

i 

i 


























































■ r 







TABLE (continued) 







j 

Functions 


Sources of 

Authority 



Responj 

Advisj Super . 

Admin; 

Dept. 

Board 

. Own 

ategory 

1 

ses 

ory | 

visory 

istra 

. Direc 

Direc 

Initia 


; 




tive 

; tive ; 

tive 

tive 

■ 

V School Community 

i 

) 

1 

i 

i 

j 

i 


1 


i 

1 

Relations 

t 


i 

| 



1 ; 


1 

,1.Public and Board 

! 

25 I 

46 j 

27 

27 

j 20 

40 

! 40 

j|2. Public and School 


25 

46 

28 

26 

21 

22 

1 57 

|)3. Groups 

1 

24 

49 

31 

18 

9 

13 

j 74 

A. Media 

1 

25 

45 

32 

23 

! 13 

24 

63 

Total 

(N— 

j 

99 , 

186 

118 

94 

i 63 

99 

1 234 

ji Per cent 

- 3$0 ) 

46 

30 

24 

i 15 i 

24 

i 61 

V Business Management: 

j 

i 





1 j 


I 

1 

j Policy Planning 








i 

1.Finance 


24 

47 

30 

23 

30 : 

43 

1 19 

2.Materials & Supplies 


25 

55 

30 

16 

17 

47 

! 28 

j3. Centralization 


25 

52 

25 

23 

32 1 

34 

: 26 

A.Buildings 


24 

54 : 

i 21 

21 

34 j 

34 

1 19 

5.Education 


25 

37 

30 

34 

! 36 1 

18 

! 39 

Total (n_ 

h 123 ) 

245 

136 

115 

i 154 I 

176 

137 

Per cent 



U9 

28 

23 

' 3U j 

36 

: 30 

I Business Management: 






j 

1 | 


i 

1 

Policy Execution 








i 

f 

1.Finance 


22 

55 

17 

15 

36 ; 

33 

i 

i 15 

;2.Materials & Supplies 


22 

60 

15 

13 

19 i 

42 

; 272 

3.Centralization 


21 

55 

17 

; 12 

25 ! 

42 

i 17 

4.Buildings 


22 

63 

3.5 

! 10 

21 i 

43 

1 20 

5.Education 


24 

31 


1 3 

23 

31 

! 38 

1 Total 


111 

! 264 

9 S 

83 

124 

191 

i 117 

Per cent 

(N — 

432) 

! 59 
» 

j 22 

j 

19 

29 j 

44 

! 27 
























































298 


TABLE XCI 


DATA FROM QUESTI01NAIRES 


f 

ALBERTA 









Functions 

Sources of Authority 

i 

Respon 

Advisj 

Super 

Admin 

Dept. 

Board 

Own 

Category 

ses 

ory | 

visory; 

istra 

Direc 

Direc: 

Initia 




i 

tive 

!tive j 

tive j 

tive 

I Instruction 


1 

i 

i 

1 

1 

i 

1 

I 1 

} 1 

1 

1 


1. The Teacher 

33 

39 * 

72 

41 ! 

79 

5 1 

1 63 

2. The Pupil 

33 

. 81 

51 

20 ! 

46 1 

10 ! 

95 

3. In Service Education 

33 

40 

92 

20 ! 

34 ! 

10 ; 

109 

4. Adult Education 

9 

-22 j 

6 

3 I 

3 

10 

i 13 

5. Special Classes 

13 

22 i 

23 I 

1 7 

10 

5 

| 37 

Total 

136 

205 

243 

1 96 

177 

: 40 1 

! 327 

Per cent (N- 

-5W 

33 

45 

! 17 | 

32 

8 ; 

1 

\ 

60 

1 

j 

El Instructional 





1 

I 


Management i 

j j 



1 

1 





!1. Pupil Records 

37 

i 57 : 

S 39 

52 

69 

11 

63 

2. Board Policy 

23 

33 

; 42 

! 52 

32 

31 

69 

;3 . Instruction Material 

38 

: 52 i 

J 4o 

1 54 : 

52 

30 

70 

i 4. Committees 

! 33 

: 60 i 

71 

1 22 

31 

11 

110 

5. Research 

33 

39 ; 

j 61 

| 32 

24 

16 

92 

Total 

179 

246 

i 259 

1 212 

203 

99 

409 

Per cent (N— 

- 716) 

34 

36 

1 30 

30 

23 

57 

[I Personnel 



j 

j 




Management 



1 

j 

i 


I 


1. Teachers 

33 

■ 50 

i 39 

63 

36 

83 

33 

2. Non-Profes. Staff 

23 

■ 32 

23 

7 

3 

74 

30 

3. Office Staff 

21 

57 

13 

9 

3 

52 

24 

4. Salary Schedules 

33 

101 

17 

14 

id 

81 

33 

5. Working Conditions 

33 

' 65 

1 57 

30 

24 

50 

73 

Total 

153 

355 

|154 

123 

! 94 

340 

193 

Per cent (n _u 632) 

i 

57 

! 25 

{ 

i is 

i ! 

i 15 

1 

1 54 l 

; i 

[ 1 

1 

! 31 

1 

i 

! 

































































' 




■ 














299 




TABLE2§CI (continued) 




ategory 

i 

Responi 
ses j 

Functions 
Advisj Super . 

ory !visory 
. 1 

Admin; 

istra 

tive 

Sources of Authority 
Dept. Board Own 

Direc Direc Initia 
i tive : tive tive 

n 

II 

I 

V School Community 

i 

! 

1 

1 

I 

1 

! 

1 


1 ; 

j 

j 

i, Relations 

j 


( 



1 : 

1 

ll.Public and Board 

j 

35 

57 

45 

38 

j 19 : 50 

1 71 

ip.Public and School 


36 

53 

47 

42 

! 20 j 35 

1 89 

IB. Groups 


33 

69 i 

56 

26 

12 13 


j4. Media 


32 

56 

38 

34 

9 [31 

‘89 

,* Total 

, j 

141 

235 

186 

140 

| 60 129 

PJ 

Per cent 

(Nl 

- 564 ) 

41 

353 

24 

i 11 i 23 

j 66 

iV Business Management: 

j 





1 I 

f 

i 

| 

Policy Planning 







j 

:1. Finance 


35 

38 

38 

14 

41 49 

i 50 

2.Materials & Supplies 


33 

86 

51 

15 

13 • (69 

1 70 

p.Centralization 


36 

82 

33 

24 

24 1 68 

: 52 

[4.Buildings 


37 

91 

35 

22 

! 22 '60 

1 66 

5.Education 


33 

49 

68 

35 

1 38 i 30 

! ^4 

Total 


134 

396 

230 

110 

1138 1276 

<322 

Per cent 

(N- 

-736 ) 

53 

32 

15 

! 18 | 37 

; 

I Business Management: 






» j 

j 

i 

i Policy Execution 






\ 1 


1.Finance 


31 

95 

24 

5 

i 29 : 44 

j 5i 

|2.Materials & Supplies 


33 

32 

38 

12 

17 ; 64 


|3. Centralization 


31 

$4 

23 

17 

23 1 63 

j 3$ 

m. Buildings 


29 

7$ 

j 26 

1 12 

: 21 | 54 

I 41 

?5. Education 


37 

43 

1 60 

4p 

(25 ; 55 

j 68 

il Total 


161 

332 

171 

91 

115 230 

]249 

Per cent 

(N 

- 644 ) 

1 5$ 

1 

t 

i 07 

! ' 
i 

| 

15 

16 j 44 

i 40 






























































500 


TABLEXXII 

DATA FROM QUESTI01NAIRES 
SASKATCHEWAN 


Category 


i Functions 

i Respon AdvisjSuper Admin 


Sources of Authority 
Dept. Board Own 


' 


i 

tive • 

itive 1 


tive 

! 

I Instruction 



! 

j 

1 

j 

1 

1 

1 ! 

1 

t 

tive | 

j 


1. The Teacher 

53 

‘ 55 

109 

51 ! 

107 

3 1 

102 

2. The Pupil 

53 

116- 

73 

25 1 

69 1 

5 ’ 

138 

3. In Service Education 

53 

65 

112 

38 1 

64 ! 

0 

148 

1 4. Adult Education 

19 

43 j 

19 

15 

33 I 

6 j 

39 

; 5. Special Classes 

10 

20 

13 

7 

6 1 


26 

Total 

188 

: 299 

326 

3.36 

279 j 

j 22 1 

453 

Per cent (N — j 

752) 

39 

U3 

18 

57 j 

3 

60 

tl Instructional 



i 


! 

I 

1 

Management ! 

-- 

1 


1 ■ 

i f 

1 1 





1. Pupil Records 

53 

i 58 ! 

1 89 

63 

103 

10 

96 

2. Board Policy 

1 41 

63 ; 

S 66 

36 

56 

24 

80 

:3 . Instruction Material j 

i 53 

79 | 

! 85 j 

1 50 ' 

72 

38 

99 

; 4. Committees 

53 

5 77 ! 

1106 

30 

51 

7 

150 

: 5. Research 

51 

56 i 

i 92 

52 

43 

29 

128 

Total 

251 

333 I 

1438 

232 

325 

108 

553 

Per cent 

1004) 

33 

43 

24 

1 

32 

10 

57 

tl Personnel 


; i 

! 

| 




Management 



! 

j 




1. Teachers 

53 

100 

I 82 

30 

38 

89 

85 

2. Non-Profes. Staff 

30 

: 9S 

16 

6 

18 

50 

52 

3. Office Staff 

21 

65 

10 

9 

16 

36 

32 

4. Salary Schedules 

24 

7$ 

9 

9 

22 

38 

36 

5. Working Conditions 

53 

100 

1 82 

30 

46 

66 

100 

Total 

! 1S1 N 

441 

! 199 

84 

Il40 

279 

305 

Per cent (N— 

| 12U 

j 

62 

! 26 

i 12 
! ! 

! 19 

} 

37 ! 

; 1 

i 44 

i 

1 

j 


































































TABLEXXII(continued) 


Sategory 

j 

Respon| 
ses 

Functions 
Advisj Super . 
ory ! visory- 

Admin; 

istra 

tive 

Sources of 
Dept. Board 
Direc Direc 
. tive : tive 

Authority 

Own 

Initia 

tive 

V School Community | 

1 

i 

i 


T 


i 

Relations 


i 

1 

1 


j 

1 



1.Public and Board 

53 

92 j 

77 

41 

j 42 

: 43 

! 126 

12.Public and School 

53 I 

33 

85 

44 

33 

I 34 

143 

3.Groups 

53 

107 1 

85 

20 

24 

10 

173 

4.Media 

46 

so 

71 

32 

! 21 

1 22 

: 144 

| Total 

205 

363 

319 i 

138 

j 120 

tL09 

591 

Per cent (N— j 

820 ) 

44 

40 

16 

14 

| 13 

i 73 

IV Business Management: 





1 

! 

1 

Policy Planning 






< 

1 

f 

il. Finance 

51 

154 

39 

11 

41 

! 61 

l 

; 102 

2.Materials & Supplies 

i 52 

137 

55 

16 

31 

165 

112 

3.Centralization 

49 

125 

57 

14 

> 30 

! 66 

99 

4.Buildings 

51 

124 i 

59 

21 

! 40 

i 72 1 

92 

;5 •Education 

53 

81 

91 

40 

; 70 

1 35 

108 

Total 

256 

621 

301 

102 

j 212 

(299 

513 

Per cent (u — ' 

.024 ) 

60 

30 

10 

! 27 

! 29 : 

44 

jl Business Management: 





1 

| i 

1 

1 j 


Policy Execution 





■■ 

j 

j | 


!l.Finance 

37 

115 

23 

8 

30 

j 50 

68 

l;2.Materials & Supplies 

33 

111 

31 

10 

18 

i 59 | 

75 

3.Centralization 

37 

109 

! 29 

10 

. 18 

63 i 

66 

4.Buildings 

35 

103 

31 

I 16 

, 2 7 

i 57 

56 

5.Education 

49" 

83 

82 

31 

42 

! 61 i 

94 

i Total 

196 

;519 

193 

72 

135 

290 i 

359 

Per cent (N_ 

734) 

! 66 

| 25 

i 

9 

J 

17 

1 

l 

i 33 ' 

45 





































































APPENDIX C 






303 


TABLE XXIII 

UNITS OF ADMINISTRATION AND THE SCHOOL INSPECTOR AND HIS WORK 
(Quoted from Report on CEA-Kellogg Short Course, 1955) 

Briti sh Columbia 

At least five years teaching experience, elementary or secondary, 
is required 

At least five years experience in some administrative capacity 
is required 

Academic Teachers 1 Certificate and B.A. or equivalent degree is 
required, A second degree in education is desirable. 

No Inspector^ certificate is issued 

Appointees screened by Department of Education and by Civil 
Service Commission 

Provincial Inspectors appointed as per Civil Service Act on 
recommendation of the Department of Education 
Municipal Inspectors appointed on recommendation of Board of 
Trustees of the district and Superintendent of Education; approved 
by the Minister of Education. They are civil servants. Recent 
Amendments to the Public Schools Act provides for the appointment 
by the local board, with the concurrence of the Department of 
Education of the provincial Inspector as Chief Administrative Officer 
for the school beard in a school district. Vancouver Inspectors 
appointed by Board of School'Trustees fcr Vancouver. They are not 
civil servants although appointment is approved by the Council 6f 
Public Instruction. 

Alberta 

Five to ten years teaching experience, elementary or secondary, is 
customary but not required 

No administrative experience is required, but about ten years 
experience as principal is customary 

No teaching certificate is required but a Professional First Class 
Certificate is customary 

Ho degree is required but a B.A. or equivalent plus a second degree 
is customary 

No Inspectors certificate is issued 

Appointees usually have had rural school experience and have been 
recommended by the high school inspect as, superintendents and others 
Provincial inspectors appointed by the Minister of Education upon 
recommendation of the Chief Superintendent. 

Edmonton, Clagary, Lethbridge school boards appoint owi inspectors. 
(Provincial inspectors evaluate the work of the junior and senior 
high schools in these cities) 



i.riwi oh 

* 

. • : 

M'&mm so sen 

■■ ■' -' 1 '- ; 

. 

■ 




Mi 










30 £ 


Saskatchewan 


At least three years elementary plus at least one year of secondary 
school teaching experience is customary but not required 
No administrative experience beyond having taught in & large school 
is required* Some experience as a principal is customary. 

A Permanent High School or Advanced Teaching Certificate is required 
B.A. or equivalent degree plus at least one year of post graduate study 
is required. A second degree is customary. 

No Inspectors certificate is issued 

Appointed by Minister of Education after selection by a panel 
appointed by the Public Service Commission. 

Hegina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and North Battlefcrd appoint their own 
superintendents f&r elementary schools. 

Nova Scotia 


Five years elementary plus five years secondary school teaching 
experience is customary but not required 

No administrative experience is required, but five years experience 
as principal is customary 

No teaching certificate is required but a High School Teaching 
Certificate is customary 

B.A. or equivalent degree is required. A second degree is customary. 

No Inspectors certificate is issued 

In making appointments consideration is given to the inspector^ 
personal suitability for the appointment in the particular locality 
concerned 

All inspectors are appointed by the Nova Scotia Civil Service Commission. 
New Brunswick 


Three years elementary plus three years secondary school teaching 
experience is required. Ten to fifteen years in all is customary. 
No administrative experience is required, but some experience as 
principal is customary 

A High School Teaching licence is required 

B.A. degree or equivalent is required and inspector must secure M.A. 
in education within three years of appointment. 

No inspectors certificate is issued 

Inspector must be bilingual for appointment in bilingual area 
County superintendents are appointed by the Department of Education 
Cities appoint their own inspectors. 











A. 


305 


Alberta, Department of Education, Annual Reports , 1920-57. 

_, Report of Commission on Co - Terminus Boundaries , 

Edmonton; Queen 1 s Printer, 1954. 

_, Report on Principal - Superintendent - High School 

Inspector Relationships , 1955. (Mimeographed.) 

Alberta, Statutes, Chap. BO. 

Althouse, J. G., Structure and Aims of Canadian Education , 
Quance Lectures. Toronto: W. J. Gage & Co., 1949. 

American Association of School Administrators. Public 

Relations for America 1 s Schools . Twenty-Eighth Yearbook, 
1950. Washington. 

_. Staff Relations in School Administration . Thirty- 

Third Yearbook, 1953. Washington. 

. School Board - Superintendent Relations . Thirty- 
Fourth Yearbook, 1956. Washington. 

. Superintendent as Instructional Leader . Thirty- 
Fifth Yearbook, 1957. Washington. 

. The High School in a Changing World . Thirty- 
Sixth Yearbook, 1953. Washington. 

Audet, L. P. Le Systeme Scholaire de la Province de Quebec . 
Quebec: Les Presses Universitaires, Laval, 1951. 


B. 


Barnard, C.I. The Functions of the Executive . Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1947. 

Berelson, B. Content Analysis . Glencoe: Free Press, 1952. 


British Columbia, Annual Report of Department of Education , 
1945-56. 
































































306 


British Columbia, Department of Education T Manual of School 
Law and Regulati ons . Council of Public Instruction . 
Victoria: King’s Printer. 

_. Public, Elementary and Secondary Education in British 

Columbia. Victoria: Queen’s Printer, 1955* 

_• School Organization in British Columbia , Victoria: 

King’s Printer, 1925. 

_. School Organization in British Columbia . Report 

Compiled by Provincial Advisory Committee to CEA-Kellogg 
Project in Educational Leadership. Victoria: King’s 
Printer, 1952. 

British Columbia, Statutes . Archives of British Columbia, 1946. 

Byrne, T.C. ”The Historical Development and Evaluation of 
Provincial Leadership in the Field of High School 
Instruction for the Province of Alberta.” Unpublished 
Doctoral thesis. The University of Colorado, 1956. 


C. 


Calder, D. G. S. ”An Outline History of the Department of 

Education, Province of Saskatchewan.” Regina: Department 
of Education. (Typescript.) 

Cameron, A. Report of the Commission into Inquiry into 
Educational Finance , Province of British Columbia. 
Victoria: King’s Printer, 19457 

Campbell, R. F. and Gregg, R. T. Administrative Behavior in 
Education . New York: Harper Bros., 1957. 

Canada, British North America Act and Amendments , 1S67 - 194& . 
Ottawa: King’s Printer, 194$• 

Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics. The Organization and 
Administration of Public Schools in Canada . Ottawa: 
King’s Printer, 1952. 

Canada, Statutes, 3$, Victoria. 

4 and 5, Victoria. 

13 and 14, Victoria. 

30 and 31, Victoria. 
































































307 


Canadian Education Association. Reports of CEA - Kellogg Course 
in Educational Leadership . 1953, 1954, 1955, 1956, 1957. 

_. Units of School Administration and the School 

Inspector and His Work . Report of the CEA-University of 
Alberta Short Course in Educational Leadership, 1955. 

_. Your Child Leaves School . Second Report, Canadian 

Research Committee on Practical Education. Toronto: 

W. J. Gage & Co., 1950. 

Collins, C.P. TT Colonization in the British Empire, 1S37-52." 
Unpublished Master T s thesis. The University of 
Saskatchewan, 1942. 


D. 


Dawson, R. M. The Government of Canada . Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1954* 

Desaulniers, O.J. "Le Role de l’Inspecteur d T Ecoles dans la 
Province de Quebec." Canadian Education , 1956, September. 

Dubin, R. Human Relations in Administration . Englewood 
Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1956. 


E. 


Elliott, C.M. "The Role Inspector in Northern Ontario." 

Twelfth Yearbook, Ontario School Inspectors 1 Association. 
Toronto. 

English, J. F. K. "An Evaluation of the Reorganized System 
of Local School Administration in British Columbia." 
Unpublished Doctoral thesis. The University of Toronto, 
1956. 


F. 


Fairchild, H. P. Dictionary of Sociology . New York: 
Philosophical Library, 1944. 






































308 


Filteau, G. et Allard, L., Un Siecle au Service de 1’Education 
Ins pection d’Ecoles dans JLa Province de Quebec . Quebec: 

Le Department de 1 instruction Publique, 1951. 

Foght, H.W., A Survey of Saskatchewan . A Report to the 

Government of Saskatchewan, Regina: King’s Printer, 191$. 


G • 


Gillespie, E.D. "A Study of Some Emerging Practices in Larger 
Units of Administration in Saskatchewan. TT Unpublished 
Doctoral thesis. Columbia University, 1950. 

Gilles, J.W. "School Divisions in Alberta. Their Organ¬ 
ization, Operation, and Contributions to Educational 
Progress." Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1942. 

Goresky, I. "The Beginning and Growth of Alberta School 
System. Unpublished Master’s thesis, University of 
Alberta, 1944. 

Gross, N., Mason, W.S., McEachern, A.W. Explorations in Role 
Analysis : Studies of the School Superintendency Role. 

New York: John Wiley & Sons, 195$. 


H. 


Hodgins, J. G. (ed.) Historical and Other Papers and 
Documents Illustrative of the Education System of 
Ontario . Toronto: King’s Printer, 1911. 


I. 


J. 


Jonason, J. C. "Larger Units of Administration in Alberta." 

Unpublished Doctoral thesis. The University of Oregon,1951. 






























509 


K. 


Katz, J. (ed.), Canadian Education Today: A Symposium. 
Toronto: McGraw Hill," 1956. 

Kennedy, W.P.M. (ed.), Statutes , Treaties and Documents of 
the Canadian Constitution . 1713-1929. Toronto: Oxford 
University Press, 1932. 

King, H.B. School Finance in British Columbia . Victoria: 
King's Printer, 1935. 


L. 


Lewis, A.C. Handbook on the Administration of Education in 
Ontario. Department of Educational Research. Toronto: 
University of Toronto, 1952. 


M. 


Miller, J. C. Rural Schools in Canada . New York: Teachers 1 
College, University of Columbia, 1913. 

Moffatt, H.P. "Financing Public Education in Nova Scotia TT 
(paper presented to Institute of Public Administration 
in Canada, 1956). 


N. 


New Brunswick, Department of Education, Annual Reports . 1935-57. 

__. Report of the Royal Commission on Financing of 

Schools . Fredericton: King T s Printer, 1954. 

North West Territories, Board of Education, Annual Reports , 
1335-1391. Regina: Printer to Government of North 
West Territories. 

. Ordinances , 1334, 1391, 1392, 1901. 










































310 


National Education Association, Department of Superintendence. 
Educational Leadership . Progress and Possibilities . 
Eleventh Yearbook. Washington: National Education 
Association, 1933. 

Nova Scotia, Department of Education, Annual Reports , 1940-57. 

_. Nova Scotia Looks at Its Schools . Halifax: Queen’s 

Printer, 195&~. 

_• Report of the Royal Commission on Public School 

Finance . Halifax: Queen’s Printer, 1954. 

Nova Scotia, Statutes . Chap. 73. 


0 . 


Ontario, Department of Education, Report of the Royal Com¬ 
mission on Education in Ontario . Toronto: King’s 
Printer, 1950. 

Ontario, Statutes . 34 Victoria, Chap. 33. 


P. 


Parsons, T. The Social System . Glencoe: The Free Press, 1951. 

Phillips, C.E. The Development of Education in Canada . Toronto: 
W. J. Gage & Co., 1957. 

. ’’Canadian Experience in the Reorganization of Local 
Administrative Areas.” Canadian Education . 1951,September. 

Putman, J. H. Egerton Ryerson and Education in Upper Canada . 
Toronto: Wm. Briggs & Co., 1912. 

__, and Weir, G.M. Survey of the School System of 

British Columbia . Victoria: King’s Printer, 1925. 


Q. 


















































r 



G 






t 



* 









f 










311 


R. 


Rees, R. E. "Superintendents of Schools in Relation to 
School Division Boards in the Province of Alberta." 
Unpublished Doctoral thesis. Northwestern University, 
1947. 

Reeves, C.E. School Boards , Their Status, Functions and 
Activities . New York: Prentice Hall, 1954. 

Reeves, A.W. "Equalization of Educational Opportunity in 
Province of Alberta." Unpublished Doctoral thesis, 
Leland Stanford University. 

Reid, N.L. "School District Finance." Regina: Department 
of Education. (Mimeographed.) 

Rowe, F.W. History of Education in Newfoundland . Toronto: 
Ryerson Press, 1952. 


S. 


Saskatchewan, Department of Education, An Explanation of 

Larger Units of School Administration . Regina: King’s 
Printer, 1944. 

Saskatchewan, Annual Report of Department of Education, 
1910-1957 

Saskatchewan, Department of Education, Report of the Com ¬ 
mission on School Administration . Regina": King’s 
Printer, 1940. 

Saskatchewan, Report of Royal Commission on Rural Life and 
Agriculture . Regina: King’s Printer, 1955. 

Saskatchewan, Statutes , Chaps. 41, 76, 170. 

Sears, J.B. Nature of Administration . New York: McGraw Hill 
Co., 1950. 

Shartle, C.T. Executive Performance and Leadership . Englewood 

Shortt, A., and Doughty, A.G. Canada and Its Provinces. 
Toronto: Edinburgh University Press, 1914* 








































IIJ 









c 















r 



t 




; 














- 





t 


c 



t 




















312 


Sissons, C.B. Egerton Ryerson, His Life and Letters. Vols. 
I, II. ~~ 

Smith, D.C. tT A Study in the Origin and Development of the 
Administrative Organization in Educational Systems of 
British Columbia*.' Unpublished Doctoral thesis, 
University of California, 1952. 

Sparby, H.T. "The Structure of Public Education in Canada." 
Canadian Education , 1950. 


T. 


Tead, 0. The Art of Administration . New York: McGraw 
Hill, 1951. 


U. 


Urwick, L. Elements of Administration . New York: Harper 
Bros., 1943* 


V. 

W. 


Walker, B.E. "Public Education: Organization and Curriculum, 
l£$9-1951. n Unpublished Doctoral thesis. Stanford 
University, 1951. 








































