


(9.X UBBIS 

TOOtBSKMIS 

ajMKWItllS 













THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE AND HJBLIC SCHOOLS IN ALBERTA 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE COMMITTEE ON GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

SISTER L. A. HOCHSTEIN F.C.J. 
CALGARY, ALBERTA 
SEPTEMBER, 1954 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/romancatholicsepOOhoch 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The writer wishes to express her appreciation 
for the encouragement and assistance received during 
the preparation of this work. The helpful advice* 
pertinent observation* and unfailing interest in the 
development of the thesis by Mr. B. E. Walker* Mr. H. 
T. Sparby* and Dr. A. L. Doucette are gratefully ack¬ 
nowledged. The writer also expresses her gratitude 
to Mr. A. A. O’Brien* Superintendent of Edmonton 
Separate Schools* to Mr. R. A. Cannon* Superintendent 
of Calgary Separate Schools* and to Mr. J. V. VanTighem* 
Assistant Superintendent of the Calgary Separate Schools* 
for valuable information on the Edmonton and Calgary 
Separate Schools; to Mr. W. E. Finbow* Editor-Librarian 
of the Department of Education of Alberta* for data 
relating to the Roman Catholic Separate and Public 
Schools of the province; to several provincial super¬ 
intendents for their cooperation; and to the principals 
and secretaries of the Roraan Catholic Separate and Public 
Schools for information and assistance. 


iii 
















. > 

•.• • ■, ; . v 



. 







PREFACE 


PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM 

It is the purpose of this study to note the beginnings, to consider the 
problems, to estimate the trends, and to trace the development of Roman Catholic 
Separate and Public Schools from 1885 ~ 1953 in the territory which is now Alberta. 
Since a number of these schools have their origin in the early mission schools 
the study begins with a consideration of the contributions of the early mission¬ 
aries, and of the Catholic Schools opened before 1885. 

DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Throughout this treatise the term Catholic Education will be used to desig¬ 
nate, "the organized development and equipment of all the powers of a human being, 
moral, intellectual, and physical, by and for their individual and social uses, 
directed towards the union of these activities with their Creator and final end."'*' 

Separate Schools in a strict sense are "dissentient schools, that are 
established by the denominational minority, Roman Catholic or Protestant, in cases 
where the minority prefer to support such schools rather than to patronize the 
public school." Roman Catholic Separate Schools are separate schools established 
by a Roman Catholic minority. 

^T.J. Corcoran, S.J., cited by W.J. McGucken, S.J. in The Philo s ophy of Catholic 
Education , (New York: The America Press), p.7. 

^G.M. Weir The Separate School Question in Canada , (Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1934), 
p.14. Mr. Weir was Professor of Education and Head of the Department of Education, 
University of British Columbia. 


iv 














■ • _■ . I. 


• • ' • i • ^ ... J . s •' • ; v i i yj C . : 

* j >■ .• o’ .vi,.Co t i Xu 

‘ ^ .i • V • ,< 0 . O.i-J. 0 . 1 ! ILV'. C 

• • J 'C • - J. r. .. /. 

: • •• . ■ ■ f .<■■■' r '• : V.'V .OO" ; v r 


• - - ' ' • ■/ '• > ■ ■■■ ;■ i \■ . vi' ,■ ' {■:. .j *• .i/.?: 






- 







: ..v ; 

• oi 0 i v v .'i y. :.vi - .ij t .,.,.10/ 

v • ...r .• „■ •. :..'M 







t 

1 s,r ‘ y . .... 

. 

, .'. , *.«( i : 




' V ’ v . u i.; 

, - .'.V .. . .r; 




. 

•' ; ■ ..' v> 



■ i.;|. 




:: ' ' » ' v' vi Ovi 






0' 




■ 




' . ' ul. J.’. 






t v,* 




: > 




/ : } /. .! ; * Ijy . 1 ■: { 1 i ■ ; sj.t •. V 'J, . J 

. 

.■ ’ ■ 










Roman Catholic Public Schools are those public schools established between 


1885 and 1901 and in which the majority of ratepayers were Roman Catholics. 

Publicly Supported Schools are those schools which are financed by local 
taxation supplemented by grants from the Department of Education. 

Catholic philosophy will be used to designate n all the philosophical- 

1 

theological bases of the Catholic outlook on life.” 

SOURCES OF MATERIAL 

The sources of information used in the part of this work which deals with 
the historical and constitutional background are chiefly: The Beginning and 
Growth of the Alberta School System, by Gore sky; History of the Catholic Church 
in the Canadian West , by Morice; The Separate School Question in Canada , by Weir; 
The Educational System of Alberta , by Hutchinson; History of Alberta , by McRae; 
Ordinances of the North-West Territories; Statutes of the Province of Alberta; 
and the Report of the Board of Education of the North-West Territories, 1885-1691. 

For information in the other sections of the work the Ordinances and 
Reports of the Department of Education have been freely used. These sources have 
been supplemented by frequent conferences and communications with the Department 
of Education, superintendents and principals of schools, and leaders in Catholic 
education; and by questionnaires sent to the superintendents of areas in which 
the residents are predominantly of the Roman Catholic faith and to the princi¬ 
pals of the schools in these districts. 

1 ” “ — " — ~ — 

W.J. McGucken, S.J., op. cit., p.l. 


v 























- 




» . . - .... . - - . ... .. . ■-. .... .*. ■ . ■_ . 










. 














' 










































































METHOD OF TREATING THE PROBLEM 


In order to trace the development of Roman Catholic Separate and Public 
Schools in their proper relationship to the educational system as a whole y the 
historical and constitutional background has been given in each chapter , A 
rather detailed treatment of the progress and trends of Catholic education 
within the limits set by the educational statutes follows. 


vi 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PREFACE ........................... iv 

INTRODUCTION ........................ 1 

Chapter 

I. PIONEER DAIS AND PREPARATION FOR PROVINCIAL STATUS 

EARLY TERRITORIAL PERIOD TO 1885 

Before 1875 ................ 4 

North-West Territories Act 1875 ...... 9 

MIDDLE TERRITORIAL PERIOD 1885-1892 

Board of Education. ............ 13 

Changing Status of Catholic Schools .... 17 

Teacher Certification, Examinations and 
Secondary Education ............ 19 

Catholic Schools 1885-1892 . 21 

LATER TERRITORIAL PERIOD 1892-1905 

Ordinances of 1892-1902 .. 30 

Catholic Schools 1892-1905 ... . 33 

II. FROM PROVINCIAL AUTONOMY TO THE ENLARGED UNIT OF 
ADMINISTRATION 1905-1936 

HISTORICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND. ... 41 

MAINTENANCE OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 1905-1936 

Local Taxation. .............. 4$ 

Government Grants ............. 53 

Maintenance Problems. .. 54 

BILINGUAL EDUCATION .............. 56 

NEW ROMAN CATHOXHC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 1905-1920 . 59 

DEVELOPMENT OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 1905-1920 ... 65 

NEW ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 1920-1936 . 73 

DEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING DISTRICTS 1920-1936 . . 79 


vii 

















































. . 

















Chapter Page 

III. THE LARGER UNIT OF ADMINISTRATION 1936-1953 

HISTORICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND . 94 

THE LARGE UNIT OF ADMINISTRATION AND MINORITY 

RIGHTS. 96 

MAINTENANCE OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 

Local Taxation . .. 104 

Government Grants. 109 

Maintenance Problems . Ill 

ALBERTA TEACHERS 1 ASSOCIATION. 112 

BILINGUAL EDUCATION. 114 

NEW SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTILL GTS 1936-1953 116 

DEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING DISTRICTS 1936-1953 . . . 125 

IV. A SUMMARY OF OBSERVATIONS OF THIS STUDY.. 148 

APPENDIX 

A. NAMES OF MEMBERS OF THE FIRST SCHOOL BOARD AND THE 
FIRST TEACHERS IN ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOL 

DISTRICTS IN ALBERTA 1885-1953 .. 151 

B. ENROLMENT IN ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 

From 1886-1930. 156 

From 1940-1953 . .. 157 

C. THE COUNTY ACT .... .. 159 

D. APPROXIMATE LOCATION OF ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE AND 
PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICTS OF ALBERTA RELATIVE TO 

EDMONTON OR CALGARY .. 162 

E. QUESTIONNAIRES USED AS ONE OF THE SOURCES OF 

INFORMATION FOR THIS STUDY. 165 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 168 


viii 




































.1 


. 












• . . 

.. . C J . ’ VI ‘ . 

.. . . . . ov, !•: ' 

. . . , ' . 

' 




. 








. 

. ^ ..... 


. v . ' • ... 



. , I 


























LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS 


Figure Page 

1. Map of Alberta Showing Roman Catholic Separate 

School Districts Established before 1905 ......... 23 

2. Map of Alberta Showing Location of Catholic Separate 

School Districts in 1936 .......... . 75 

3. Map of the City of Calgary Showing Location of 

Separate Schools in 1953 . 81 

4. Map of the City of Edmonton Showing Location of 

Separate Schools in 1953 .. 84 

5. Map of Alberta Showing Location of Catholic Separate 

School Districts in 1953 . H7 

6. Graph Showing the Enrolment in Roman Catholic Separate 

Schools 1885-195 3• .*.. . 158 


ix 











INTRODUCTION 


The nineteenth century was an important period in the history of the 
North-West for within it white men in increasing numbers ventured into this until- 
then little known territory. Many came fired with zeal for the material gain 
afforded by the fur trade, or the honour and renown of venturous exploration; 
others eager for the spiritual profit of the Indians faced danger and hardship, 
hunger and cold that they might bring to the natives the tidings of the gospel. 

In this mission, education had its place, and even in the early period insistence 
on moral education was the distinctive characteristic of Catholic education. 
Throughout the years that followed, when the population of the North-West be¬ 
came predominantly Protestant, the question of Catholic education for Catholic 
children was a vital issue. 

In fact, one is forced to acknowledge that second only to the struggle 
for responsible government the question of minority rights in education caused 
most controversy and engendered deepest feelings of animosity. That this 
should be the case is not difficult to understand when one considers the aims 
and objectives of education. Of necessity there would be difference of 
opinion, for any philosophy of education is based upon something still more 
fundamental, namely, upon a philosophy of life. A Catholic philosophy of 
education is built upon and flows from a Catholic philosophy of life. Not 
that Catholic teachers find the aims and objectives of secular education 
unacceptable because they are vicious or wrong in themselves, but because 
they ignore or neglect some fundamental aspect of man 8 s nature and final end. 

In the words of Pope RLus XI education consists "in preparing man 
for what he must be and for what he must do here below in order to obtain the 
































. ■ 




' - ' 'i. .. -• "J 



■ 


., v. .... v. , . . : . 





. 



. 

c: J 






... ... - •. . . 



















































■ 










2 


sublime end for which he was created'*^ 

Pope Leo XIII wrote regarding education: 

God has divided the government of the human race between two 
authorities, ecclesiastical and civil, establishing one over 
things Divine, the other over things human. Both are supreme, 
each in its own domain; each has its own boundaries which 
limit its activities. These boundaries are determined by the 
peculiar nature and the proximate end of each, and describe as 
it were a sphere within which, with exclusive right, each may 
develop its influence. As however the same subjects are under 
the two authorities, it may happen that the same matter, though 
from a different point of view, may come under the competence and 
jurisdiction of each of them .,, The education of youth is 
precisely on© of those matters that belong to the Church and to 
the State, though in different ways ... Therefore between the 
two powers there must reign a well-ordered harmony ... Everything 
(in education) ... that has reference to the salvation of souls 
and the worship of God, whether by its nature or by its end, is 
subject to the jurisdiction and discipline of the Church. What¬ 
ever else is comprised in the civil and political order, rightly 
comes under the authority of the State . 1 2 

Generally speaking. Separate and Public Schools are the same. They 
follow the same courses ©f studies, use the same text books, meet the same 
standards, with teachers prepared in the same training schools. Essentially, 
however. Catholics believe there is an important difference. This difference 
grows out of the aims and objectives of the respective schools. Since 
secular schools are composed of pupils of so many and varied creeds, it is 
most difficult to arrive at unified goals and purposes, and equally difficult 
to give moral and religious instruction. The ultimate objective of Catholic 
education, on the other hand, can be stated very simply. In the words of 
Pope Pius XI; 

The proper and immediate end of Christian education is to co¬ 
operate with divine grace in forming the true and perfect Christian, 
that is, to form Christ Himself in those regenerated by Baptism ... 

For precisely this reason Christian education takes in the whole 


1 Pius XI, Christian Education of Youth , (New York: The America Press, 1936), p.3. 

2 Pope Leo XIII Immortal© Dei, cited by Pope Pius XI, ibid ., pp. 16-17. 



























. . 




























, . t . : 



... 





























' 

















' 



3 


aggregate of human life, physical and spiritual, intellectual and 
moral, individual, domestic, and social, not with a view of reducing 
it in any way, but in order to elevate, regulate, and perfect it, in 
accordance with the example and teaching of Christ. 

Hence the true Christian, product of Christian education, is the 
supernatural man who thinks, judges, and acts constantly and con-” 
sistently in accordance with right reason illumined by the super¬ 
natural light of the example and teaching of Christ; in other words, 
to use the current term, the true and finished man of character. 

For, it is not every kind of consistency and firmness of conduct 
based on subjective principles that makes true character, but only 
constancy in following the eternal principles of justice. 

... The true Christian does not renounce the activities of this 
life, he does not stunt his natural faculties; but he develops and 
perfects them, by co-ordinating them with the supernatural. He 
thus ennobles what is merely natural in life and secures for it new 
strength in the material and temporal order, no less than in the 
spiritual and eternal.^ 

With this ultimate aim of Christian education there never has been, 
there never can be a change. Into this ultimate aim every type ©f Catholic 
educational institution must fit from kindergarten to graduate school; 
otherwise it has no right to be called a Catholic school. 


1 Pope Pius XI, ibid .. pp. 32-33. 



























- 





■ 

































■ 





■ . ■ 


































CHAPTER I 


PIONEER DAYS AND PREPARATION FOR PROVINCIAL STATUS 

Before 1875 relatively few people were interested in Western Canada. 
Missionaries, eager to spend their lives in the service of God and their 
fellowmen, explorers and furtraders in search of adventure and wealth, were 
among the first whitemen to cross the plains. No formal education was under¬ 
taken. In 1875 the first provision for instruction was made by the Federal 
Government. Roman Catholics and Protestants shared equally in the opportuni¬ 
ties. By the Ordinance ©f 1884 a definite system of education was established. 

At the time M it was rather expected that the minority in the North-West 
Territories would be Protestant 11 .^ A thoroughly equitable arrangement, 
satisfactory to both religious denominations was agreed upon, but during the 
ensuing years the population changed, Catholics became the minority, and a 
series of amendments in 1885 to 1901 gradually took from them many of the 
privileges they enjoyed. The Church ever mindful of her mission of teacher 
and guardian of souls continued her work through the Catholic Separate, 

Roman Catholic Public and a limited number of Public Schools. It will be 
of Interest to examine these changes in greater detail. 

EARLY TERRITORIAL PERIOD TO 1885 
Before 1875 

Before the middle of the nineteenth century Catholic missionaries 
penetrated into the area which has since become Alberta. It was the natural 

■kx.M. Weir, The Separate School Question in Canada, (Toronto? person Press, 1934) 

Appendix 1, p. 243. 
























































5 


waterways of the Saskatchewan and the Mackenzie that decided the area in which 
their apostolic zeal would first be exercised. Lac La Biche* Lac Ste. Anne and 
Smoking Lake^- were the meeting places of Indians and furtraders, hence at these 
points the Hudson Bay Company had established their trading posts. It is to be 
expected that these would be the sites of the first missions established by 
that devoted band of missionaries who so heroically ministered to the spiritual 
needs of the wandering western populations. 

Records indicate that the first of these missionaries to come to the 
Edmonton district were Fathers Blanchet and Demers* who* in the course of a 
journey across the western prairies in 1838 visited Fort Edmonton. In answer 
to an urgent request* probably of John Rowland* governor of the fort* that a 
missioner be sent to them* Father Thibault came to Fort Edmonton in the spring 
of 1842.2 He founded the mission at Lac Ste. Anne and visited the Fort 
periodically for the purpose of ministering to the Catholic population there. 

In 1845 Father de Smet spent sometime in Edmonton on the occasion of his heroic 
trip to the North-West as ,, Peacemak@r ,, between the Blackfeet and the Flatheads 
who were irreconcilable enemies. 

During these early years of missionary endeavour no formal education 
was undertaken. Efforts were directed to fulfilling the more immediate needs 
of establishing the basis of civilization through the teachings of the Christian 
way of life. 

In 1852 Father Lacombe* that intrepid missionary* was assigned to the 
territory of the North-West. He spent the first year studying Cree and acting 
as schoolmaster for both old and young* though he directed his efforts mainly 
to instructing the children. Having mastered the language of the natives 

Smoking Lake is now known as Smoky Lake. 

^Morice, Rev. A.G., Histoire de L’Eglise Catholique dans L 1 Quest Canadian, 
(Montreal: Granger Freres* 1912), 1, p. 243. 















...... . . V .. 
















■ 


. 











... i 












6 


Father Lacombe entered immediately upon a most strenuous, active life. It 
was not until 1859 that he was able to make a continuous advance in education. 

In that year three nuns. Sisters of Charity of Montreal arrived at Lac Ste. Anne 
and opened a home that would be a boarding school, orphanage, hospital and 
refuge for the aged. 

In 1861 at Edmonton the first formed school in the present area of 
Alberta was opened. Father Lacombe took advantage of the presence of an 
Oblate novice, Brother Scollen, later Father Scollen, to open the first 
regular school that existed west of Fort Garry. The building in Edmonton was 
a log house within the Fort; the pupils some twenty in number were the children 
of the Company’s clerks and servants. 

By August 1862 another school was in operation at Lac La Biche. Sisters 
Guenette, Damois and Tisseur, Grey Sisters, were in charge of this institution 
which became a refuge for the blind and aged and an orphanage and school for 
the little waifs and strays of the North-West. In 1870 Father Lacombe’s 
youngest sister, Christine, inspired by her brother’s accounts of the needs 
of the missions came west with him to fulfill the role of teacher in this 
school at Lac La Biche. 

In March 1863 Sisters came to St. Albert from Lac Ste. Anne to 
establish a school In the already flourishing mission. Their convent, built 
by Father Grouard and Brother Alexis, was a two-storied house, the first of 
the kind that had been raised in those vast and desolate regions. In this 
centre under the judicious care of the zealous missionaries and teachers real 
progress was made. 

In a work entitled ’’Ocean to Ocean” by Reverend G. Grant of Halifax, 
Secretary to the Expedition of the Engineer in Chief of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway, the following passage appears:- ’’Crossing the Sturgeon River, a hill 
rose before us crowned with the Cathedral Church of the Mission, the house of 
the Bishop, and the house of the Sisters of Charity ... The Sisters took us to 














7 


their orphanage, they have twenty-four children in it, chiefly girls." 

The settlement and work of the mission of St. Albert and the surround¬ 
ing area was described by Lord Milton and Doctor Cheadle in their joint work 
"North West Passage by Land": "At Lake St. Alban’s about nine miles north of 
the Fort, a colony of freemen have formed a small settlement which is presided 
over by a Romish priest ... The priest’s house was a pretty white building 
with garden round it, and adjoining it the chapel, school and nunnery ..." 

"He had built a chapel and established schools for the half“breed 
children ... Altogether this little settlement was the most flourishing 
community we had seen since leaving Red River. They have established stations 
at lie a la Crosse, St. Alban’s, St. Ann’s and other places, far out in the 
wilds, undeterred by danger or hardship, and gathering half-breeds and Indians 
around them, have taught with considerable success the elements of civilization 
as well as of religion." 

A memoir on the territory which was to comprise the future diocese of 
St. Albert was sent in June 18?1 to Cardinal Barnabo, prefect of the Propaga¬ 
tion of the Faith. In this report Bishops Tache and Grandin declare that 
fifteen missionaries, one Canadian and fourteen French were working in the 
area, and within its limits "there are five elementary schools, all the pupils 
of which are Catholics.’’^ 

This closes the account of the first phase of education in Alberta. 
There were no spectacular accomplishments; we would not expect that there 
should be. The natural law of human progress is that growth is gradual. 

Every great and noble achievement, every genuine contribution to human wel¬ 
fare has had a humble beginning and has passed through a period of trial in 
which it was slowly and imperceptibly strengthened. The most important of all 
contributions to society, education for Christian living, would of necessity 
follow this general plan. Having done so, it would as surely bear genuine 
fruit in the years that followed. 

^Morice, ibid., II, p. 244. 













8 


Marked changes followed in rapid succession during the years immediately 
preceding and immediately following 1875. Settlers came out in steadily in¬ 
creasing numbers. The North-West took on a value apart from its being a potential 
source of furs. By an Order-in-Counci1 of the British government dated June 23, 
18?0 Rupert's Land and the North-West Territories became a part of the Dominion 
of Canada, and the parliament of Canada was given full rights to "legislate for 
the welfare and good government" 1 of the inhabitants of this territory. 

Accordingly the North-West Territories Act of 1870 was passed. It pro¬ 
vided a government for this territory which was to consist of a council of twelve 
members with the Lieutenant-Governor of Manitoba acting as president of the 

o 

council. The powers of this council were but vaguely defined, but it proceeded 
to legislate on such matters as seemed advisable in order to provide good govern¬ 
ment in the territory. 

At this time the State gave no help towards education. The whole burden 
was borne by the parents and missionaries. In this matter Canada, though a new 
country, was not far behind other nations. In England, for example, up to 1870 
less than one-third of the country's children were in schools receiving a state 
grant; less than a quarter were in schools supported by voluntary subscriptions 
aided, very slightly in most cases, by school fees. The rest, numbering about 
one-half of the total number of children, were in no schools at all. It is not 
surprising, then, to find that it was not until 1875 that the government of the 
dominion made legislation regarding education in the North-West Territories. 

Oliver E.H., Prof. The Canadian North-West . Vol. II Ottawa, Qnt. Publications 
of the Canadian Archives, No. 9, Government Printing Bureau 1915, pp. 939-944. 
Cited by I. Goresky in The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta School System . 
Unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Alberta, May, 1944 p. 16. 

2 

An Act to make further provision for the Government of the North West 
Territories. Statutes o f Ca nada , 1870, Chap. 16. 













. • 




. 








' 




■ 








. 


















. 











































. 


- 
















9 


North-West Territories Act 1875 

By 1875 the region west of Manitoba had increased in importance. A 
separate governor together with a council, not exceeding five members was 
provided for by the bill of 1875. The Government at Ottawa still intended to 
guide the destinies of the West for a clause in this act which outlined the 
duty of the Governor stated that he was "to administer the Government under 
instructions from time to time given him by Orders-in-Gouncil or by the 
Secretary of State. 

There is a Section of this North-West Territories Act which merits 
special consideration. 

'‘When, and as soon as any system of taxation shall be adopted, in 
any district or portion of the North-West Territories, the lieutenant 
Governor by and with the consent of the Council or Assembly, as the case 
may be, shall pass all necessary ordinances in respect to education, but 
it shall therein be always provided that a majority of the ratepayers of 
any district or portion of the North-West Territories or any lesser por¬ 
tion or sub-division thereof, by whatever name the same be known may establish 
such schools therein as they may think fit, and make the necessary assessment 
and collection of taxes therefor, and further that the minority of the rate¬ 
payers therein, whether Protestant or Catholic, may establish separate 
schools therein, and that, in such latter case, the ratepayers establishing 
such Protestant or Homan Catholic separate schools shall be liable to the 
assessments of such rates as they may impose upon themselves in respect 
thereof ." * 2 

The above Statute might astonish one in its breadth and the fairness 
of its provision but it is well to note that, "It was rather expected by the 
Federal Parliament of 1875, according to Mr. Scott, that the minority in the 
North-West Territories would be Protestant."^ Further, it was but maintain¬ 
ing the spirit ©f the British North America Act of 1867 which was formulated 
in keeping with Emerson’s theory which he states in his "Essay on Politics." 

He says, "There is a middle measure which satisfies all parties be they never 
so many, or so resolute for their own." 


^North-West Territories Act, Statutes of Canada 1875 - Chap. 45. 

2 Ibid . Section II 

^Extracts from Hansard Debates Mr. W. Scott, March 31, 1905 Hansard p. 3614 
cited by G.M. Weir, op.cit ., Appendix I, p. 243. 


































































■ 

■ 


. 




■ 












' 























































10 


The North-West Territories Act definitely made provision for Separate 
Schools with powers similar to those of Ontario and Quebec. The purpose of 
establishing such a system was stated as the desire to lay down a general 
principle with respect to public instruction which would be acceptable to 
both parties in the Dominion Parliament. At the time it fulfilled its end. 
While making provision for the development of schools the state assumed no 
responsibility; it made no attempt to secularize education; rather it 
strengthened the hands of those in whom education reposed, the Church and 
the parents. 

To realize the full import of the above statement one has but to 
recall the incident relating to the school of St. Laurent, a district in 
the northern part ©f the present province of Saskatchewan. The case is 
significant of the trends of the period. This school founded in 1875 was 
no mission school. It was built by the Metis as part of the scheme of 
Father Andre to form a colony with economic security. The Metis, at first 
full of enthusiasm and zeal were not too assiduous in the management of the 
school and so in 1877 the missionaries offered to take it over as a mission 
school. The offer was hardly accepted before the leaders changed their mind. 
Led by Moise Ouellette and Pibrre Landry, the Metis attempted to set it up 
on property closer to Ouellette's home on the opposite bank of the South 
Saskatchewan river. Being fully aware of their position as citizens of the 
newly formed North-West Territory they turned to the State for aid. They 
made a petition for finances to support their newly proposed school and to 
pay the teacher. The matter was considered but no assistance was given. 

The position of the Council made it impossible for it to give any 
aid for educational purposes. At that time the Dominion Government had no 
funds for this purpose nor had it made provision for any kind of taxation. 












. 














•' 








. v . • *- ! 

.. i :t . • ri.• v 

. •' • . . 














. 

• 



















- 













■ 

. 






















’ ■ 






11 


The reply given the people of St. Laurent was couched in the following terns: 
”... there are no funds ... applicable to educational purposes, and the 
Council do not think it expedient, at present, to consider the question of 
establishing a system of taxation. 

Such disinterestedness on the part of the State could not persist. 

The time had come when it was obliged to assume a more direct responsibility. 
It was in the field of finance that it began to make provisions. During the 
years 1878 and 1879 there was much discussion and various schemes were pro¬ 
posed. Finally on December 10, 1878 the Lieutenant-Governor included in his 
estimate an item of $2,000.00 for schools. In July 1879 the fora of the 
proposed aid was as follows: "Propose aid schools supported by missions or 
voluntary subscriptions of settlers to extent of paying half teachers’ 
salaries where minimum average of fifteen scholars taught.”^ 

Throughout this period the Saskatchewan Elver was the highway to the 
west. Although there were small settlements in the south around the North- 
West Mounted Police posts at Fort Macleod and Calgary, it was in the north 
that the greatest work in education was being accomplished. In Edmonton, as 
was formerly noted a Catholic school had been opened within the Fort. A 
public school seems to have been taught in 1874-75 but the financial diffi¬ 
culties did not permit it to become a permanent establishment. By 1880 
classes were again taught and in 1881 and 1882 definite advances were made 
for the Dominion Government accepted the submission with request to the 
school grant. It was some time, however, before financial problems were 
really solved. The changes from voluntarily supported schools to tax sup¬ 
ported schools did not take place without a struggle. 

1 Journal of the Council of the North-West Territories. 1877. 

^ Journal of the Council of the North-West Territories , 1879. 















- 








, 














■ 





- 


















' . : - : ■ --V. ■ '• •• • 


. ...\ ... . ■ . 








V . . . . ‘ 











12 


Throughout this period the school at St. Albert was progressing in a 
remarkable way. Mention was made earlier of its inauguration and the initial 
successes. The Edmonton Bulletins of IBB2, IBB 3 and 1B84 contain many refer¬ 
ences to activities in this school. There are announcements concerning visits 
of church dignitaries at closing exercises and marks obtained by individual 
pupils. 

By 1882 two new buildings with provision for boarding pupils had re¬ 
placed the original structure. In this way students living at a distance 
were enabled to profit by a Catholic education. The attendance during this 
year was between 60 and 75 pupils daily. These pupils received a thorough 
training in the Christian way of life, and in addition to the usual subjects 
needlework, art and French were taught. In 1881 a commercial course was al¬ 
ready being offered in this institution. The fee for this course was $150.00.^ 

The population of the neighbouring districts was increasing! in fact 
the Edmonton Bulletin of December 27, 1884 reports that three more schools 
were being organised in the St. Albert vicinity - aU Catholic schools. The 
following year a special examination was held in the St. Albert school. 

Visitors from Edmonton who were present for the occasion reported that the 
school was made up of five divisions and that examinations were conducted in 
both English and French. 

Southern Alberta was relatively slow in attracting white settlers. 
Calgary was still a very modest trading centre in 1881 nor did Macleod present 
a more promising appearance. Bishop Grandin accompanied by Father Doucet 
visited Fort Macleod on June 22 of that year. Despite the poverty and primi¬ 
tive facilities of the inhabitants the missionaries were well received. Ever 
mindful of the value of education the Bishop in a report of this visit, made 
the following statements ‘‘There are here a number of Irish Catholics ... 

^• Edmonton Bulletin . December 17, 1881. 








. V 

- 

.. ' 

. 




' 


































■ 






















13 

They need a priest and a school, I understand and desire it as much as they, 
but how are we to manage?"^ 

Two years later, in 1883 Macleod had a priest and a small, gratuitous 
school. Father L. Van Tighem, the missionary of the south, daily assumed the 
role of schoolmaster for about twelve children. 

MIDDLE TERRITORIAL PERIOD 1885 - 1892 

Board of Education 1885-1892 

In 1883 the appointed Council for the North-West Territories was 
succeeded by a Council consisting of six appointed and six elected members. 

A definite change was seen in the business of the Council when it was 
strengthened by elected members. 

Mr. F. Oliver, ©f Edmonton, the only elected member from Alberta, 
made the proposal in 1883 to establish a school system in the North-West 
Territories. The following year, early in the session he introduced a school 
biH. On July 8, Judge Rouleau, an appointed member of the Council introduced 
another school bill to remedy the legal weaknesses of the Oliver bill and to 
insure the privileges of Roman Catholics. On August 6 , 1884, a third bill 
drafted to embody the better suggestions of both was passed. It was known as 
15 An Ordinance Providing for the Organization of Schools in the North-West 
Territories. w It established a system in which separate schools constituted 
an important part. 

Under this Ordinance a public school district could be formed in areas, 
not exceeding thirty-six square miles, in which there resided four or more 
families having at least ten children of school age. Recognizing the 

^ Missions des Oblats de Mari e Immaculee , Vol. XX p. 318. cited by Morice, 
op. cit, Vol. II, p. 30SI 






■ 




























































14 


possibility of fewer settlers of the minority denomination in the area, 
separate school districts could be formed out of one or several public school 
districts. Protestants and Roman Catholics were liable for taxes only to 
their respective schools. Provision was made for devoting the last hour of 
the afternoon to religious instruction. 

After the lieutenant- Governor had created a school district the resi¬ 
dents of that district elected a Board of Trustees. The duties of these 
trustees were defined as follows; They were to '‘exercise all the powers 
vested in them which are necessary for the maintenance ©f the district ... to 
engage the teacher, to inspect the school, to purchase land to erect buildings, 
to provide equipment and out of the funds ©f the district to provide books and 
slates for the children of the indigent and a library for the district. 

In the Ordinance of 1884 provision was made for financing the schools. 
Each district was t© raise money by local taxation and in addition received a 
grant from the Council of the North-West Territories. If a district were 
situated within a municipality, which was the local unit ©f government in the 
Territories, after it had made Its estimates it was to call upon the munici¬ 
pality to collect the required funds which must not exceed five mills on the 
dollar. If a district were not within a municipality (as was usually the 
case) it appointed its own assessor and levied a tax on land within the 
district.^ 

The above legislation created adequate machinery for erecting districts, 
and regulating schools as well as for financing them but there were difficulties 
in putting the machinery into effect. The prospects of Alberta ever becoming 
a rich agricultural district were not considered favourable. Consequently 

^Journals of Council of North-West Territories , 1884, Sec’s. 74-75. 

^Journals of Council of North-West Territories, 1884, Sec’s. 91-96. 










.. •. • •: . ' ' »'■ ' ■■ - ' 

■ 


■ 








1 




■ 






v 




■ 





















15 


there was still an indifference toward education* and occasionally even 
opposition was shown by the settlers. The people were* as a rule* quit© 
willing that the schools should remain independent institutions maintained 
by public subscriptions in order that they might avoid the school tax* which 
would be imposed as soon as a government system was enforced. 

Edmonton affords the most striking example of the struggle which 
characterized the initial efforts to enforce the legal provisions. There was 
resolute resistance to an established school system. Many citizens energeti¬ 
cally opposed the levying of school taxes. Finally opposition ceased in 
victory for the school system. Although irritation continued for some time* 
organization went on rapidly. 

The keynote of the 1884 system* however* was the establishing of a 
Board of Education appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council. It was 
not to exceed twelve members* six of whom were to be Roman Catholic* six 
Protestant. In addition to the ordinary powers granted while sitting as a 
body* it could resolve itself into sections, one Catholic and one Protestant. 
Each section had the following powers over the schools which were under its 
control: 

1) To have under its control and management the schools of the section and 
to make* from tin© to time* such regulations as may be deemed fit for 
their general government and disciplines and the carrying out of the 
provisions of the Ordinances. 

2) To arrange for the proper examination* grading and licensing of its 
teachers, the recognition of certificates obtained elsewhere and for 
the withdrawal of the license upon sufficient cause. 

3) To select all the books* maps and globes ... provided ... such selection 
by the Catholic section of the Board shall be subject to approval of the 
competent religious authority. 
































v p 


















16 


4) To appoint inspectors, who shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
section appointing them. 

Such were the most pertinent provisions of the Ordinance passed in 1884. The 
system established bears very close resemblance to that existing in Quebec and 
was most satisfactory to Roman Catholics, but it was in force for only a few 
years. 

Unfortunately, the Roman Catholics were not equipped to take advantage 
of this equitable law. The west was booming. The fanatical popularity of 
Riel had deprived the missionaries of their influence over the Catholic Metis 
at a time when they most needed the prudent counsel of wise leaders. The 
Rebellion of 1885 and its aftermath of white immigration quickly gave rise to 
a Protestant majority unsympathetic to a Catholic cause which it unjustly 
identified with rebellion. Such a situation did much to hasten a tendency 
which was already world-wide, namely the complete secularization of education 
under state control. True, this had been a gradual process since the six¬ 
teenth century but the latter half of the nineteenth century saw a definite 
policy formed and pursued. 

The state had come to realize that the child of to-day is the citizen 
of to-morrow and the schools of to-day determine the government of to-morrow. 

To the Protestant majority of a territory which was struggling for p rovincial 
autonomy and which looked with disfavour on any established privilege as a 
potential obstacle to obtaining responsible government denominational schools 
of the type provided by the Ordinance of 1884 were undesirable. These leaders 
determined to establish a uniform system of education subject to a common 
inspectorate and common examinations^ they resolved to enact uniform qualifi¬ 
cations for teachers and to allow one approved list of textbooks. The Separate 
school privileges had become so closely bound up with the political struggle 
that from the beginning the cause was lost. The fact that their privileges 














> 

. 

' 













■ 

• ■ 










1 




v c .. • . u ' ■ ... . . v • 




, 

; . , j 


■ 




























17 


were vested in the right of law with dominion sanction did not make them more 
popular. 


1 o 

Mr. Tarte (quoting the Hon. T. C. Casgrain^) used the following words 
in describing the events of years 1885-1892. 

"No one had the right to deprive the Catholics of the North-West 
Territories of their Separate Schools. The Hon. Mr. Haultain .... 
understood that pretty well. That is why he went in a roundabout way. 

He overhauled all the Ordinances relating to schools! and while the 
New Ordinance reaffirms the rights of Catholics to Separate Schools, 
it makes these dependent on such conditions that they are virtually 
suppressed. So that Mr. Haultain^ has done indirectly what he could 
not do directly."4 


Changing Status of Catholic Schools 
1885-1892 


As suggested in the above quotation this period is one of transition 

unfavourable to Catholic schools. In 1885 an act was passed which was the 

first in a series of amendments to the School Ordinance of 1884* It marked 

a definite tendency towards unified state control. Where the first act left 

the majority of powers with the Board of Education sitting in sections - 

examinations of teachers, selection of books, appointment of inspectors - the 

second act left to the sections only the power to cancel the certificate of a 

teacher upon sufficient cause and to control text-books.^ 

The School Ordinance of 188? clarified the division of powers between 

the constituent Protestant and Catholic sections of the Board of Education: 

*4lr, T.J. Tarte was Minister of Public Works in the Federal Government from 
1896-1902. 

p 

Hon. T.C. Casgrain was a member of the Legislative Assembly for Quebec from 
1886-1890 and for Montmorency from 1892-1896. 

^Sir F.W.G. Haultain was the first premier, attorney-general and commissioner 
of education of the North-West Territories. 

^G.H. Weir op. cit .. Appendix I, p. 242. 

5 Ordinances of the North-West Territories , 1885, No. 41. 












, 


/ 








- 

X 







v . , ■ . ' «• ' : 







. 1 r *' 

■ 

. 













..." v: ■ i > • vJ 






- 














. 


. . 

» 












t . • . ■ .n#■ 











18 


"Each Section of the Board shall have the selection of text-books 
for the examination of teachers in history and science and it shall have 
the power to prescribe any additional subjects of examinations for the 
teachers of the schools of its section, and in all examinations on such 
subjects the examiners of each section shall have exclusive jurisdiction. 1,1 

A further change in the same year altered the composition of the Board 
of Education to five Protestants and three Roman Catholic members. The Board 
was to appoint one of its members as chairman. 2 

In the following year it became increasingly evident that a single 
uniform state system was the goal. The Separate School question and the Board 
of Education were the most important items of discussion. Religious controver¬ 
sies arose between the ecclesiastical and educational authorities and these 
found expression in the somewhat bitter struggle and debate which characterized 
the Council meetings during the sessions of 1889-1892. 

Mr. J. F. Betts inaugurated the movement to modify the rights of 
Separate Schools when on October 30* 1889 he introduced a bill in which he 
proposed that the number of members in the Board of Education be reduced, and 
the sections of the Board be abolished.^ In addition he proposed to abolish 
denominational schools and to vest in the Lieutenant-Governor the power to 
form separate schools. In a further clause provision was made for uniform 
inspection of all schools. 

Although this bill was defeated the matter was not dropped. New tactics 
were introduced. Since the effort to transform the Board of Education had 
failed an attempt was made to alter the basis of the Catholic rights, namely 
the special privileges given to denominational schools under the Dominion Acts. 
The proposed amendment would have made the Territorial Assembly supreme in 
education and therefore separate schools would have depended on the will of 

•^ Ordinances of the North-West Territories , 188?, No. 2. 

^ Report of the Board of Education, North-West Territories , 1887. 

\he Hon. J.F.Betts was returned a s member of the Territorial Legislature for 
Prince Albert East in 1888. 




















■ 








. : si 





■ 
















. 
























’ 























19 


the Territorial Assembly. Under the leadership of Judge Rouleau a spirited 
defence was made with the result that the proposed amendment was voted down. 

In the following year the bill was again introduced but for the second 
time it was defeated.^ 

Teacher Certification, Examinations 
and Secondary Education 

Other matters too called for attention. As the school system developed 
the question of securing qualified teachers became a greater problem. It was 
deemed wise to increase the qualifications necessary for teaching certificates. 
Accordingly in 1890 all applicants except graduates of Universities in the 
British Empire were compelled to write Territorial examinations. It is of 
interest to note that in the list of the first successful candidates who wrote 
these examinations the names of the Sisters who were teaching in the Lacombe 
(Calgary) Separate Schools appear. The requiring of Catholic teachers, who 
were already well qualified, to submit to these examinations of the State 
Board was a further step in the trend to centralize education under state 
control. By 1891 the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council had assumed the power 
of licensing teachers and appointing inspectors. Over all examinations there 
was appointed a Board of Examiners which consisted of two members from each 
section of the Board of Education. This Board had control not only over the 
teacher's examinations but also over the examinations which qualified for 
entrance to the Union Schools. In 1889 and 1890, the first two years when High 
School Entrance examinations were conducted, the Board of Education presided 

^■"Hansard" of the Legislative Assembly of the North-West Territories, 

October 30, 1890. 











. 








« 

. 












/:.. . ... J , ■ v ■ , . , .. . : . • jor 


. 

■ c . 






.* . ... 

c . • 1 ..i 














20 


over them. The records of the fifth form in Lacombe (Calgary) Separate School 
for 1889 state all the candidates presented were successful. A high standard 
evidently was maintained in this school from its inception. 

The entrance examinations which qualified a student for admission to 
high school have continued to be a part of the Alberta system of education. 

With the change in curriculum and the new organization of schools these 
centralized examinations give entrance to senior high school. 

Closely allied with the problem of teacher-training was that of second¬ 
ary education. St. Albert had been offering more advanced instruction as early 
as 1881. In 1884 a High School with over thirty pupils was being taught in 
Prince Albert, Saskatchewan in a private school under the direction of the 
Sisters Faithful Companions of Jesus.^ Not until 1886 do we find a proposal 
regarding High School facilities in state schools. But even at that date 
nothing was done, as the grant given by the Federal Government was insufficient 
to support the Common Schools. Finally in 1888, in the revision and consolida¬ 
tion of all the ordinances together with some changes which in©re introduced by 

the Assembly that had replaced the Council, clauses were added authorizing the 

2 

establishment of High Schools, 

In the summer of 1889, “the first two high school departments in the 
North-West Territories were organized, one under Mr. Short at Calgary, the 
other at Regina about the same In October of the same year a Catholic 

High School was opened at Sacred Heart Convent, Calgary.^ The report of the 
Board of Education of 1889 records that beginning with the school quarter 
ending December 31, 1889 Lacombe Separate School District No. 1 (Calgary) 
received the Union grant for its High School. 

^“Annals of St. Anne * s Convent”, Prince Albert, 1884, p. 39. 

^ School Ordinance of North-West Assembly, 1888, c. 59, s. 177-180. 

■'D.G. Bayne “Calgary School District No. 19, 1885-1935". 

Annals of Sacred Heart Convent”, Calgary, 1889. 






. 


■i ' ,. • - 












. 













. - 

. 






















. 










21 


Catholic Schools 1885-1692 

Tremendous activity in the educational field characterized the period 
immediately following the passing of the Ordinance of 1884. From aU sides 
applications for aid were made as soon as it was known that the Dominion 
Government had granted a substantial increase in the school subsidy. By 
November 1885 eight Roman Catholic School Districts had been proclaimed as 
compared with thirty Protestant.^ These figures include the districts 
formed in North-West Territories. 

Among the first districts to be formally recognized in 1885 were 
St. Albert Roman Catholic Public School District No. 3 and the one-roomed 
schools that had been in operation for some time* Saskatchewan Roman Catholic 
Public No. 2, St. Leon Roman Catholic Public No. 4 and Cunningham Roman 
Catholic Public No. 5.^ Between 1885 and 1890 Bellerose* St. Francis Xavier* 

St. Agnes, St. Thomas Duhammel* and Lac Ste. Anne were organized as Roman 
Catholic Public School Districts No. 6* 7* IB* 26 and 29 respectively,^ and in 
1891 Creuzot Roman Catholic Public School District No. 34 was established.^ 

All these districts except St. Agnes* which was near Pincher Creek* were in 
the Edmonton vicinity.'* 

The year 1885 is a momentous on© in the history of Catholic education 
in Alberta* for in that year the Sisters Faithful Companions of Jesus cam© to 
Calgary. In 1883 at the earnest request of Bishop Grandin this missionary 
band had come from England to the West. They opened schools in Brandon* 

Manitoba* Prince Albert and St. Laurent, Saskatchewan* but the perils of 

^ Journals of Councils of the North-West Territories , Nov. 5* 1885. 

^ Report of the Board of Education of the North-West Territories , 1887-1888, p.120. 
3 lbid ., 1887-1888* p.121; 1890 pp. 75 and 90. 

4 Ibid.* 1891* p. 130 

^For location of these districts see Figure 1* p. 23. 










■ 

' 

. 

1 

’ • - . 

i . v .; . - , 

. 


. 

. 

J * ■ 



















. .... A 








22 


rebellion in 1885 made it unsafe for them to remain in their already well 
established schools and necessitated moving farther west. A log house on 
the banks of the Elbow, on the site of the present Sacred Heart Convent in 
Calgary became their first school in Alberta. 

The Sisters with Mother Greene as Superior were teachers of outstand¬ 
ing qualifications. All had spent several years on the Continent and had taken 
advanced courses in French. Among their number were distinguished needlewomen, 
artists and musicians. They had taught in the schools of the Congregation in 
France, Ireland, England and Scotland where the standard of achievement was 
outstanding. It is reported of these schools that ,5 th@ Government Inspectors 
look upon the Religious engaged in teaching as second to none, in devotedness 
and skill as instructors. 

The private school which the Sisters opened in midsummer 1885 was thus 
truly an educational institution of the highest order. Through it the old- 
world culture was brought to the pioneers of the West. Music, instrumental 
and vocal was taught not only to the children, but to a large number of adults 
©f all denominations who benefited specially by the excellent instruction. 

Many, too, profited from the classes in needlework where the art of applique 
lace, fillet embroidery, point de Venice, pen painting, and cut work were 
taught. Classes in china-painting, oil, pastel and pyrography work were given 
for those who chose this line of culture. 

These educational advantages were not reserved for residents only, for 
by October 3, 1385 Bishop Grandin had consecrated a new building which provided 
boarding accommodation for pupils who lived at a distance. Rapid growth 
characterized the early years of this school and it soon became necessary to 
expand the facilities. In 1893 the cornerstone of the grey stone structure. 


3-Rev. Fr. Stanislaus F.M., Life of the Vicountess de Bonnault D'Houet , (New York; 
Longmans, Green and Co., 1913), p. 228. ~ * ~ ~ 














■ 

. 
































. 







































MAP OF ALBERTA SHOWING CATHOLIC SCHOOL DISTRICTS 


ESTABLISHED BEFORE 1905 

Inset of St. Albert District 



0 ROM fit/ C/n/iOLlC S/TPHHHTF SCHOOL 0/S7P/CTS 
O Cftrtfoj-jc /?o0jjc school C>/orje/crs 

DHrer //VO/ChtsS Ye/?/? of opg hm/Z./9T/OA/ 
MfJP Sc/flir: /oo M/LFS - / //YCt/ 


Figure 1 




























24 


part of the present Convent, was laid. A second, much larger wing was added 
in 1924 when the original wooden structures were demolished. Throughout these 
years a large number of students have profited by the excellent education 
provided by the boarding school at Sacred Heart Convent. In 1884 Lord Aberdeen, 
Governor General of Canada accompanied by Lady Aberdeen made a tour of Canada. 

The Catholic School in Calgary was honoured with a visit. On this occasion, 
after the reception. Her Ladyship examined the pupils' work and expressed her¬ 
self pleased to see that the children of Calgary enjoyed the same advantages 
offered to those who attend large boarding schools in Europe. ^ 

Immediately after the opening of the private school, steps were taken 
to secure government recognition. On December 18, 1885 by a proclamation of 

the Lieutenant-Governor, Edgar Dewdney, the Lacombe Roman Catholic Separate 

2 

School District Number 1 came into existence. Some years later, April 25, 

1911, this district changed from the name of "Lacombe", after Father Lacombe, 
to "Calgary". The occasion of the change was a difficulty in the sale of 
debentures when investors confused the district with that of the town of 
Lacombe. 

Before the close of the first school year the Lieutenant-Governor visited 
the school. He questioned the children in geography, spelling and reading. 

Before leaving he praised the progress of the pupils and granted them a holiday.^ 
The number of pupils increased steadily as did also the standard of 
proficiency. Public examinations were held, as required, yearly from 1886. 

On December 19, 1888 they were presided over by an Inspector, Judge Rouleau 

Annals of Sacred Heart Convent", Calgary, 1894. 

^ Report of the Board of Education of the North-West Territories , 1886, p. 2. 
^"Annals of Sacred Heart Convent", Calgary, 1886. 








































' 




' 














0 











25 

and the School Administrator. The report which followed praised particularly 
the higher branches of studies such as Algebra and Geometry. Distribution of 
the prizes merited in this examination took place two days later. About a 
hundred beautiful, instructive books were given as rewards. The report of 
1890 comments on the exceptional progress of the pupils. 

In 1889 the newly formed Board of Examiners administered high school 
entrance examinations for the first time. The students of the Sacred Heart 
Convent who presented themselves for these examinations in August formed the 
nucleus of the first Catholic High School in Alberta, which was opened on 
October 1. The following August four pupils wrote the Certificate Examina¬ 
tions, three the third class, one the second. All the candidates were suc¬ 
cessful. 

The Convent was no longer able to accommodate all the pupils who 
presented themselves and it was, therefore, necessary to open a second school 
in October 1889 for pupils who lived at a distance.^ The building used for 
this purpose had been a Methodist Chapel. Its spacious room formed a most 
suitable classroom and served this purpose until greater facilities were 
provided at the Convent school. 

The Calgary Separate Schools experienced the same financial diffi¬ 
culties as the other schools. Universal taxation to help support schools was 
accepted only gradually. The resistance that was offered in Edmonton found 
a parallel in most school districts. While the mill rate was low the popula¬ 
tion was growing rapidly so expenses outstripped resources. Although the 
teachers received only meagre salaries, it is reported in 1897 that the funds 
were insufficient to pay for the heating, equipment and rent of the school 

2 

buildings which at the time were owned by the Sisters who taught in the school. 

1 Ibid .. 1889 

^"Minutes of Calgary Separate School Board Meeting, 1 * 1897. 



















. 

















































- 




. 


c 












' 










: 







' 







. 













26 


In spite of the fact that Edmonton was the site of the first formal 
school that was opened west of Winnipeg, and that the first Roman Catholic 
Public Schools were opened in the neighbouring districts, it was not until 
1886 that the Roman Catholic population of Edmonton petitioned the Educational 
Council at Regina for the establishment of a Separate School District. The 
request was granted and the St. Joachim Separate School District Number 7 was 
formed on October 26, 1888. 

A few weeks earlier five Sisters Faithful Companions of Jesus had 
come from Calgary to establish a convent and to teach in the School. On 
November 2, 1888 school was opened; twenty-three pupils presented themselves 
the first day. By Christmas the enrollment had increased to thirty-five. In 
Edmonton, as in Calgary, the Sisters gave music, art and needlework lessons 
and a boarding school was opened early in the new year. 

The following reports given by the Deputy Minister ©f the Interior 
and the Surveyor-General of Canada give testimony of the excellent type of 
education given by the Sisters in this school; 

I have great pleasure in stating that in the course of the Examina¬ 
tions which the children of this school have undergone today, I have 
found them very advanced if one takes into consideration that the school 
has existed less than a year. The system ©f teaching followed therein 
appears excellent and the progress of the pupils in all branches satis¬ 
factory. 

A. M. Burgess 

Deputy Minister of the Interior, 
Canada 1 


ln Annals of F.C.J. Convent”, Edmonton, 1889. 











































■ 



















. . 







27 


Having been invited by the Rev. P. Vegreville and the Sisters charged 
with the Catholic Schools of Edmonton to assist at a seance given by the 
pupils, I am happy to testify to the remarkable results obtained in the 
short time the school has been open and to the system of instruction by 
means of which considerable progress has resulted. 

E. Devilie 

Surveyor-General of Canada^ 

Edmonton, October 4, 1889. 

At the close of this school year, mid-summer 1890, four students wrote 
the high school entrance examinations. 

The annals of this school for the year 1890 make reference to another 
significant item which has been of vital interest to our bilingual country and 
which at this date was proving a point of controversy in the political field, 
namely the use of the French language. Some influential persons of the dis¬ 
trict were, apparently, unfavourably impressed with regard to the French 
taught in the School. An official examination took place on April 17th. The 
report given by the Inspector was as follows: 

I am proud to be abl© to state that I am delighted with the results 
of this school. I examined the pupils (fifty-seven on register, thirty- 
eight present) in presence of the three trustees, M.M. Roy, Dr. Potvin, 
and L. Kelly, and a number of ratepayers and friends, and found the pro¬ 
gress of the children remarkable in every branch - French and English. 

The results would have been still more brilliant if it had not been for 
the epidemic which visited Edmonton during the year. The good Mothers 
deserve great praise fop their ability and energy in making this school 
such a success in so short a time. 


J.M. Lestanc, Fret re O.M.I. 

Inspector. 

Some interesting details regarding the early organization of the 
Edmonton Catholic Schools is provided by the minutes ©f the meetings of the 
School Board: a fee of $1.00 a month was charged to parents who were not 
ratepayers; the first assessment roll was prepared by Mr. A.E. Johnstone; 
the first tax levy was at the rate of eight mills on the dollar. An early 
financial statement shows an assessment of $8,295.00; total receipts for the 


tbid. 



















- 5 ' 




























' 










■ 












' 

. . r. !• 

. . ... .... 







year were $1,760.69, of which $255.97 was collected as taxes, $184.22 as fees 
from pupils and the balance received from government grants. 

Although northern Alberta and particularly the region near the 
Saskatchewan had been the first part of the province to establish schools, 
efforts had been made in the south. Reference has already been made to the 
first school at Fort Macleod, With the building of the railway more and more 
settlers were attracted to this part of Alberta. By 1888 a petition had been 
made to have a Catholic Separate School District established in Fort Macleod. 

The desire became an actuality when the Holy Cross Separate School District 
Number 8 was formed on January 8, 1888.^“ The early history of this school in 
no way presages the later vicissitudes it was destined to experience. Mr. Win. 

J. MacDonald was the first teacher of the school which was first conducted in 
part of the present rectory. The initial enrollment of twenty represented 
pupils in Grades I to III. In a short time a one-rooiaed school built in the 
church yard was ready for occupation. The prospects were hopeful and progress 
was good. 

% 1888 Lethbridge was a rapidly growing town. The coal mines of the 
district were attracting numerous settlers and the extension of the railway 
gave promise of increase in trade and population. At the earliest opportunity 
Reverend Emile Legal, O.M.X., Reverend Fathers Lacombe and Van Tighem, O.M.I., 
ably assisted by M.E. Roy, Joseph Noel, CyriHe Begin, T. Kevin and W.F. Gay 
began the organisation of a Catholic school. On January 18, 1889, the Leth¬ 
bridge Catholic Separate School District Number 9 was officially formed by a 

P 

proclamation of the Lieutenant-Governor, Joseph Royal'. 

On April 3, 1889, the first Catholic School, later known as St. Aloysius 
School, was opened in Lethbridge. It was a one-roomed wooden building on the 

•^ Report of the Board of Education of the North-West Territories , 1888-1889, p.17 
^ Report of the Board o f Education of the North-West Territories , 1888-1889, p.17 







. 



















' 










■ 






. . . 


. • 


. 




. 










. 




















29 


comer of 9th Street and 2nd Avenue South near the C.P.R. Station. The first 
teacher was Christopher McRae. Not until the following year, however, was 
the school organized in a truly satisfactory manner. On December 31* 1890, a 
group of Sisters, Faithful Companions of Jesus, came from Calgary to Lethbridge 
to take charge of this school and to give the residents of the district some of 
the many advantages already enjoyed by the people of Calgary and Edmonton. 

In January the Sisters began to teach in the school and despite the 
many hardships which the severe winter and inadequate housing conditions 
imposed, achieved remarkable success. The enrollment at this time was fifty- 
seven students who were taught by two teachers. The reports of the inspections 
which were made at regular intervals of six to eight months by officials duly 
appointed by the Educational Council of the North-West Territories, from the 
opening up to 1900 give ample testimony of the outstanding work that was done. 
The names of Emile Legal, Q.M.X., A. Lacombe, O.M.I., Vital Grandin, O.M.I., 
W.J. Costello, and D.J. Goggin appear in these reports. 

As in Calgary and Edmonton, a boarding school was opened in Lethbridge 
in order that the advantages of a Catholic education and cultural training 
might be enjoyed by students who did not live in the immediate district. In 
September 1892 fifteen resident pupils were enrolled! the number increased to 
twenty-two in succeeding years. The average daily attendance of pupils in 1900 
in boarding and day school combined was 88. The actual enrollment would have 
been much higher as the attendance was very low in the severe winter season. 

It was in the north of the province that the next Catholic School was 
opened. The beginnings were humble, and the difficulties many. The Thibeault 
Roman Catholic Public School District Number 35 (at Morinville) was officially 
organized in 1892. 1 

^ Records of Department of Education . Alberta. In this study this reference 
refers to a manuscript book in the files of the Department of Education 
containing dates of organization and other information relating to Roman 
Catholic Public and Separate School Districts. 













. 

' 




. 




. 




. . 






■ . • i- > 

■ L- • •: . : -j.i O 














30 

The first school was taught for a short time by Miss Delina Deschenes in the 
home of Mr. Harnois. This gentleman soon assumed the role of school master, 
but was unable to continue the duty for long. Consequently, when no teacher 
could be procured, the school was temporarily closed. 

On the whole, outstanding progress was made in education in Catholic 
Schools from 3885-1892. The standards achieved and the cultural influence ex¬ 
tended to the entire community could not be overestimated. The results of the 
public examinations and of the written state examinations were of the highest 
order. The Inspectors' reports of this period testify that the Catholic schools 
in the territory which is now Alberta, were entirely satisfactory. Nevertheless, 
the succeeding decade was to be a sad one. 

The attitude of the governing officials of North-West Territories and 
in particular of those intimately connected with education did not change after 
1885. They were intent on establishing a single state controlled system of 
schools in which religious influence was cut down to a minimum. Reference has 
already been made to the unfortunate effect of the North-West Rebellion of 1885, 
and to the identification of minority privileges with federal interference. 

Such privileges were, therefore, regarded as a tendency to prevent the west 
from attaining provincial autonomy. In addition the increasingly numerous 
sects among Protestants made agreement upon a state system almost a necessity 
while the Catholic philosophy of education required that the Church be granted 
the basic power. The inevitable clash on these two administrative concepts 
formed the educational issues from 1892 - 1902. 

LATER TERRITORIAL PERIOD 1892 - 1905 
Ordinances of 1892-1902 

In 1892 and 1901 Ordinances, "of doubtful validity",^* which completely 
^G.H. Weir, op. cit., p. 65. 





















. • ' 








, \ , 

' 





































31 

centralized the school system, and "radically curtailed separate school privi¬ 
leges' 1 ^ were passed by the Territorial Assembly. The system which was esta¬ 
blished provided for coterminous boundaries of a public school and a subsequently 
formed separate school. This was a distinct disadvantage to a minority group. 
Furthermore, uniform teacher-training and certification, uniform inspection and 
text books, with few minor exceptions, as well as uniform examination standards 
were demanded of all schools which received government aid. 

In the Ordinance of 1892 the Board of Education was abolished and 
education was placed in the hands of the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council, in 
which capacity they were known as the Council of Public Instruction. The only 
remaining vestige of the former Board of Education, with its sections, was the 
Educational Council of four members, two Catholic and two Protestant, who were 
to sit in on the meetings to advise on educational matters; they did not, 
however, have a vote. 

Religious instruction might be given during the last half-hour of the 
day, if the board of trustees so directed and only to those children whose 
parents or guardians offered no objection. A further point which caused dis¬ 
sension was the provision that all schools were to be taught in English. That 
French-Can&dians should resent being deprived of the language rights, that had 
been granted them by the Quebec Act of 1774* is most understandable. In the 
minds of many French-Canadians language and religious issues are inseparably 
united. In fact, it is true to say that the perpetuation of their religious 
faith is, from their standpoint, primarily dependent upon the efficient safe¬ 
guarding of their language privileges in the elementary school. A satisfactory 
agreement was eventually arrived at, and the Territorial Ordinance of 1892 
provided that all schools of the North-West Territories were to be taught in 
the English language but it was "permissible for the board of any district to 


^G.H. Weir, op. cit .„ p. 65. 




























. 








Civi • 






32 


cause a primary course to be taught in the French language."^ This section 
still stands in the school law of Alberta. 

The Ordinance of 1892 raised a protest and several petitions were 
received by the federal government asking for disallowance of the Bill. 

Mr. Weir states, "Apprehension was likewise expressed in regard to the inviola¬ 
bility of minority school rights in the future."^ 

The federal cabinet shelved the issue on the ground that the evidence 

as to grievances being suffered was conflicting and in the fact of such contra¬ 
il 

dictory evidence disallowance was deemed inexpedient. 

Actually the bitter remembrance of the litigation concerning the 
Manitoba school question was very fresh in people’s minds. Although the point 
of law involved in the Manitoba question was entirely different from that which 
would apply to the situation in the Territories, it was deemed wiser not to 
press the matter further. 

In 1901 the Council of Public Instruction was abolished and its duties 
and powers were handed over to a Commissioner who was a member of the government. 
Thus the Department of Education was organized.^ The Act also stated that the 
first school in any district must be a public school. If a minority so desired, 
they could create a separate organization. The control of the teaching, in¬ 
spection, text books, however, was centralized under the Department of Education. 
The final stroke in. abolishing denominational schools was dealt. 

Although there is no specific mention of this fact in the law, the trend 
can be ascertained by noting the changes in nomenclature during this period. 

The School Ordinances of 1884-1885 Section 10, read as follows: 

^"North-West Territories Ordinance 1892, Section 83. 

2g.M. Weir, op. cit . t p. 241. 

3 Ibid . p. 242. 

^ Minutes of Worth-West Territories Council Sessional Papers . 1901. 









■ 










































' 1 










. 

. • 

. ... 






33 


Every school district shall be known under the corporate names of 
the * School District of ...' (Here insert the name chosen by people 
of district), ‘Protestant’ (or ’Catholic') 'public' or 'separate' 

School District No. (given by the Lieutenant-Governor or Lieuten- 

ant-Governor-in-Council of the North-West Territories). 

This Section is modified slightly in the School Ordinance of 188? 
(Section 15): 

The name of every School District under this Ordinance shall be 'the 
...' (here insert the name as hereinafter provided) 'School District No. 

...' (given by the Lieutenant-Governor) 'of the North-West Territories'. 2 

It will be noted that while the Ordinance of 1887 did not specify that 
the name of the Public School District should not contain the word "Catholic" or 


"Protestant", at the same time it did not make any provision that this word 
should be included. Accordingly we find new public school districts organized 
bearing the name "Catholic School District of (Creuzot, Glengarry, Rose Ridge, 
etc.)" down to as late as 1901. It is significant that no Roman Catholic 
Public School District was formed after that date. The steps had been gradual, 
the change slow, but the end was realized. Denominational control of schools 
was a thing ©f the past. The school system of Alberta was secularized, but 
the issue was not finally settled. The Ordinances passed by the Territorial 
Assembly radically curtailed separate school privileges and infringed on the 
North-West Territories Act of 3875. Because they were of doubtful validity, 
they were the basis of a new struggle that was definitely settled in 1905. 

This matter will be dealt with in succeeding pages. 


Catholic Schools 1892-1905 

During this period, when the very existence of Catholic Schools was 
threatened, when their powers were being seriously curtailed, when various 
means to end denominational control were used, we would expect few new Separate 

^“ Ordinance of the North-West Territories . 3884-1885, Section 10. 

Ordinance of the North-West Territories , 1887, Section 15. 






- 

1 ... 

« - 

■ 

... 

v • , . .• ■ V, * t •; .. , ! ,, . : 












■ 




















































34 


School Districts to be formed. The records show that three only were organized 
between 1892 and 1906. These are described briefly below. 

Strathcona, a town on the south bank of the North Saskatchewan river 
opposite Edmonton, had begun to develop rapidly from the time of the arrival 
of the railroad, whose terminal station was there. In 1894 St. Anthony’s 
Separate School District No. 12 was formed to provide school accommodation 
for the Catholic children of Strathcona. A history of St. Anthony’s Parish 
states: 


The first house-chapel was built at the time when the Reverend Father 
Lacombe was Superior at Edmonton ... The first chapel had a small sanctu¬ 
ary which could be separated from the remainder by curtains, and the church 
thus served as a school house for several years. Every day, in fine or bad 
weather, in winter or summer, two nuns of the Faithful Companions of Jesus, 
left the Convent at Edmonton, in sufficient time to arrive at the school 
for classes, driving their little carriage and crossing the Saskatchewan 
river, on the ferry boat, in summer, or on the ice in winter time.l 

The frame building which had served as a school was replaced in 1906 by the 

present St. Anthony’s School. 

The Roman Catholic Separate School District Number 14 was formed 
February 16, 1900, in Gleichen,^ a Freneh-Canadian settlement, which owed its 
passing importance to the fact that it was for a time the focal point of two 
railroads. At Metaekiwin, Sacred Heart Separate School District Number 15 
was organized in 1901. * * 3 Here, too, the Catholic population was largely French- 
Canadian. Both these one-room schools were taught by lay teachers. 

Between 1895 and 1901 six Roman Catholic Public School Districts were 
organized. All of these were one room rural schools. Glengarry, Granger 
and Vegrevill© (not the town school, but adjoining VegreviUe) were established 
in 1895 as Roman Catholic Public School Districts No. 41, 42, and 44. Rose 
Ridge Roman Catholic Public School District No. 45 was organized in 1896, 

Vo limer as No. 47 was formed in 1897, and Chorest Roman Catholic Public School^ 


^History of Saint Anthony's Parish cited in The Western Catholic . ’’Separate 
School Supplement" June 14, 1939, p. 2. 

2Records of the Department of Education, Alberta. 

3 Ibid. 

^For location of these districts see Figure 1, p. 23. 







■ 


' 














. 


■ 




... 


c : N 

. 
















. - 


" 

•: l. ■ .. -■ -• 


. • • 




: 






' 

docl 


. 

V 

■ 

■ . 

. 





















. 







35 


District No. 51 was officially recognized in 1901. 1 

The Catholic schools in the larger centres grew steadily during these 
years, and despite the anxiety to which they were subjected they continued to 
meet the demands of the Department of Education. At the same tin® they gave 
their pupils an education impregnated with the Catholic philosophy of life. 

In Calgary, Edmonton, Lethbridge and Morinville the progress was most 
remarkable. Reference has already been made to the new stone building erected 
at Sacred Heart Convent, Calgary and opened in 1894. Sufficient accommodation 
for the ever increasing number of pupils was thus afforded. The enrollment 
was out of proportion to the number of Catholics in the town for at that time 
a large number of non-Catholic parents chose to send their children to the 
Catholic school where they were given opportunities which they could not other¬ 
wise have enjoyed.2 

The high standard achieved by this school is evinced in a report of 
1895 regarding a Territorial Exhibition held in Regina. School pupils and 
teachers were encouraged to send specimens ©f their work. The prizes offered 
ranged from two to twenty dollars. Fourteen prizes were merited by the 
Calgary Separate School for drawings, paintings, composition, and historical, 
topical and topographical maps.^ 

On May 23, 1893, a Teachers’ Convention was held at Sacred Heart 
Convent, when the Superintendent of Public Education and the School Inspector 
spent the day with the teachers lecturing on the subjects taught in the element¬ 
ary school. Much benefit was derived from the helpful suggestions given.^ 
Despite the successes and the increased enrollment, the period was, 
as has been noted, not without anxieties. The changes were accompanied by 


^Letter from Mr. W.E. Finbow, Editor-Librarian of Department of Education, 
Alberta, September 10, 1953. 

^Missions des Oblats de Marie Immaculee Tome XXIII, p. 19 cited-by R.P.J. 
Le Chevalier, O.M.I., in Origin© et Premiers Develdijnents de Calgary « 
Paroisee Sainte-Famille, Calgary, 1934, p. 81. 

•^"Annals of the Sacred Heart Convent”, Calgary, 1895. Pages not numbered. 
^ Ibid ,. 1898. 












. ■ 


. . . 

. 






. 

. . 

■■. ■ - '■ 




■ 




' i. ■•■■■ • • 










, . •.. - v, - . , ■ 

: :.'6 X 1 & 






. . . 

. . . • 

... 


36 

uncertainty as to the final status of the schools of the minority group, and 
the effect of the enforced amendments. One incident only of this period will 
suffice to illustrate the effect of the amendments of the School Ordinances 
1892-1902 on the Catholic schools. It is most probable that a misunderstand¬ 
ing gave rise to this issue and that the intention of the authorities was to 
give all parties full justice, nevertheless, the fact remains that effects were 
prejudicial to Catholic schools. In March 1894 Mr. Goggin conducted a three- 
day inspection of the Separate School in Calgary. He seemed pleased with the 
progress made and commented on the good management. On leaving he promised 
to send a detailed report from Regina. The report never arrived; but in May 
it became known that Mr. Goggin had privately' informed a Member of Parliament 
for the North-West Territories,^ that the Principal Mistress of the High 
School at Calgary told him she was perfectly satisfied with the text books 
assigned by the Council of Public Instruction for use in the schools of the 
North-West. In a speech answering the demands of the Bishop and Clergy for 
a redress of grievances in educational matters, the above information was used 
to evince that the aforesaid demand was unreasonable, since the approval of 
the principal school in the Territories showed clearly that the Catholics had 
full confidence in the Council at Regina. 

When the above argument appeared in the report of the Parliamentary 
proceedings in the Ottawa papers, information was sought by the Bishop as to 
the real nature of the question. The reply was sent that the Sisters had 
given no formal approbation of the books; they had simply remarked that, since 
the books were made compulsory, they used them as they had no other means of 
preparing their students for the state examination. To Mr. Goggin's question 
as to whether the late amendments mad® any notable change in their schools, 

^The name of the Member is not given. The account of the incident appears in 
the "Annals of the Sacred Heart Convent" 3894, pp. 93-96. 






















' 

. . d: - . . v' 


V 

. 

. 

, - t 

. 













. 













. ‘ . • 





. 

. 

. 

•_ v; > . .. * jr • .. 





37 

the reply was that, 11 We had not made any change in our system - we had no con¬ 
fidence in the present Board of Education, and we feared its future enactments 
would be injurious to our Separate Schools.”**’ 

It would be well to recall that the Manitoba School Question was the 
issue of the day and Catholics of the North-West feared lest they might suffer 
a complete loss of their Separate Schools as did their brethren in Manitoba, 
Happily the entire issue was of a different nature and the educational authori¬ 
ties of the North-West Territories partially recognized the rights of minorities 
in the spirit of the British North America Act of 186?. 

The outcome of the above mentioned incident was that the authorities in 
Regina promised that the readers would be revised, and that a different history 
would be adopted. 

In Edmonton during the years 1893-1905 the Separate School Board was 
most ably headed by a young lawyer, Mr. N. D. Beck, who later became the 
Honourable Mr. Justice Beck. The enrollment in the Catholic school in 1894 
was 137 pupils taught by three Sisters. The subjects taught at the time were 
reported as follows: ’’Reading, Spelling and Dictation, Writing, Arithmetic, 
Ethics, Drill and Calisthenics, French, Music, Object Lessons, Drawing, Com¬ 
position, Grammar, Geography, History, Literature, Bookkeeping, Needlework 
and Kindergarten.” 

In 1899 it was decided that a school for the accommodation of the older 
boys should be established. Accordingly the C.M.B.A. 2 Hall was purchased for 
that purpose and Mr. W.S. McNamara became the first teacher in the Boys’ School. 
The operation of this school seems to have occupied much of the Board’s atten¬ 
tion during the next few years. In an endeavor to check tardiness on the part 
of the pupils the Board decided at one time ’’that teachers be instructed not 
to admit pupils who came to school fifteen or more minutes late; and that one 
hour’s recess each week be given to all those who arrive punctually at school 
each day.” 

1"Annals of Sacred Heart Convent", Calgary, 1894, p. 96. 

2Christian Mutual Benefit Association. 













. 


















' 


. 








. 


i 












. 




































■ 









i 





An interesting reference to the use of the French language in schools, 
a timely issue, is found in the Annals of 1&9S. Mr. Calder, the Inspector, 
spent two days, November 15 and 16 in a strict examination of the subjects of 
the North-West program of studies. He was delighted with the progress made, 
and wondered how the teachers managed to attain such results in spite of having 
an hour less than other schools (an hour was devoted daily to the French 
language). In the report which followed Mr. Calder testified the utmost 
satisfaction and remarked that the trustees and the ratepayers of the district 
had just reason to be perfectly satisfied.^ 

Tangible proof of the efficient results obtained in the Catholic schools 
and of their ability to compete with the Public schools of the time is afforded 
by the prizes won by St. Joachim’s Separate, and St. Albert Roman Catholic 
Public School in the public exhibitions held in Edmonton and open to Public 
and Separate schools. In 1901, thirteen of the eighteen prizes awarded in a 
competition for free-hand map-drawing and writing, were merited by the Catholic 
schools, nine by the first mentioned, four by the latter. In 1903 St. Joachim’s 
School took the first prizes for all subjects? map, object and crayon drawing, 
writing, and collection of wild flowers and noxious weeds. In this same year 
the results of the music examinations and high school entrance examinations 
were particularly good. 

Early in the twentieth century the need for adult education was great 
in the Edmonton district. Many Galician, Polish and Russian immigrants were 
yearly coming to the North-West. In 1900 classes were first opened for young 
foreign girls most of whom were employed as maids. In the first year over 
fifty were enrolled. During the succeeding years these night classes for 
European girls became more popular and the numbers increased. 

^"Annals of F.C.J. Convent", Edmonton 1898, pp. 103-104* 







’ 
















' - . -.s’ 




' 




v. - : ' . . 
















. '• 






... 









39 

Between 1892 and 1905 the population of Lethbridge increased rapidly. 
To provide the necessary accommodation for the students who presented them¬ 
selves at St. Aloysius School two classrooms were built in 1893, and four were 
constructed in 1899. In that year the enrollment was 2?0. In 1902 a brick 
building which provided a classroom and four music rooms was erected. The 
standard of attainment in the school was high. This fact is attested by the 
very satisfactory inspector's reports, by the good results of pupils writing 
the public examinations, and by the numerous prizes merited by the students 
of the school in the public exhibition. 

Meanwhile at Morinville, after the first difficulty of securing a 
teacher was overcome, school reopened in 3899. This was a well-organized 
venture which, under the capable direction of Father Jolicoeur gave promise 
of success. The school was a two-storey wooden building. The first floor 
served as a classroom, the second as a teacherage. French was taught by 
Miss Ada LatuHpe and English by Miss Kathleen Steffes. At this time the 
school was not under government control and hence received no grant. 

In 1904 a Religious Community, Filles de Jesus, arrived from France 
to take charge of this school. The Sisters were experienced educators who 
had worked zealously and successfully in their numerous schools on the Con¬ 
tinent and in England. They began teaching on February 1. Their school con¬ 
sisted of sixty pupils, twenty-six of whom remained at the convent from Monday 
morning to Friday evening. In this way it was possible to provide a Catholic 
education for children of the neighbouring districts. The enrollment in this 
school increased to eighty when school reopened for the fall term. 

The attendance in all the schools during these early years seems to 
have been most irregular. Numerous epidemics of measles, diphtheria, and 
scarlet fever in all parts of the north-west would have been in some measure 




' 


; ; ■■■ : ©I 

■ - v w * *• ■ . 










■ 

. . i 

. 




: ' ■ : . ■ ■ ' ' ■ : 
















■ . 


. 

L > 

. . O j 










. 



















■ 






40 


responsible for this. Another factor was that many pupils had great distances 
to travel so were unable to attend school in severe weather. Then, too, in the 
spring and autumn boys and girls were often kept out of school to help with the 
field work. In spite of these handicaps genuine progress was made and these 
young people received adequate preparation for citizenship in the province so 
soon to be formed. 

Undoubtedly Catholic education of this period in the history of our 
province was one of the great factors in the preparation of this part of the 
North-West Territories for provincial autonomy. The original rights of complete 
independence in education were gradually taken away as centralization under state 
control was enforced ; nevertheless. Catholic schools continued to function and 
in doing so gave the citizens of this pioneer land the benefits of an old- 
world culture. The rights of the minority group had been seriously curtailed, 
but with that courage which characterizes those who are inspired with a lofty 
ideal and who are fired with zeal to work for a great cause. Catholic educators 
pressed on to fulfill their goal. 










. 



. 

. 





. 































CHAPTER II 


FROM PROVINCIAL AUTONOMY TO THE 
ENLARGED UNIT OF SCHOOL ADMINISTRATION 
1905 - 1936 

HISTORICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND 

For several years prior to 1905 the subject of provincial autonomy for 
the vast area, known as the North-West Territory, had been the occasion of 
frequent discussions at Ottawa, and of conferences between the Dominion 
Government and Mr. Haultain, Premier of the Territories. Throughout Canada 
it seems to have been recognized that the time was approaching when the con¬ 
solidation of the Territories into a Province or Provinces would be necessary. 
The separate school question seems not to have been raised in the negotiations 
that passed between the two governmentsj neither was it an issue in the terri- 
torial and federal elections held in 1902 and 1904, respectively. When at 
last this question was forced into prominence and was finally settled, the 
establishing of provincial autonony was assured. 

The great "School Question" of 1905, which excited Canada as few 
political issues had since Confederation, began as the question of whether 
religious instruction in the schools of the provinces was to be continued, 
and grew into the much more momentous one of whether the government at Ottawa 
could dictate to a province concerning its educational system. As has been 
noted, Separate Schools and religious instruction under the district trustees 
had been allowed in the Territories by the Ordinances under which educational 




























■ 















. 



































42 


affairs had been administered. 

It was the intention of the Liberal Government at Ottawa, under the 
leadership of Sir Wilfred Laurier, to incorporate in the Alberta Act, a clause, 
similar to the one in the North-West Territories Act of 1875, thus forcing the 
province to continue separate schools and religious instruction. 

To the Protestants, however, it became not only a question of religious 
instruction in schools, but also a case of interference in provincial affairs 
by the federal government. This interference concerned the eastern provinces 
as well as the western, and accordingly they all took part in the agitation. 

The bitterness was increased by the fact that it was. represented by the 
Protestants as a case in which the Roman Catholic Church was, by means of the 
federal government, attempting to use public money for the support of a system 
of sectarian schools. This was quite a different matter from the province it¬ 
self allowing a district or part of a district to form and support a separate 
school, and to give religious instruction as a part of the course of studies. 

When the autonomy acts providing for the creation of the two provinces, 
Alberta and Saskatchewan, were introduced by Sir Wilfred Laurier in the Federal 
House, the school clauses provided that Section 93 of the British North America 
Act was to apply to the new provinces. Section 93 reads in part, as follows: 

In and for each Province the Legislature may exclusively make laws in 
relation to Education, subject and according to the following provisions: 

(1) Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect any Right or 
Privilege with respect to Denominational Schools which any class of persons 
have by law in the Province at the Union. 

The proposed legislation reads as follows: 

Subject to the provisions of the said section 93 of the British North 
America Act, and in continuance with the principle heretofore sanctioned 
under the North-West Territories Act, it is enacted that the legislature 
of the said province shall pass all necessary laws in respect to educa¬ 
tion and it shall therein be provided that (a) a majority of the rate- 











' . / I 




■ 



. 




























■ 






. 




■ 

























43 


payers of any district or portion of the province, or any lesser portion 
or subdivision thereof, by whatever name it is known, may establish such 
schools therein as they think fit and make all necessary assessments and 
collection of rates therefor, and (b) that the minority of the ratepayers 
therein, whether Protestant or Catholic may establish separate schools 
and make the necessary assessments and collections of rates therefor, and 
(c) that in such cases the ratepayers establishing such Roman Catholic or 
Protestant separate schools shall be liable only to assessment such as 
they impose upon themselves with respect thereto. 

This clause was followed by another: 

In the appropriation of public monies, paid by the legislature in 
aid of education, and in the distribution of any monies paid to the govern¬ 
ment of the said province from the school fund established by the Dominion 
Land Act, there shall be no discrimination between the public schools and 
the separate schools and such monies shall be applied to the support of 
public and separate school in equitable share or proportion. 

The federal government claimed that it was within their power according 
to the British North America Act to frame these clauses, since they did not 
interfere with the provincial control of education. Complete administration 
of education with respect to the curriculum, text-books, teachers and trustees 
was left to the province. The government maintained, too, that the aim of the 
school clauses was simply to crystallize the existing law, as set forth in the 
School Ordinance of 1901, and that the type of separate schools proposed by 
the bin was practically of a national character. To the western members at 
Ottawa, however, there seemed doubt as to the interpretation the proposed 
clauses might bear, should litigation similar to that involved in the Manitoba 
School Question, arise. It was admitted that the new provinces were empowered 
to exercise such control over separate schools as the Ordinances of 1901 had 
warranted, but with this proviso: "subject to the provisions of the said 
Section 93 of the British North America Act, and in continuance of the principle 


^Hansard 1905, cited by J.M. Hutchinson, Calgary; The Educational System of 
Alberta , (Alberta Job Printers, 1916), p. 15. 





. 

' 









•i- 






- 

. 











■ 








. . 


















44 


heretofore sanctioned under the North-West Territories Act. M 

It should be recalled that the principle sanctioned by the North-West 
Territories Act was consistent with the establishment of sectarian schools in 
the complete sense of the term, and that since the Ordinances of 1901 infringed 
on the Act of 1875, they were of doubtful validity. Unless, therefore, the 
School Ordinances of 1901 were definitely confirmed by federal authority, and 
reference to the Act of 1875 omitted, the case appeared precarious to the 
opponents of sectarian schools. 

As stated before, the dispute developed into the question of the relation 
of the federal and provincial governments and of the interpretation of clause 93 
of the British North America Act. Every province in the dominion was concerned 
in the outcome. 

Early in March, 1903, a crisis in the government was narrowly averted 
when the Honourable Clifford Sifton resigned from the Cabinet. Resolutions 
of protest were passed by various social and religious groups, in which nearly 
every public man, lodge and society took one side or the other. The newspaper 
controversy seems to have been particularly bitter. 

Happily a compromise was effected. The contentious clauses proposed 
by Sir Wilfred Laurier were dropped from the bill, and an amended section 
validating the Territorial Ordinances of 1901, was substituted. The political 
storm subsided. 

The Alberta Act, providing a constitution for the newly-created 
province, came into effect on September 1, 1905. Section 17 of this Act reads 

as follows? 

Section 93 of the British North America Act, shall apply to the said 
Province, with the substitution for paragraph (1) of the said section 93, 
of the following paragraph: 

(1) Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect any right 
or privilege with respect to separate schools which any class of persons 


\ 






• . 0 








. 




. 

; , a ■ 






, ■ 


• . • r . ;o ' ‘St v J\.-: i ,'i J 


' 


. 






. 


- 

, .■ .Ju . • .... .i . ' . . • 




■> 




. 




‘v • *i 14 : •’ i '; } 




. 








. 






. v'i 

' 






■ ’ 















45 


have at the date of the passing of this Act, under the terms of Chapters 
29 and 30 of the Ordinances of the North-West Territories, passed in the 
year 1901, or with respect to religious instruction in any public or sep¬ 
arate school as provided for in the said Ordinances. 

(2) In the appropriation by the Legislature or distribution by the 
Government of the Province of any monies for the support of schools 
organized and carried on in accordance with the said Chapter 29, or any 
Act passed in amendment thereof or in substitution therefor, there shall 
be no discrimination against schools of any class described in the said 
Chapter 29. 

A comparison of Section 93 of the British North America Act and Section 
17 above will make clear the significance of the Alberta Act. The rights and 
privileges of the religious minority, whether Roman Catholic or Protestant, in 
any district were defined and limited by the terms of Chapters 29 and 30 of 
the Ordinances of 1901, and thus the additional rights and privileges which 
had been enjoyed by the minority groups under the North-West Territories Act 
of 1875, or under any Territorial Ordinances passed prior to 1901, were 
definitely excluded. 

Hence the opinion behind succeeding legislative enactments appears to 
be that separate schools as known under the Ordinance of 1901 cannot be inter¬ 
fered with although public denominational schools, Roman Catholic Public schools 
for example, can be. 

The Alberta Act of 1905, then, made provision for the creation of 
separate schools and for religious instruction, but with the proviso that 
education be left entirely under provincial control. Thus the Roman Catholics, 
who did not regard education as purely secular had their rights safe-guarded, 
and the provincial government was supreme in the field of education. The 
Separate Schools whether Protestant or Roman Catholic, were to be subject to 
the same regulations as the public schools ; they were to have the same in¬ 
spectors and the same text-books, and their teachers were to have the same 











■ 












' 
















... i 



























■ 





















46 

qualifications. This afforded a practical guarantee of the same standard of 
efficiency, and reduced to a minimum the difference between Separate and Public 
Schools. 

Despite the above mentioned provisions the question has frequently- 
arisen as to whether the framers of the constitution intended that the separate 
school, Roman Catholic or Protestant, should be an efficient institution on an 
equal footing with the public school. The answer seems to be in the affirma¬ 
tive for Section 17 of the Alberta Act could scarcely- convey any other impres¬ 
sion. Subsection (2), Section 17, of the Alberta Act reads as follows: 

In the appropriation by the Legislature or distribution by the 
Government of the Province of any monies for the support of the schools 
organized and carried on in accordance with the said Chapter 29, or any 
Act passed in amendment thereof or in substitution therefore, there shall 
be no discrimination against schools of any class described in the said 
Chapter 29. 

The judgment of a member of the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Justice 
Anglin, is a confirmation of this interpretation. He said, “Equality of 
treatment and equal rights and privileges for public and separate schools 
would appear to be the spirit of the school law".^ 

Autonomy brought with it no radical changes as far as the administra¬ 
tion of educational matters was concerned. When the Province of Alberta was 
established the Ordinance of 1901 pertaining to education was adopted by the 
Legislature and was known as the School Ordinance. This Ordinance was amended 
from time to time by Acts passed by the Legislature of the Province. The 
organization of the first provincial government of Alberta included a Depart¬ 
ment of Education. The Premier assumed the portfolio of Minister of Education. 
To act in an advisory capacity, there was appointed by the Minister an Educa¬ 
tional Council consisting of five members, three Protestant and two Roman 
Catholics. The members were to hold office for two years. But since the 


\r.M. Weir op, cit . p. 73. 








. 




■ 

' 

. 






* . . ' . , A. ■ ? v. 























■ 







47 


Minister was not compelled to follow its advice or even seek it, the Committee 
soon lost all importance and ceased to be a factor in educational affairs. 

It is evident from the above discussions that Alberta and Saskatchewan 
set out upon their provincial careers with the same federal heritage with res¬ 
pect to separate schools. Moreover, Sections 1? of the Alberta and Saskatchewan 
Acts were identical. In actual operation, however, the school systems of the 
two sister provinces have differed considerably. The school system of Alberta 
has, in comparison with that of Saskatchewan, been singularly free from sec¬ 
tarian and political strife. Separate school and language issues have been 
matters of local interest which have been satisfactorily arranged in each 
district. As a result the political strife of Saskatchewan resulting from 
such issues has had no counterpart in Alberta. The system of education in 
Alberta has, on the contrary, expanded and developed in a remarkably success¬ 
ful and harmonious my. 

One point of difference in particular is of importance to Catholic 
education, namely that in Alberta the rights and privileges of separate schools 
extend into high school levels; they are not limited to the elementary or 
common school grades. These rights have their origin in the North-West 
Territories Ordinances, In October 1889 a High School was opened at Sacred 
Heart Convent, Calgary. This school was recognized by the educational authori¬ 
ties in Regina as an integral part of the educational system, for the records 
of 1889 state that beginning with the school quarter ending December 31* 1889* 
Lacombe Separate School District No. 1 (Calgary) received the Union grant for 
its High School.^ 

In the Alberta Act, as was already stated, the following provision 
appears j n Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect'any right or 
privilege with respect to separate schools which any class of persons have 
at the date of the passing of this Act, under the terms of Chapter 29 and 30 

^• Report of the Board of Education. North-West Territories , 1888-1889, p. H. 





















0 -' 





















■ 

. 

. 

. 










. 


. 

. 

. 













. 


■ 


■ 




of the Ordinances of the North-West Territories, passed in the year 1901 . ,. H 
The right of Separate Schools to include high school grades had been established 
by the recognition of the High School in Calgary in 1889, hence this right con¬ 
tinued in Alberta after the province attained provincial autonomy. 

MAINTENANCE OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
1905 - 1936 

Local Taxation 

The schools in Alberta are financed by local taxation supplemented by 
grants from the Department of Education. Local taxation falls into two cate¬ 
gories i that which Is charged on privately owned property, and that which is 
collected from companies, corporations and co-operatives. The former is 
regulated by the Alberta Act which states, regarding minority groups; 

The minority of ratepayers in any district, whether Protestant or 
Roman Catholic, may establish a separate school therein; and in such case 
the ratepayers establishing such Protestant or Roman Catholic separate 
school shall make necessary assessments and collections of rates therefor, 
and the ratepayers establishing such Protestant or Roman Catholic school 
shall fee liable only to assessment of such rates as they impose upon them¬ 
selves with respect theretoA 

The application of this law has proved satisfactory to all concerned. 
While in many cases the income for Separate Schools from this source is 
proportionately lower than that of the Public School District because the 
Separate School assessment is often lower, it is a just way of allocating 
funds and has proved acceptable to all. 

^ Alberta Act 1905 - Section 22, Subsection 2, 






■ 


' 











; ■ ■ 






- ' 

c. . : ■ '\ • • " • • • 









■ 


. 






. 



















. 






49 


The second type of taxation, that collected from companies, corpora¬ 
tions and co-operatives, has been more difficult to regulate fairly. In this 
source of funds Catholic Separate schools, in most cases, are at a decided 
disadvantage. In order to understand the nature of the problem it will be 
necessary to examine the Statutes relative to this subject and to note the 
amendments that have been made since 1901. 

Chapter 30 of the 1901 Statute reads as follows; 

A Company may by notice in that behalf to be given to the secretary 
of the board of any district in which a separate school has been estab¬ 
lished and to the secretary of the board of such separate school district 
require any part of the land of which such company is the owner to be en¬ 
tered, rated and assessed for the purposes of such separate school and 
the proper assessor shall thereupon enter said company as a separate school 
ratepayer in the assessment roll in respect of such land specially desig¬ 
nated in that behalf in or by said notice and so much of the land as shall 
be so designated shall be assessed accordingly in the name of the Company 
for the purposes of the separate school and not public school purposes but 
all other land of the Company shall be separately entered and assessed in 
the name of the company as for public school purposes: 

Provided always that the share or portion of the land of any company 
entered, rated or assessed in any district for separate school purposes 
under the provisions of this section shall bear the same ratio or propor¬ 
tion to the whole land of the company assessable within the district as 
the amount or proportion of the shares or stock of the company so far as 
the same are paid or partly paid up held and possessed by persons who are 
Protestants or Roman Catholics as the case may be bears to the whole amount 
of such paid or partly paid up shares or stock of the company.^ 

The companies referred to by the above law were of three types: 

(a) Companies whose shareholders were all Protestants and whose taxes 
would therefore be available for public schools only - (assuming that the separ¬ 
ate school is Roman Catholic): for since no shares were held by Roman Catholics, 
valid notice could not be given and as a result no portion of the taxes levied 
could be devoted to the separate school. 


^“Ordinance of North-West Territories, 1901, Chapter 30. An Ordinance 
Respecting Assessment and Taxation in School Districts. Section 9 . 







■ 

■ 

V.. 










. 

. - 

■ 










■ 








' 

. . . . : : . - - j. -■ 

, ' ' : 




■ • 














. 

. 








50 

(b) Companies whose shareholders were all Roman Catholic. Such com¬ 
panies could give notice requiring all their property to be assessed for 
Catholic separate school purposes; but, if no notice were given, all their 
taxes would be devoted to the public school. 

(c) Mixed companies whose shareholders were partly Protestant and 
partly Roman Catholic. These companies could give notice requiring a portion 
of their taxes to be devoted to separate school purposes, but if, as was fre¬ 
quently the case, no such notice were given, all the taxes were given to the 
public school. 

Such a situation operated unfavourably with respect to separate schools. 
There are two outstanding reasons why this would be the case: A company has no 
religious convictions nor has it any children to educate, hence it would pro¬ 
bably be indifferent as to the distribution of its taxes; secondly, for business 
reasons a company would not be likely to discriminate on a religious basis. The 
tendency was exemplified by the actual state in Regina in 1913. "Of the 159 
companies whose taxes were in dispute, not one had given the notice specified".^ 

The situation in Alberta was similar to that in Saskatchewan since the 
two provinces had identical laws regarding company taxes. In 1910 the Alberta 
Legislature passed certain amendments in order to provide a fairer distribu¬ 
tion of company taxes. 

Section 9 of the School Ordinance was amended by adding the following 
subsections: 

(5) In the event of any company failing to give a notice as herein¬ 
before provided, the board of trustees of the separate school district 
may give the company a notice in writing in the following form or to the 
like effect, that is to say: The board of trustees of the ... Separate 
School District No. ... of the Province of Alberta hereby give notice 
that unless and until your company gives a notice as provided by Section 9 
of the School Assessment Ordinance (C.30 of 1901), the school taxes payable 
by your company in respect of land lying within the limits of the ... 

Public School District No. ... of the Province of Alberta (naming the 


\}.M, Weir, op. cit ., p. 84. 

























. 


- 





. : . - 

' 

. . . ,/ . • ,• , ■ v' L . • ‘ ' • • ' ‘, ^ • : 

. 



































. . : ' v- 













• 




























. . 



















. 








. * - 













51 


public school district in relation to which the separate school district is 
established) will be divided between the said public school district and the 
said separate school district in shares corresponding with the total amount 
of the assessed value of lands assessed to individuals for public school 
purposes and the total amount of the assessed value of lands assessed to 
individuals for separate school purposes respectively. This notice is given 
in respect of section ..., of chapter ... of the Statutes of Alberta 1910, 

(6) Unless and until a company to which notice has been given as afore¬ 
said gives a notice as hereinbefore provided for the whole of the lands of 
such company lying within the limits of the public school district shall be 
entered, rated and assessed upon the assessment toll of the public school 
district, but the public school district shall pay to the separate school 
district a share of the taxes collected from the company in respect of its 
lands equal to the proportion which the total assessed value of the lands 
assessed to individuals upon the assessment roll of the separate school dis¬ 
trict bears to the total assessed value of the lands assessed to individuals 
upon the assessment rolls of both the public and separate school districts. 

As a result of this amendment the taxes of companies and corporations 
M failing to give notice” were to be divided between the two school districts 
on a definite basis. Thus, if notice regarding the distribution of its taxes 
were given by a corporation situated within a separate school district the taxes 
would be divided between the two classes of schools on the basis of the amount 
of paid-up or partly paid-up shares or stocks held by Protestants and Roman 
Catholics, respectively, in the company. But if notice were not given by the 
company, the taxes were not, as formerly, to be available only for public school 
purposes; the separate school was to receive its share. This share was to be 
in proportion to the total assessable property owned by Homan Catholics in the 
district (excluding corporations) and was to be paid provided the notice was 
duly given to the company by the board of trustees of the separate school district. 

Difficulties soon arose in the application of the amendment. According 
to the more obvious interpretation the Separate School District would collect 
taxes on all companies and corporations which did not give notice. In the case 
of companies and corporations which had no Catholic shareholders this seemed 


^An Act to Amend the School Ordinance, the School Assessment Ordinance, and the 

School Grants Ordinance , 1910, Province of Alberta. 










. 

. . . 




















' 

. 

. 




















. • ;■ • . /' - 






..... . • v -• S • ' -. «. “1 : 1 ; '■/ C'* - 


. 

. 


: • .. ■ • : ■ • : - •- 




. 





















































52 


contrary to the spirit of the law, since such companies could not give notice. 

In Saskatchewan the matter proved a source of litigation. 

The interpretation given the words "in the event of any company failing 
to give notice", by the Supreme Court of Canada and by the Supreme Court of Sask- 
atchewan was that these words, 

could only refer to such companies as could give notice and failed to do 
so, that is, companies some of whose shareholders were of the religious 
faith of the separate schools. These words cannot .... be applied to a 
company that could not give notice under that section ... ^ 

No amendment was passed by the Alberta Legislature to bring the subsection 
containing the ambiguous terms into stricter conformity with the interpretation 
of the Supreme Court until 1931. In the meantime several modifications in form 
but not in content of the original statutes appeared. 

In the 1920's these original statutes appeared without change as Sections 
9 and 60 of "The School Assessment Act". In 1931 they were consolidated (the one 
Section set forth the procedure for both municipalities and public school dis¬ 
tricts) in Section 50 of "An Act to Consolidate and Amend the Assessment Act". 

The amendments made no significant change. 

Although the law appeared to be equitable and to give due consideration 
to minority groups, in actual practice this was hardly the case. Taxes were 
collected from all companies, corporations, and co-operatives without exception; 
payments were made to Separate School Districts only from such companies as 
voluntarily agreed to support these schools. Some companies, regardless of 

Catholic shareholders, refused to divide their taxes on the grounds that they 

2 

could not easily find out the religious beliefs of their shareholders. 

■kx.M. Weir, op. cit ., P. 91. 

2 Letter of Mr. A.A. O'Brien, Superintendent of Edmonton Separate Schools, 

January 13, 1954. 














: . \. • 

' 




■ 

. 




■ 

' 

'• ‘ •' - 

. 

. 

- 

.. i.f.- 






■ 
























• ' 

. . 




53 


Government Grants 

Government grants are the second source of finance for Alberta schools. 
These are paid to both separate and public schools according to a definite 
plan. This plan has varied as the school system developed. 

Before 1905 the problem of securing duly qualified teachers was equalled 
only by that of enforcing regular attendance throughout the year. Accordingly 
we find that by the School Ordinance of 1885, grants were given on the basis of: 
teacher's qualifications, attendance, Inspector's reports of the school, addi¬ 
tional teachers, and advanced classes,^ 

By the Ordinance of 1901 changes were made in the basis of the payment. 
To offset the tendency to organize very large districts and to compensate for 
sparsely settled districts the flat per diem grant was changed. The basic 
grant of $1.20 per day was gradually reduced to $0.90 a day for larger districts, 
A new bonus based on regularity of attendance replaced the one which depended 
on average attendance. 

Between 1905 and 1920 the major emphasis seems to have been directed 
to improvement of the rural schools. In this period educational authorities 
also began a consistent movement to encourage secondary and technical schools 
as wen as consolidated and two-roomed schools. Rural schools received a per 
diem grant of $1.20; this amount was reduced to $1.00 in 1919. The grant 
paid to village and town schools varied inversely as the number of teachers 
employed. In some districts it went down to as low as 30 cents a day, but 
in 1919 the School Grants Act stipulated that no school should receive less 
than 60 cents a day. 

^School Ordinance of 1885, Section 85, "Aid to Schools". 

^ School Grants Act , 1919. 













. ' r,. 






' 














' 




. 

. 








' 


, 








. 










54 


The early twenties was a difficult time. Economic conditions were bad 
because of the postwar depression, and of conditions in the north. Consequent¬ 
ly financial returns in the province were meagre. Despite the very evident 
general tendency towards a reduction of grants during the years 1920 to 1935, 
a truly outstanding development took place in 1926. 1 This was the institution 
of the Equalization Grant to aid schools whose assessment was below $75,000. 
Schools with an assessment below $10,000 received $2.80 per day. Those with 
assessment between $70,000 and $75,000 received $.20 per day. Schools with 
assessments between $10,000 and $ 70,000 received amounts in proportion to their 
assessments. This grant has benefited many Catholic Separate school districts, 
for since they are organized by minority groups, they frequently have a rela¬ 
tively low assessment. 

Without the aid of government grants many schools would have remained 
closed in the depression years. Due to the special grants and Equalization 
Grant some two-room school districts actually contributed very little money 
to the school budget. In 1934 the maximum amount of grant paid to any school 
was fixed at $500, which was in no case to exceed seventy-five percent of the 
teacher's salary. During this period, because of the financial difficulties 
of the government, grants were paid for only 180 days of operation. 

Maintenance Problems 

The maintenance problems of Catholic schools were acute during the 
period under discussion. The Roman Catholic Public School Districts had no 
difficulties which all districts of the province did not face. The Roman 

^ -Annual Report, Department of Education, Alberta , 1926, pp. 9, 10. 







E • ■ - 


■ 

. 




..... 

' 

< . 

■ 

l± 

' 

■ 

v , .r f... • 





' 










. 














55 

Catholic Separate School Districts, however, were in a different position. 

There were several reasons for this fact. The income of the Separate School 
Districts was, generally speaking, proportionately lower; the building and 
operating expenses (excluding salaries) were proportionately higher. 

Several factors combined to cause the proportionately lower income. In 
the larger cities many Catholics are not home or property owners; therefore 
they may or may not support the Separate School District. The assessed value 
of the Separate School District is in some cases slightly lower, in others 
definitely lower than that of the Public School District. The reasons for 
this are principally: the incomes of many of the Separate School ratepayers 
are low; as a result the value of their property is also low; through dis¬ 
interestedness in some cases, through ignorance in others, some Catholics 
fail to give the notification necessary to have their property valuation placed 
on the Separate School assessment roll. The fact that the average number of 
pupils per family in the Separate Schools is somewhat higher than that in the 
Public Schools would also tend to lower the proportional income of the district. 
The final and usually greatest factor is that already discussed at length, 
namely that Separate School Districts did not receive their proper share of 
company and corporation taxes. 

Expenses were proportionately higher because the Separate School rep¬ 
resented a smaller unit than the Public School. A district which provided a 
nine-room public school required a two-room separate school to accommodate 
the pupils. Additional rooms were built in the same proportion. It is evident 
that the per capita expense of the smaller unit greatly exceeded that of the 
larger. In the cities an added consideration was the matter of carfare. Rela¬ 
tively speaking the Separate School District with fewer schools had to budget 
a much larger sum for carfare than the Public School District which had schools 
in all parts of the city. 




- 


. 

... . ■ , . ■ Bb ■; . •. ' ,. ' J 

.. ... . ..L •; !: s':' - X' -■■■ ■ •- ■ t ..j;.-:.. u.;J lo 



Ix; aj s i; ,u* ■ u-Vv‘in.tl©| 

.. ... , ’ • . ' 5 ' 

' • .. . - • t ' 


. .. • ' . 

^ - - . . 

• - - ' ■ - . -• - . l iO 

■ ... . 

.. .. .. . ' 1 : 

* 

. ’,t.\ i : .. .. : •. ;\i. • f i i 


. . .. 1 «t,er!J 

. f 




























56 


As the depression became more severe various temporary means were 
utilized. In 1933> for example, the Calgary Separate and Public Schools 
closed all elementary classrooms (Grades I-VIIl) on June 16 and reopened on 
September 18. The teachers received one-twelfth less salary for the year. 1 
To save the financial situation from collapse, the government passed the Tax 
and Rates Collection Act in 1931 making the municipality the collecting agency 
instead of the school district. The municipality was able to borrow money from 
the banks more easily and could thus provide at least part of the necessary 
funds. The Tax Consolidation Act was passed in order to encourage annual pay¬ 
ments of at least a portion of tax arrears. 

The only way to balance the budget was to cut supplies, to limit operat¬ 
ing expenses and to reduce salaries. In all schools of the province during 
depression years, salaries were low; in Catholic Separate Schools they were, 
of necessity, very low. The reasons have been set forth. 

BILINGUAL EDUCATION 

According to the Territorial Ordinance ©f 1892 as stated in Chapter I, 
aU schools of the North-West Territories were to be taught in the English 
language, but it was '’permissible for the board of any district to cause a 
primary course to be taught in the French language”. This section was main¬ 
tained in the school law of Alberta (Section 184). Sections 18 and 19 con¬ 
tained further references to this same subject. 

Subject to the provisions of Section 184 of the School Act, the 
board of any district may employ one or more competent persons to in¬ 
struct the pupils attending school in any language other than English. 

Such instruction shall be given between the hours of three and four 

1 "Minutes of C.S.S. Board Meeting”, May 18, 1933. 





' 

. 

■ 

■ 







. 















. 


■ •• ' v.‘. v.: : ; ■ , . . i 

... 


• . . 








. 



* ■ 




















57 


o’clock in the afternoon of such school days as may be selected by the 
board and shall be confined to the teaching of reading, composition and 
grammar. The text-books used shall be those authorized by the Minister 
of Education. 

In any school in which only a part of the pupils in a class receive 
instruction in a foreign language it shall be the duty of the teacher in 
charge to see that the remaining members of the class are profitably em¬ 
ployed while such instruction is being given. 

Some years ago the Minister of Education in Alberta defined what shall 
constitute a "primary course" in French and the teaching of French was authorized 
in a number of schools in the province. According to this interpretation during 
the first school year French could be used as the medium of instruction but oral 
English was to be included as a subject of study. During the second year, after 
the child has learned to read in his mother tongue, the formal teaching of 
English was to begin. From Grade III - VIII a period not exceeding one hour 
each day could be allotted to the teaching of French. In addition it was per¬ 
mitted to devote the last period of the day in all grades to religious instruc¬ 
tion, which instruction could be given in French. 

It is the general feeling in Alberta that educational authorities have 
treated the French minority most generously. The result has been that har¬ 
monious relations have in general characterized the administration of the 
school system of the province both as regards bilingual education and Separate 
schools. 

In 1925 the Department of Education published the first regulations 
and program of studies, "A Primary Course in French", for Bilingual Schools, 

On December 13 of the same year L ! Association Canadienne - Francaise de l 1 Alberta 
was organized. The primary aim of the association is to encourage the study of 
the French language, history, literature and culture among the French-Canadians 
of the province. 

In the following year, 1926, the teachers of Bilingual Schools organized 
to form, "L*Association des Instituteurs Bilingues de 1*Alberta", in order 
that they might more effectively encourage the study of their native tongue 


' 


. 







. 

■Cv ... c; r ,u, ivcr:^ id al tor'os to ‘todm/P & aX. 


■ 


■ 

' 

. :,' 1 \ ■ , . : ...A • •• ‘ ' - 


■ 








' 

. 











. 




. • , v. . ... •••. O' >• •; 





58 


by the French Canadian youth of the province, A tangible proof of their 
activity and progress was the inauguration of provincial examinations in 1929. 
These examinations were written by all grades. Successful pupils were given 
certificates. The marked yearly improvement in standard gives evidence of the 
increased interest and proficiency of the French-Canadians of Alberta in this 
study. 

Bilingual education does not imply only the study of French grammar, 
Reading, language, literature, composition, and history are all included. The 
entire French-Canadian culture with its folk lore, art and traditions form a 
part of the program for these schools. 

Section 154 of the Alberta School Act expressed the legal basis and 
provision for payment of instructors for bilingual education as follows: 

(1) All schools shall be taught in the English language, but it 
shall be permissible for the Board of any district to cause a primary 
course to be taught in the French language. 

(2) The Board shall have power to raise such sums of money as may 

be necessary to pay the salaries of the instructors, and all costs, charges 
and expenses of such a course of instruction shall be collected by the 
Board by a special rate to be imposed upon the parents or guardians of such 
pupils as take advantage of the same. 

The greater number of bilingual schools were Public Schools. Some 
Roman Catholic Public and Separate Schools gave bilingual instruction. Among 
these were St. Albert and Thibeault, near Edmonton. Several rural Catholic 
Public schools gave instruction in French when it was possible to obtain the 
services of a teacher qualified to do so, and when the School Board deemed 
the number of French-speaking pupils was sufficiently great. Creuzot, Fort 
Saskatchewan, Glengarry and St. Leon in the present Sturgeon Division; 
Vegreville Roman Catholic Public No. 44* just across the river from Vegreville; 
and Lac Ste, Anne were among this group. The only Roman Catholic Separate 

Schools which offered bilingual education were Grandin, Sacred Heart and Calder 
in Edmonton, St. Aubins in Chauvin and Sacred Heart in Wetaskiwin.^ The latter 
ceased to give bilingual instruction in 1924. 

^For location of these districts see Figure 1, p.23 and Figure 2, p.75. 





. 

■ 








IT .. 


• " ... -■ - . • . - 












■ 


' , ' . . - . - - « ■ ' 


. ■ 






.1 ' vf-t ' ' ;X - • u - ■ : i o ' 

■ 

■ ■ •- ■ ■ 










. . . . - 




’.s.:. > . . . *.>. , 




• : • i 











. 

. 




r.i: i:J 













59 


NEW ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICTS 
1905 - 1920 

During the first decade of the 20th century there was a great movement 
toward the west. Pioneering conditions of Alberta soon gave way to well es¬ 
tablished community centers. One of the most convincing proofs of the rapid 
development of the province was the establishment of numerous schools. Catholics 
were keenly aware of the rights they possessed by the Alberta Act; accordingly 
it is found that Catholic education was provided in many districts. In central 
Alberta where Catholics predominated a number of public schools provided this 
benefit; in the south of the province where Catholics formed a decided minority 
a number of Separate School Districts were organized.^ 

St, Martin's, Vegreville - In August 1906 St. Martin’s Roman Catholic 
Separate School District No. 16 was organized in the town of Vegreville. 

Reverend A. Bernier with the help of active members of the newly formed parish 
of Vegreville prepared a small house which was to serve as a school and a 
temporary convent for the Sisters* Filles de la Providence* who arrived in 
Vegreville in December 1906. In January 190? the school was opened with 12 
pupils in attendance under the direction of the sisters and a young teacher* 

Miss Anna Doyle. During the first year the numbers increased to 77> 25 of 
whom were boarding pupils. 

On December 16* 1907 a new convent was opened and classes were con¬ 
ducted in it. In addition to the regular school courses the Sisters gave 
special lessons in art* music, sewing and embroidery to those who wished to 
take them. The French-speaking pupils who formed a large percentage of the 
enrollment were given daily instruction in their native tongue. 

4*or location of the districts treated in this sub-section see Figure 2* p. 75 













: i ' 


. 


. • 










, . k •- 8U 




. ... 

. 


' 

■ : . : ■. . ■ ' ' • -v 




■ 


, , » •• ' • 


■ 


■ 

'. ■ .. . ; ■ .r r\i : ■■ . i ■ ■ 2 . 

' 

■ 






. 













60 


The school attendance grew rapidly; soon the new Convent was not large 
enough to hold all the classes. The basement of the church was used as a large 
classroom, but still accommodation was insufficient. It was decided that a 
school separate from the convent should be built. Accordingly a fine brick 
structure was erected and in the fall of 1914 this six-room school was opened. 
All Grades from I-VTII were taught. More and more parents in the surrounding 
district wished to take advantage of the splendid opportunities and the Catholic 
education which the Sisters gave their pupils. To provide for the growing 
numbers of non-resident pupils a new wing was added to the convent in 1918."^ 

St. Joseph's, Red Deer - In 190? the Catholic population of Red Deer 
under the leadership of Reverend Henri Voisin sent a petition to the provincial 
government for the formation of a Separate School District. On October 8, the 
same year the Religious Congregation, Filles da la Sagesse, came to Red Deer 
to open a convent and to teach in the newly constructed school. 

This congregation was instituted in France in 1703. The principal 
works of the institution are education of children, the care of the poor and 
sick, and the conducting of retreat houses. One of its special works in France 
and elsewhere is the education of deaf-mutes and the blind. In Alberta these 
sisters have three schools? at Red Deer, at Castor and at Whitefish, (an 
Indian Mission). 

Among the sisters who came to Red Deer in 1908 were trained teachers, 
an artist and a musician. Accordingly, from the beginning the pupils of this 
school had every opportunity to receive special training in music, art, sewing 

and French. 

When the classes opened on October 21, 1908 there were but two pupils, 
one day student and one boarder. This number rapidly increased to 20; of these 


1”Archives of Immaculate Conception Convent”, Vegreville. 















. 












. 

' 













































... ' l.-iA 









61 


15 were resident students. There must have been some delay in the official 
recognition of this district, for the Annual Report of the Department of Educa¬ 
tion for 1908 states that no new districts were organized. The Report of 1909 
lists North Red Deer District No. 17 with an enrollment of 28 pupils as one 
of the Roman Catholic Separate Schools. The date of organization is given as 
January 8. 1 The numbers increased rapidly and in 19H high school classes 
were taught. 

A new wing was added to the original building in 1913. This included 

classrooms, dormitories and a dining-room for the resident students. The f our- 

2 

room school accommodated 100 pupils of aU grades. By 1920 this number had 
increased to 149. 

St, Mi c hae 1 * g i Pin ehs r C i*eek - Meanwhile in Pincher Creek a Religious 
Congregation, Filles de Jesus, had been conducting a private school in Kemaria 
Convent since 1903. Messrs. T. Lebei, P. Bertles, F. Lynch, and G. Dionne 
worked untiringly to form a Separate School District. Finally on February 9, 
1909 St. Michael's Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 18 was recog¬ 
nized.^ From the beginning this district experienced financial difficulties. 
Thanks to the kind co-operation of the sisters it was possible to give the 
Catholic children of the district the benefits of a Catholic education. 

The enrollment for the first year after the official recognition of 
the district was 139. Classes were conducted in the convent in rooms rented 
at the modest Siam of $1.00 per month. The teachers' salaries were proportion¬ 
ately low. 

In 1910 the first part of the brick building which now stands on the 
corner of Lacombe Street and Christie Avenue was completed. The increased 

1 Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta , 1909, p. 35. 

^"Records of St. Joseph's School", Red Deer, 1908 - 1953. 

3 Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta , 1909, p. 35. 





















. 










' 

• . . ..... 




s - . . • 







. 




. . . .v . ■ i i 

. . ■. 


,.• *. ■ •: - . 





















. ■ 

* 













62 


accommodation and improved facilities attracted a still greater number of pupils. 

In 1915 a medical health officer was appointed for the school, and in 
the following year a truant officer was named. High school classes had been 
taught from 1904 when there were sufficient pupils. In 1917, owing to diffi¬ 
culty in obtaining a teacher at the modest salary the school district could 
afford, it was found necessary to send the Grade X and XI pupils to the Public 
High School. The parents of the pupils paid the tuition fee. In 19X8 Grade IX 
pupils, too, went to the Public School. 

Throughout these years the minutes of the School Board meetings contain 
references to the unsuccessful efforts to collect company and corporation taxes. 
The provincial wide postwar difficulties added to the ever-present monetary 
strain and resulted in an acute financial situation. In August 1918 a poll 
tax of $4.00 was levied in accordance with provincial laws, on all males over 
21 in the district. 1 

Pontmain, Trochu - The Congregation of the Sisters of Charity of Notre- 
Dame d’Evron opened a private school and boarding school in Trochu in 1909. In 


"Minutes of the Board Meetings" from 1909 - 1918. "The poll tax was no doubt 
levied under Section 35a of the School Assessment Ordinance. The following 
is quoted from the 1920 Office Consolidation, but this Section was a part of 
the original Ordinance (Chapter 30 of the Ordinances of 1901) 

"35a. Subject to the approval of the Minister, any school board 
may by resolution fix a minimum tax to be paid by any person assessed 
upon the assessment roll, at the .sum of four dollars ($4.00) and may 
require that every male resident of the district of the full age of 21 
years who has resided therein for a period of one month or over, and 
has not been assessed on the assessment roll, shall pay an annual tax 
of $4.00 for school purposes to be collected at any time after the first 
day of January in each and every year, and such school tax shall be payable 
by such residents, whether he has resided in the district before the date 
of the completion of the last revised assessment roll or not; but in the 
case of the collection of such tax, the name of such resident so paying, 
shall be added to the assessment roll." 
















■ 








: ' v/ , Y • , . : i . 

>■ 




. 






. 




* 
























. 










. 

■ 

. 




































63 

May 19H, Pontmain Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 20 was formally 
recognized.*^ The small frame school building was not ready for use until 
August 1912. In that year between 30 and 40 pupils in Grades I-VII were taught 
by three teachers. In 1918 the high school was opened and by 1920 there were 
156 pupils enrolled in this school. A four-room concrete and brick building 
had replaced the original frame structure. 

St. Louis, Medicine Hat - In June 1911 at Medicine Hat still another 
Separate School District, under the name of St. Louis Roman Catholic Separate 
School District No. 21 was officially organized. * 2 * * Not until January, 1913, 
however, was St. Louis school opened. Grades I-VIII, 60 pupils, were taught 
in two rooms by the Sisters of Charity of St. Louis. From the first, boarders 
were received at the convent. When the school opened they were five in number 
but after the new convent was completed and the Private School, St. Theresa 8 s 
Academy, was opened in 1914 the number rapidly increased. Twenty pupils ma.de 
up the high school group in that first year.^ 

By 1920 St. Louis school Grades I-VIII had an enrollment of 165. 

St. Theresa’s Academy was a private school. All Catholic high school pupils 
attended St. Theresa's and the Separate School Board paid the fees. 

North Edmonton - North Edmonton Roman Catholic Separate School District 


^Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 19H, p. 18. 

2 Xbid, 

^"Minutes of School Board Meeting”, January, 1913. 

^""Archives St. Theresa’s Academy", Medicine Hat. 









* 

. :J . ... 

* 


.... 








... 








. .. ■ . i ' - .. .. 

' 











1 . 


, 











, Id::> . . 1 . : j. .< A .. gov-i icnk 













64 

No. 19 was organized in 1911^ and a school was erected on the present site of 
St. Francis School in the same year. The existence of this district as an in¬ 
dependent unit was short, for in 1913 it was merged with St. Joachim's Separate 
School District No. 7. 

Theresetta. Castor - A private school, Montfort Boarding School, was 
opened in Castor in 1913 for the Catholic education of the children of the 
town and surrounding territory. This school was conducted by the Sisters, 
Filles de la Sagesse, who were in charge of the local hospital and who had 
opened a school in Red Deer a few years earlier. There were but two pupils 
when the school opened but the number soon increased.^ 

Reverend Father Leconte aided by Mr. Tony Wiart and Mr. John Barnes 
organized the Catholic families of the district. In December 1917 Theresetta 
Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 23 was formed.^ In January 1918 
the school as a publicly supported institution opened in a reconditioned 
Lutheran Church which had served as the Montfort Boarding School since 1913. 
Forty-nine pupils in Grades I-X comprised the initial enrollment. 

Early in 1918 the old Merchant's Bank Building was purchased and was 
moved to the newly acquired site. The building was repaired and served as a 
second classroom when school reopened in. September.^- In 1920 the enrollment 
in Theresetta school had increased to 128. 

Grouard - In February 1914 the Grouard Roman Catholic Separate School 


1 Ibid . 

^"Chronicles of Our Lady of the Rosary Hospital", Castor. 
3 Ibid. 1917, p. U3 

^■"Minutes of the School Board Meeting", September 1918. 





■ 

' ; 

. „ . ,;/ c. j 






' 

. 

. V 










'■■■■ . 


. 

■ 




' 


















' 





. 




• v . 


' 










. 

. 







District No. 22 was organized.'** It seems to have been a one-room school which 
never prospered. Although it was officially disorganized in August 1918, 
there is evidence that a school was in operation there during the following 
year at least. This may have been the Mission school which was eventually ab¬ 
sorbed into St. Bernard's Indian Residential School. 

St. Aubin, Chauvin - St. Aubin Roman Catholic Separate School District 
2 

No. 24 was formed in 1919. The school opened in September of that year in 
one of the rooms of the Rectory with 25 pupils in attendance in Grades I-VI 
and Grade IX.^ 

St. The re sa 8 s, Drumhelie r - August 1920 saw the organization of yet 
another Separate School District, St. Theresa No. 25 in Drumheller. A site 
was purchased and a plan for a six-room school was drawn up. Th© Separate 
School assessment was, however, too small to meet the expenses. The whole 
project was given up and the district was dissolved in January 1921. 

DEVELOPMENT OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 
1905 - 1920 

The period 1905 - 1920 was a time of steady development in the Catholic 
schools of the province. The security afforded by the passing of the Alberta 
Act 1905 together with the steadily increasing population had beneficial 
effects on these schools. 

Calgary - Although no new school buildings were erected in Calgary 
until 1909, there was a steady increase in enrollment. Various means were 
devised to meet the new demands on limited accommodation. In January 190? 

^Annual Report of the Department of Education^ Alberta, 1914 * p. 157. 

2 Ibid . 1919, p. 127. 

^"Minutes of the St. Aubin’s School Board Meeting”, September, 1919. 













. 
































- 

•• . oC /" ' ( , : 










■ 





































66 


the basement of St. Mary's Hall, the present C. N. R. Station, was leased as 

a classroom for boys with Mr. Wm. Ryder as teacher.^ In 1909 a classroom was 

opened in the basement of the East End Church. Miss Ethel MacDonald was the 
2 

first teacher. 

The need for accommodation was so acute that the erection of a school 
could no longer be delayed. In April 1909 the contract to build St. Mary's 
School was let. It is of interest to note that it was the sale of debentures 
to raise funds for this enterprise that occasioned the difficulty which gave 
rise to the changing of the name of the district from Lacombe Roman Catholic 
Separate to Calgary Roman Catholic Separate. 

Early in 1910 St. Mary's, an eight-room school, was formally opened. 

A year later it was already necessary to convert the assembly hall into class¬ 
rooms. In 19H two four-room schools were built, one in east, one in west 
Calgary. These were later known as St. Anne's and Sacred Heart Schools, 3 Two 

classrooms were opened in each of these schools in January 1912, Before the 

close of the year still further accommodation was required) three rooms were 
rented from Sacred Heart Convent, In 1913 Bridgeland, a one room school, was 
opened in the north-east section of the city. In 1914 two more small schools 
were organised, one in Hillhurst and the second in the basement of St. Joseph's 
Church. In this way provision was mad© for the Catholic pupils in the north 
and north-west parts of the city. 

During the next five years no new schools were opened. Those already 
functioning increased steadily in enrollment thus necessitating the opening of 
several new classrooms. Dr. McDonald, superintendent, reported at the annual 
ratepayers' meeting, November, 1917, "There has been an increase in attendance 

^-"Minutes of C. S, S. Board Meeting", January, 1907. 

2 "Minutes of C, S. S. Board Meeting", August, 1909. 

3For location of schools named in this and succeeding paragraphs of this 
sub-section see Figure 3* p. 81. 











. 






i • 

' 












. 












■ 






, ! , ' ■ --i. • . ; 


























... . , . • . 

. 






67 


from 730 to 909 since 1914. Hillhurst which opened with five pupils now 
has S3". 1 

The Catholic attitude toward coeducation has frequently been misunder¬ 
stood and misrepresented. Pope Pius XI expressed the views of the Church as 
follows: 


The Creator has ordained and disposed perfect union of the sexes 
only in matrimony, and, with varying degrees of contact, in the family 
and in society. Besides there is not in nature itself, which fashions 
the two quite different in organism, in temperament, in abilities, any¬ 
thing to suggest that there can be or ought to be promiscuity, and much 
less equality, in the training of the two sexes. These in keeping with 
the wonderful designs of the Creator, are destined to complement each 
other in the family and in society, precisely because of their differ¬ 
ences, which therefore ought to be maintained and encouraged during their 
years of formation, with the necessary distinction and corresponding 
separation, according to age and circumstances. The principles with due 
regard to time and place, must, in accordance with Christian prudence, 
be applied to all schools, particularly, in the most delicate and decisive 
period of formation, that, namely, of adolescence.2 

Mindful of the above principles. Catholic educators, whenever possible, 
have separate classes for boys and girls particularly at the high school level. 
Thus, when the enrollment in the Calgary Separate schools was sufficiently 
large the School Board organized a boys’ school. In September 19IS four rooms 
were rented in St. Mary’s rectory. Here under the capable direction of 
Reverend Father Cameron, St. Mary’s College for boys in Grades VI-XXI was 
opened. Up to this time St. Mary’s Girls’ School had been the only Catholic 
high school in the city. 

Mount Royal district was being built up rapidly during this period. 

To provide Catholic education for the children in this part of the city Mount 
Royal School (now Holy Angels) was constructed in 1919* three rooms were 
opened in September. 

The development of the Separate Schools in Calgary was not only in 
number of buildings and increase in pupils. Every aspect of education gives 

1 “Minutes of Calgary Separate School Ratepayers’ Meeting", November, 1917. 

^Pope Pius op, cit ., p. 23. 








. 

. . :■ 

: . : • •• • . ■; .... .... ' ' ... 

. 

. 

. 







. 

















. : 







68 


evidence of corresponding growth. In 1911 a truant officer, Mr. Barker, was 
appointed. Beginning in 1913 monthly meetings of the principals of the three 
schools were held. In March of the same year Mr. G. J. Connolly was appointed 
Superintendent and Secretary-Treasurer. A year later he was replaced by 
Dr. A. B. McDonald. 

About this time the first mention of manual training and household 
science classes was made. It was not until 1920 with Miss N. Nolan as teacher 
that the domestic science classes were actually begun, and several years 
passed before the boys were given manual training. 

Health services were given in the Separate Schools in 1915 with 
Miss iilone LeBlanc as school nurse. In August 1916 Miss Margaret Brown was 
appointed to this position. For many years Miss Brown gave capable and 
generous service to the citizens of Calgary. 

Throughout the years 1912 - 19IB a cadet corps was in operation under 
Sergeant Armitage. Annual field meets were begun in the autumn of 1914. Other 
sports, too, were encouraged for in 191? St. Mary's Hockey Club won the Inter- 
Scholastic Hockey League Championship. 

At the close of the period under discussion the Calgary Separate 
Schools, with Mr. J. F. Kinahan as Superintendent and Secretary-Treasurer 
(Mr. Kinahan was appointed August 2, 1916), had an enrolment of 1496. These 
pupils were instructed in eight schools by 35 teachers. Among these teachers 
were members of the Society Sisters Faithful Companions of Jesus who taught 
in St. Mary’s Girls * and Holy Angels Schools and Sisters of St. Joseph who 
were engaged in Sacred Heart and St. Anne's Schools. For a short time in the 
precedeing years members of the Congregation Ursulines of Jesus and Filles de 
la Sagesse had taught in Sacred Heart and St. Anne's Schools. 












» ... ii. . 










' 




. 






. 




V • . 'v . , .• a • J **til 

■ 

- 




















69 

Edmonton - Progress in the Edmonton Separate Schools -was continuous in 


the period 1905 - 1920. Early in 1905 Mr. E. Tessier, later Reverend Father 
Tessier, was appointed Secretary. He did valuable work for the Edmonton 
Separate Schools throughout his tenure of office which lasted until 19IS. 

By the end of 1906 the 103rd Street School, later known as St. Mary's, 
was completed. 1 At first it accommodated only elementary pupils while the high 
school classes continued to be taught in the Faithful Companions Jesus Convent, 
110th Street - 99th Avenue. The first unit of the present Sacred Heart School 
was built in 1908. In 1911 a four-room addition was made to this unit. 

At this time discussions began regarding the amalgamation of the Separate 
School Districts within the boundaries of Edmonton and Strathcona, These negoti- 
ations were completed in 1913 when the three Separate School Districts in the 
city of Edmonton, St. Joachim's No. 7, St. Anthony's No. 12 and North Edmonton 
No. 19, amalgamated under the name of the Edmonton Roman Catholic Separate 
School District No. 7. 

In 1906 the original frame building which had served as St. Anthony's 
School was replaced by a new building. In 1913 a four-room frame structure on 
the present site of Mount Carmel School was built. The same year a school was 
opened at Elm Park (Calder), and during the year temporary two-room schools 
were constructed in North Edmonton, Calder, and Gallagher Flats. A four-room 
addition to Sacred Heart was also constructed. 

Mr, E. Tessier became Superintendent ae well as Secretary-Treasurer 
in 1913. In 1914 Grandin, an eight-room school, was built. Elementary grades 
were removed from the 103rd Street School to make room for the increasing high 
school population, 

A temporary class in rented quarters was opened in Fraser Flats in 1915* 


•^For location of schools named in this sub-section see Figure 4, P* $4* 













. . 


. 










• . 








- 








s 




- 

. 


. 






. 






... - 

. 

. 










70 

It did not, however, continue in operation for long. The frame school building 
at Calder was destroyed by fire early in 1916. Rented classrooms were used 
until a new building had been completed. Fairview school was built in 1917 
while Gallagher Flats school was closed in 19IB owing to the decrease in popula¬ 
tion in the district. 

Mr. Tessier resigned the office of superintendent in 19IB and was 
temporarily replaced by Mr. D. J. Gilmurray. The following year Mr. D. J. 

O'Dooley became Superintendent and Secretary-Treasurer. Construction of the 
Hempriggs (now St. Andrew’s) School was completed in 1919. About this time 
a system of medical inspection for schools was organized. By arrangement with 
the Edmonton Public Board it was, for a time, carried out by the Medical De¬ 
partment of the Public Schools. 

In 1920, 31 years after the Edmonton Separate School system had been 
inaugurated, eight schools were in operation. The total enrollment was 1,822 
pupils. 


St. Albert - When in 1905 Edmonton became the capital of the Province 
of Alberta, it would seem St. Albert accepted the status of a small town. 
Catholic education continued to be given to the pupils of the district and to 
those who took advantage of the boarding school. There was a gradual increase 
in enrollment. In 1909 it was necessary to build a four-room addition to pro¬ 
vide accommodation for the 1?1 pupils. Between 1910 and 1920 there was little 
growth; in fact after that date a slight decline set in . St. Albert was al¬ 
ways a bilingual school. 

Macleod - During the early part of the century there was little growth 
in the Catholic population of Macleod. In fact in 1910 the enrollment of the 
Holy Cross School was the same as it had been when the school was opened in 
1888, 20 pupils. Between 1910 and 1920 this number was doubled and for a time 
it seemed that Macleod had entered upon a period of prosperity. In 1919 a new 










- 

. 

. .. . 








■ 


. 






































71 

brick structure, which was intended to serve as a convent and school, was built. 
The convent was never opened but one room of the new building served as a very 
fine classroom for the forty pupils who were registered. 

Lethbridge - In Lethbridge advance was slow but continuous. By 1910 
the enrollment had increased to 302. To provide the necessary accommodation, 
two new classrooms were constructed bringing the total number of rooms in 
St. Aloysius School to nine. 

The following years saw a great influx of Central European immigrants 
who established themselves in North Lethbridge where new coal mines were being 
opened. To provide educational facilities for the increasing numbers, St. 
Basil's, an eight-room school was constructed in North Lethbridge. Grades 
X-VIII were taught in this school while St. Alo3fsius School on the south side 
taught only Grades X-IF. 

In 1920 the enrollment in the two Separate Schools was 50?. The Sisters 
Faithful Companions of Jesus ably assisted by devoted lay teachers taught in 
both these schools. Music was regularly taught and the achievements in art 
and drama throughout this period were of a very high quality. 

Morinville - Meanwhile Thibeault Roman Catholic Public School No. 35 
was advancing steadily. By 1906 the first building was already too small and 
an additional wing had been built. In it a third classroom for English- 
speaking pupils was opened. From 1905 - 190 ? lay teachers replaced the Sisters, 
for these latter, having been educated in France, were required to complete 
their teacher-training in Calgary. 

In 1907 the boarding school was opened with approximately 20 boarders 
and about 20 others who remained only from Monday to Friday. Two years later, 
in spite of the recent addition, the school was too small. 






- 





. 




• 

. 


. 

V . 

- : ' I 

. 


• 








- £ 






: ... : . 









. 


' 










72 


A new building was erected and completed in 1909. Four classrooms, two 
in the convent and two in the former school functioned as a private school while 
a single classroom in the old school constituted Thibeault Roman Catholic Public 
School No. 35. The following year a second classroom was opened in this pub¬ 
licly supported school. Eighty pupils were registered. 

Until 1912 the education given in both the private and public school 
was on the elementary level. Grade VIII was taught for the first time in these 
schools in the school year 1912 - 13. The following year instruction, was given 
in Grade IX and in 191? Grade XII examinations were first written by Morinville 
pupils. 

In 1913 the Thibeault school, a fine brick structure, had replaced the 
old frame building and in 1917 another wing was added to Notre Dame Convent. 

In 1919 the two High Schools, Private and Public, which until then had func¬ 
tioned as separate units, were combined. 

Wetaskiwin - Sacred Heart School in Wetaskiwin was still a one-room 
school in 1905 having an enrollment of 49 pupils in Standard I-V. In 190? a 
second room was opened and by 1910 the enrollment had increased t© 67 . The 
Sisters of the Assumption came to teach in Sacred Heart School in 1910. At 
that time it was a bilingual school giving instruction in French. Between 
1910 and 1920 there seems to have been a gradual shift in population; from a 
predominantly French group it became predominantly German.. Consequently the 
teaching of French was discontinued and the Sisters of the Assumption, bilingual 
teachers, were replaced by the Sisters of St. Joseph. In 1920 the enrollment 
in the school was 77. 









, 

' '■ .1.' Jfr. : ■ .. 


. 


. 

. 

. 
















. - ' ■ ■ ■ . ■ 




. 



. 





































73 


S maller Schools - St. Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Public School 
District No. 7 was not in operation after 1885. 1 St. Thomas Duhamel Roman 
Catholic Public School District No. 26 became Duhamel Public School District 
No. 627 in 1901; 2 3 St. Agnes Roman Catholic Public School District No. 18 be¬ 
came Beauvais School District No. 18 in 1910.^ Gleichen Roman Catholic Sep¬ 
arate School District No. 14 seems to have been closed before 1906, for it is 
not listed in the Annual Report of the Department of Education for 1906; the 
district was, however, officially disorganised only in 1952.^ The other 
smaller Roman Catholic Public rural and hamlet schools continued to function 
throughout this period, but there was no significant development nor note¬ 
worthy change in either enrollment or organization. 

NEW SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICTS 
1920 - 1936 

This period of financial stress and hardship did not deter educational 
leaders from forming new school districts. In seven areas where the Catholic 
population was sufficiently great to justify the undertaking, Roman Catholic 

^ Report of the Board of Education of the N.W.T. , 1886-1887* p. 23. 

2 Order issued August 23, 1901, by the Chairman of the Council of Public 
Instruction. The order was made under Section 56 of the School Ordinance. 

3 

By authority of a ministerial order of Mr. D. S. MacKenzie, Deputy Minister 
of Education dated February 24, 1910. 

^Annual Report of the Department ©f Education, Alberta, 1952, p. 118. 











; . ■ : . ... , 

. 

. i. ; • • . .• s ... «. 6 

. 








- . C; > . t. , J i, it ■ C . ■ ;*iU; 


■ ' > ' ' • • 






■ . .. . . , J. . .. V: i 
















■ 






. . 








. 
















Separate School Districts were formed. The first of these was in the northern 
part of the province.^ 

Fort Vermilion - June 7, 1923, Fort Vermilion Roman Catholic Separate 
School District No. 26 was formed. It opened as a one-room school with 41 
pupils in Grades I - VII. Sister Lucy of Venice of the Sisters of Providence 
was the first teacher. For several years there was very little progress, but 
in 1935 it became necessary to open a second classroom. A new two-room school 
was built at that time. 

St. Rita's. Rockyford - St. Rita's Separate School District No. 27 
was officially organized May 5* 1926.^ In November of that year the school 
was opened with an initial enrollment of 45 pupils. Miss Justine Walsh taught 
Grades I - V; Miss Frances Walsh taught Grades VI - XI. This first school was 
a two-room frame construction building with full basement. 

In 1929 the Ursuline Sisters of the Chatham Union opened St. Rita's 
Convent and boarding school. Two of the sisters taught in the school while a 
third gave private music lessons. There were 22 children from neighbouring 
districts in the boarding school. 

Rockyford was much affected by the depression of th® early thirties. 

In 1931, when the number of boarding pupils decreased to four, it was deemed 


See Figure 2, p. 75 for location of Separate School Districts organized 
during this period. 

^ Annual Report. Department of Education. Alberta , 1923* p. 122. 














; c v: ; ‘ . • \ 


, 












. . , v . 






. 







. . 

t . •- .. v ■ .■.** . • 


■ 

. 

• . J-I ' . •• \ ; 











MAP OF ALBERTA 


Showing location of Separate School Districts 
in 1936 



© ROMAN CRTffoLiC SEPAR SeNOOi. 

ot>jr*0 T <ors 

Q) POP) PM CtiTHOi-IC StP/fPPTE'. SCPooi. 

CiOSJFO a 

DPT S’ IN 0/C/9TES 

PI ftp scpj-e : /oo Apn.es 


Figure 2 





















advisable to close the convent and boarding school, and to move to a smaller 
house in the village. Finances were so low that for a time it seemed as if 
St. Rita's Separate School would have to close, but the goodwill and sacrifice 
of the people enabled the School Board to manage. In April 1932 the convent 
was reopened and in September boarding pupils were again accepted. Grade X, 
consisting of four pupils, was taught for the first time during that school 
term. 

Guy* McLennan - The public school in Mclennan was destroyed by fire 
in 1929. During the unavoidable delay prior to the opening of the new public 
school, the Catholics of McLennan opened a private school. Miss Alice BoisjoU, 
a bilingual teacher, conducted the classes. There were only eight pupils in 
attendance during the first school year, but the following year the numbers 
increased to 27. 

On July 21, 1930 this private school was officially recognized as Guy 
Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 30 * 1 In September 1931 a fine two- 
room school was completed. Sister Jean Placide of the Sisters of Providence 
taught the 35 pupils in Grades I - VIII who attended. In 1932 there were 42 
pupils and in the following year a second classroom was opened. 

St, Joseph's Grand® Prairie - With the opening up of the Peace River 

district in the early twenties Grande Prairie became a thriving town. Reverend 

J. A. Josse O.M.I. worked untiringly in the interests of the Catholic popular 

tion of the district and on February 4, 1928 he succeeded in obtaining official 

2 

recognition of St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 28. 


^ Annual Report. Department of Education« Alberta , 1930, p. H3. 











. 

« 






t el x ■ • 


■ 









. : . 






' • . .... . • . lc< 








. 


j ... .. 












































77 

In September of that year Miss Ann McDonald conducted classes in the parish 
haH for the 40 pupils enrolled in Grades I - VIII. 

The Sisters of the Holy Cross came to Grande Prairie to take charge of 
the newly constructed school and to offer private music lessons in September 
1929. In 1930 - 31 the 45 pupils in Grades I - X were taught in two classrooms; 
in 1932 Grade XI, too, was taught. Two new classrooms were built in the summer 
of 1934; one of these rooms was opened in September as a high school room in 
which Grades X - XII were taught. 

In that same year, 1934, the sisters opened a boarding school for girls 
of the neighbouring district. The accommodation was limited as a private home 
was used for this purpose, but nine pupils registered during that first term. 

By 1936 the school enrollment, including boarding pupils, had increased to 90. 

Our Lady of Good Success, Clandonald - Clandonald was the district 

chosen by a group of Scotch inmigrants in the late twenties. Father Malcolm 

MacDonald was much interested in this settlement and helped these new Canadians 

to adjust themselves to their unfamiliar environment. In 1930, January 4, Our 

Lady of Good Success Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 29 was organized 1 2 

to provide Catholic education for Catholic children of the district. On March 6 

2 

of the same year the name of the district was changed to Clandonald. Arch¬ 
bishop 0 s Leary was responsible for the building of a convent while Father 
MacDonald directed the undertaking. 

In September 1929 Benedictine Sisters came from the United States to 
take charge 'of the newly built convent. Classes opened in the convent with an 
enrollment of 2 & elementary and 12 high school pupils. Sister Ruth and 
Mrs. Sherbeake were the first teachers. 

1 Ibid,. 1930, p. 113. 

2 

Records of the Department of Education. Alberta 

















. 


. 

, . ■ ' . ■ - , ■. ■ . 








' 








■ 








, . • U ■ . V 


. 



















■ 














78 

In 1932 the Sisters of St. Joseph of Peterborough took over the convent 
and opened a boarding school. They also gave private music lessons. Three 
rooms in the convent were still rented from the Sisters as the School Board 
was unable to build a school for a few years. The enrolment in the school 
increased gradually. 

Throughout the history of Glandonald Separate School the cost of 
operating it has been a very heavy burden on the taxpayers of the district. 

The number of ratepayers has always been small and the district has never re¬ 
ceived a just portion of company and corporation taxes." 1 ” 

Wainwright - On September 9, 1931 five Sisters of Saint Joseph of Peter¬ 
borough arrived in Wainwright. They had come west in response to the urgent 
appeal of Reverend Hugo Doyle for teaching sisters who would open a Catholic 
school in the town of Wainwright. An old house formerly used as a hospital 
situated at the north end of the town, served as the first convent. Within a 
month a more suitable home had been found, and a small bungalow on Fourth 
Avenue had been rented for a school. 

On September 16 a private school supported only by private donations 
was opened with 35 pupils in Grade I - VIII in attendance. Reverend Mother 
Edwina was the teacher. Ail but the absolute necessities were lacking during 
those early days. Opposition too, was openly expressed, and it was necessary 
to take immediate steps towards having the Department of Education recognize 
the private school. 

When in March 1932 a petition was sent to the Alberta Government request¬ 
ing the establishment of a Separate School District in Wainwright, the opposition 
reached a climax. Both the Public School Board and the Town Council openly ex- 

2 

pressed disfavour in formal resolutions. The necessary vote for the formation 

of the separate school district was taken on June 13, and on June 28, 1932 

Statement of Mr. P. Convey, Secretary of Clandonald Separate School District, 
letter of January 4, 1954. 

^Resolutions cited by Reverend J.C. McGrane in After Twenty Five Years 
(1909-1934), Chapter III, Pamphlet, Publisher not given. 









. .. • 7 v.: • v .-’A ... or, . i 0.7'...\; 7 .t . 0 . ; c f il 

v,. ' I b; J . .7 • Ol OV(0 o 0 1U 0. V-: 

■ ■ ‘ •' : 7 v < 00 1 7 ‘. O' , 7 0 .IT 

* 

. .. ^.. v o^o*::or;j 

: > • t. • '' :'v.' O.o or .o :.70 Or • O' ‘ 'J 7 

■ ■ • v. r. 'v o„.. 07: ,c .70 < 

• 0; - . • . \ ■ 0. o oouuJUn :v7. 

■ . . . ' 

v. . i . a ..." ■ , . . xr O' . - . . . 

> 

. •• o-, ' ' • o’' ,<r .7 ,-v q , : a •, ./ .. '.to 

' j: £ i : 

. • . • 0 .. r . , "• a- ■ r. 0 ro t 7 j 

* • i 

. 7 ’ . x ■ .. ■ ■ • v . r. *j 

•• o 7: , . • .• ; 0 • v7\/ o OJ. -.'.ov. . o.i. . :. it’ 

"-■ ■ ■ ■ ‘ . - , . ; 0. ;. ;j C 0.0 

- . . , ■ 

. . , 

•o jiiVi.• o- ooy t .. p4 

. 

. 

• ‘ ' . ii ■ ■ . i 

.: .. ■ ■ , : : "O;,.. , .■ O' j 0; 

- . .0' o f . 0.: •; r 

.*. • ' . 0 0 ' , o. , OO Jr. J IQ 

, ' , . ‘ . ... - . " v . . 

.; ’ " I J i ; 



79 


Wainwright Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 31 was officially organized.^ 

In September 1932 Grades I - XII were taught. The enrolment was 99* 31 
of whom were high school pupils. A number of these students came from the sur¬ 
rounding districts as a boarding school had been opened in 1931. From the begin¬ 
ning music, piano and instrumental, and dancing lessons were given. 

By 1933 the number of pupils had increased to 105. The building of a 
new and larger school was imperative, but the district lacked funds. A promise 
had been given at the time of the formation of the separate school district that 
the mill rate would not be higher than that of the public school and that promise 
had to be honored. The depression was at its peak; debentures were unsaleable; 
loans were impossible; the Public Utility Commission was opposed. When every 

avenue seemed closed an insurance company bought the debentures and the work 
2 

of building began. 

In May 1934 the new school, one of the finest buildings in the town, 
was formally opened. It was of standard construction containing four class¬ 
rooms, a library, a teacher’s room, and a science room. The old church ms 
moved to the site of the new'school. After expensive remodelling it served as 
an auditorium. In the new surroundings the Wainwright Separate School continued 
to prosper. The opposition of the early years gave way to genuine appreciation 
of the contributions to education that the convent and Separate School were giving. 


DEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING DISTRICTS 
1920 - 1936 

Calgary - Although six new classrooms were opened in different schools 
in 1920 and 1921, no buildings were erected by the Catholic Separate School 
Board until 1922. In 1921 the Catholic Separate School system was made up of 
eight schools. St. Mary’s Girls’ had an industrial arts unit aid 10 classrooms 

^ Annual Report* Department of Education. Alberta * 1932, p.93. 

2j.C. McGrane 0 £. cit ,, Chapter III 



















. 





















cJ 1 . . 




' 








■ • v :■( . • 'O ... ■ ..... 






■ • 


• — >• - ’ ;. - v v . : . ..... 

. 


. 




. 

. 






■ ' • . J .. .•> o'. - : Co 













_ 


. . ‘ 1 r .. ' 






. . 





80 


for pupils in Grades I - XII while St. Mary's Boys' operated five classrooms 
for Grades VII - XII. Sacred Heart, Bridgeland, and Holy Angels' were five- 
classroom schools. Sacred Heart and Bridgeland accommodated pupils in Grade 
I - VIII; Holy Angels' taught Grades I - V. St. Anne's was a four-room school; 
St, John's was a three-room and St. Joseph's a two-room school. Grades I - VIII 
were taught in each of these units.^ 

In 1922 a four-room addition was made to St. Anne's School. In December 
1923 the domestic science classes were discontinued, and the money formerly 

devoted to this was used to pay the fees for Catholic students attending the 

2 

Commercial High School. A sixth room was finished in Bridgeland school (known 
as St. Angela's since 1923), in 1926. 

A fire in St. Mary's Girls' School made the'building unfit for use 
from November 1926 to March 1927. Temporary accomodation had to be found. 
Grades I and II were taught in Holy Angels, Grades III - VIII in Sacred Heart, 
while the high school classes were held in Western Canada College which was 
kindly offered for that purpose by the Public School Board. 

St. Maiy's Boys' School, an eight room school, was built in 192?. The 
Diocesan clergy with Father Cameron as principal continued to teach in the 
school until 1933 when five Basilian Fathers from Toronto took over. 

A music supervisor. Father Bolts, was hired in 1928. Splendid work 
was done throughout the schools under his direction. In 1931 a sub-normal class 
for under-privileged children of the Calgary Separate School District was in¬ 
stituted in Holy Angels School which had been enlarged in 1929 by the addition 


^See Figure 3, p, 81 for location of Separate Schools in Calgary. 
^"Minutes of Separate School Board Meeting", 1924. 



. 




















• ! ^.C; V " .. *. ... 

. 


z 

■ 






■ 












■; v. 

■ 

. : 






' 













81 


MAP OF THE CITY OF CALGARY 
Showing location of Separate Schools in 1953 




<0 

V 

4 

Cs 

** 

*k 

<0 

tl 

c* 

•k 

r o 


$ 

\ 

J? 



"ofloc 







<u 

* 

c 














£7: PfHO-S 

J-vMoc. /sr.M 

m 

-r. 




— /? 

2 4Tpbf 




s,Ms 
la/?c&. /SSt-M 

IV. 

© , 

Josephs 
jo p?vc. & sr. //. 







/ & /7 









0 • y * 
w <fw% 

RLPHOMSOS 
n 3o/. off PcS 

•eff-sr. 


tPr* 



Sr. F»GT£PS 

Sot 

• /V**/ 



> .■ 

^ • 

vS-r MMG£-JLM$ 
irtve. 6SW 

w. 



/ /7? jo 




sr j~&m/ 

'So 9- /e’en 

3 y*J 

k>. 

>9 SrsfOUSM 


0 

ST GFP-IC& 

\ \ ys 

V / 

5y>>- 


- LJ^LJU^. 



$&<S#0G 

*s/?ve 

0 

***M*r£& 

. rss?nf 

Sc M em &&/?# 

? ocr/c£ 

•P. 

S7 

T'^A/ 

PAOPtr'so £r 
COP/Z/9 4 / 

V 

/<£ 

st~ 

if 


0 

e.iV- 


HcuY 4 
J&ffv 

sr. M/Yuvii 

/* Y?VC J 

«erii% 

, s.yt s7 S 

3.US. 

• . . 
9pys 6/klS< 

9vc. JS?H/ 

0 

i/*>vc 9 

i 

j*/- r 


J4/?oe 




0 

Sr ctMieke* 
l££}ve. £zisr- 

w 


f'i 
l w 

\M. 






32 five. 

) 





Iff 

2^ 

~^y 





40 /?};Z 

1, 1 




© 

m rftooae sa 
& 4r u 

\\— 

st-s. w . 


«5 7 ffNTMO* 

3 t/fns/ct r?c 

0 

K.S 

- Sa/Joe 





rof/i’c. 




J? 

fe) 








ss Sue. 


k 

* 

*0 

§■* 

/ j S 
( / 




v*< ^ 

£ <2 

*5 

/ \ 


.JJLd&t. 


N 

/N 


W f 




s 

Figure 3 






























































































































82 


of two classrooms and an auditorium. 

In 1934 a group Life Insurance Plan for all employees was begun by the 
Separate School Board. The following year, 1935, the school clinic was amal¬ 
gamated with the City Health Department.^ Both arrangements have proved very 
satisfactory and continue to the present time. 

No further building projects nor significant changes were effected by 

the Calgaiy Separate School Board during the depression years. The monetary 

difficulties common to all parts of the province were not lacking in Calgary. 

The inability of the city council to make full payments to the School Board was 

2 

the chief cause of financial indebtedness. Various means were adopted to en¬ 
able the schools to function under these reduced circumstances. 

The operation of schools on a nine month basis in 1933 has already 
been mentioned in Section 2. Requisitions of the School Board on the city were 
severely cut. In 1933 although 46 teachers were employed as against 41 in 1927, 
the requisition was dropped to the 192? level.^ 

Edmonton - The first important change in the Edmonton Separate School 
system in the period 1920 - 1936 was the inauguration of a Separate School 
Medical Department in 1922. Dr. J. H. Conroy was appointed medical inspector 
and Mss L. Levasseur school nurse. 


^"Minutes of the Calgary Separate School Board Meeting' 1 , May 1, 1935. 
^"Annual Report of Calgary Separate School Board", 1934. 

^"Minutes of Calgaiy Separate School Board Meeting", May 18, 1933* 




• . 




. 
























. • ' : 




















. 















83 

In the following year 1923 another change was made. A Boys' High 
School, under the principalship of Rev. P. F. Hughes, was opened in classrooms 
in the 103rd Street School. The high school girls' classes operated as a sepa¬ 
rate unit with Sister L. Hickey as principal. The same year at North Edmonton 
a new school site was acquired, and a four-room brick school, St. Francis, was 
erected to replace the older frame structure. This enterprise marked the be- 
ginning of an extensive building programme which continued until the economic 
depression of 1930 halted further development. 

During these years in the north-east section of the city St. Alphonsus 
School with an enrollment of 79 pupils in Grades I - ¥111 was opened.^ It 
consisted of two portable frame schools which were moved to Grandin school 
site when a six-room school was built in the district in 1928. In 1938 a two- 
room addition completed the school. 

St. Alphonsus was not the only new unit organized in 1924* A one-room 
school with 40 pupils in Grades I - VIII was opened in rented quarters in 
Dunvegan Yanis, and two classrooms, purchased from the Public School Board, were 
placed in operation for the 46 Catholic school children in Fraser Flats. These 
latter rooms were later temporarily closed when the enrollment dropped. In 
September 1924 a Commercial High School Unit, known as St. Vincent's High 
School, was organized. It was placed under the principalship of Sister Frances 
de Chantal, of the Sisters of Halifax and had an annual enrollment of approxi¬ 
mately 90 pupils. It was established in the rooms formerly occupied by the 
McTavish Business College, 9859 Jasper Avenue, 


^See Figure p. 84 for location of Separate Schools in Edmonton. 





. 

. - ! . . •: ■ iii;» . Lv oi i Z 

. 








- 

' 












■ 





■ 








; 



. 

- 

































MAP OF THE CITY OF EDMONTON 
Showing location of Separate Schools in 1953 



N 

✓fv 


W 


Figure 4 







































































































































S5 

Another event which has proved most auspicious for the Separate School 
System in Edmonton was the appointment of Mr. A. A. O’Brien as Superintendent 
and Secretary Treasurer in 1924. The year 1925 saw the construction of a six- 
room brick school. Mount Carmel, on ?6th Avenue, South Edmonton, to replace the 
four-room frame school in operation there. 

In 1928 St. Edmund’s, a four-room brick school was built on 130th Avenue 
and 117th Street, Calder, to replace the frame structure in use, and O'Connell 
Institute, Forest Heights, a three-room frame and stucco school, was erected to 
accommodate the children of the orphanage and surrounding district. A one-room 
unit was opened in rented quarters on the Ross Flats, and in 1929 a one- 
classroom addition was built to St. Andrew’s School. 

About this time the enrollment in the high school was increasing rapidly. 
To provide the necessary accommodation, St. Joseph’s High School for Boys was 
built on 109th Street and 108th Avenue in 1930. The boys' high school classes, 
161 pupils, were removed to this new building in September. Reverend Father 
F. W. Daly, who since 1924 had been principal of the boys' high school unit on 
103rd Street, became principal of the new school. 

One-room schools were opened in rented quarters in the Bonnie Doon 
district in 1932, and in St. Mary's Home in 1934. The same year centres for 
instruction in home economics and general shop were begun in St. Mary’s and 
St. Alphonsus schools respectively for pupils of Grade VIII and IX from aU the 
Separate Schools. In 1934* too. Reverend G. L. Green was appointed supervisor 
of music and Sergeant G. W. Hawkes was named supervisor of physical education. x 

Although the Edmonton Separate School Board, like all School Boards in 
the province, experienced great financial difficulties during the depression 
years, the period 1920 - 1936 was one of marked progress. This was evident 

1 Western Catholic , Separate School Supplement, June 14, 1939. 














■ 


C - .... : . ; • 


. 




. 




■ 


. 














- 

• . ■ . i 














■ 








. <i 



































' 





















86 


not only in the number of schools opened and the substantial increase in enroll¬ 
ment, but also in the improved facilities for commercial, music, home economics, 
shop and physical education courses. The keen interest evinced in the inter¬ 
school baseball, basketball and hockey games as well as in the annual track meet 
bear testimony to the splendid school spirit. The success in the musical festi¬ 
val and in art in the annual exhibition are proof of the high level of attain¬ 
ment achieved by the Edmonton Separate Schools in the fine arts. 

MacLeod - The Macleod Separate School seems to have prospered during 
the early twenties for the attendance increased to 52 in 1926.^ After that 
date there was a decline in enrolment. In 1936 it was 32. The prosperity 
of the twenties was short Hved; the financial strain of the depression years 

became acute. In fact, during the early thirties it was all but impossible 

3 

to keep the school open. 

Lethbridge - The Lethbridge Separate School District began the period 
1920 - 1936 with two schools, St. Aloysius and St. Basil’s and a total enrol¬ 
ment of 507 pupils in Grades I to VIII.^ There was only a slight increase in 
the Catholic population of the city during these years) nevertheless an im¬ 
portant development took place in the Catholic school system. 

In September 1925 a high school unit was opened in St. Basil’s. During 
that first year there were nine students registered in Grade IX, The following 
year instruction was given in Grade X units for 16 pupils.^ The accommodation 
in St. Basil's school was limited) it was, therefore, impossible to open 
Grade XI classes until a new school had been built. 

^ Annual Report of Department of Education, Alberta » 1926, p. 68. 

2ibid. 1936, p. 85. 

3statement of Miss M. Perry, Secretary of Holy Gross Separate School District, 
Letter of June 28, 1953. 

^ Annual Report, of Department of Education* Alberta , 1920, p. 150. 

^St. Basils' School Registers, 1925. 



















. * ■ c . ^ ■ •: - 

- .v 


. 


- ■ LJ::; " . . ■, t . t o z d 

















■ 

* 














. . 

- 




_ 






■ 








. 









S7 

St. Patrick’s High School, a four-room brick building was completed 
late in 1927. On January 3, 1928 the school, staffed by two sisters Faithful 
Companions of Jesus and one lay teacher, was opened. There was an enrolment 
of 75 students in Grade VII to X. Grade XI, 15 pupils, was first taught in 
1928 and Grade XII, 16 pupils, was added in 1931. ^ 

The years 1914 - 1935 were difficult years for the Lethbridge Separate 
Schools, The war and the depression greatly affected the incomes of the rate¬ 
payers. As work slackened in the mines, many were unable to pay their taxes. 
The Sisters Faithful Companions of Jesus were asked to work at a much reduced 
salary to make it possible for the School Board to carry on. St. Patrick’s 
parish made up the deficit. Conditions improved when the Lethbridge Public 
School Board found it necessary to increase the mill rate, for then the rate 
for Separate School supporters automatically increased. The two rates have 
always been the same. 

Wetaskiwin - Sacred Heart School, Wetaskiwin, experienced great diffi¬ 
culties during this period. The financial problems of the depression years 
were acute. The district, however, continued to operate a two-room school in 
which instruction was given to pupils in Grades I to VIII. The enrolment be¬ 
tween 1920 and 1930 was high, around 77* but during the next few years there 

3 

was a decided drop. In 1933 it was only 42; by 1926 it had increased to 54. 

The only significant change in the organization of the school was that 
it ceased to be a bilingual school when the Sisters of St. Joseph replaced the 
Sisters of the Assumption as the teachers in September 1929.^ 

^St. Patrick’s School Registers, 1928 - 1931. 

^Statement of Reverend J, R. MacDonald, Pastor of Sacred Heart Parish, Letter 
of March 31, 1954. 

^ Annual Reports of Department ©f Education,.Alberta , 1920 - 1936. 

^■’’Annals of Sisters of the Assumption”, 1929. 












. 

. 

' 

- 


•' . 

. 












- •• . - 

. 





. • Dv V . • . 




. 

. ■ 

' v . . • -J . . . v 








. 

. , 

. 













88 


VegreviUe - Although the town of Vegreville grew steadily, the Roman 
Catholic population did not change much during the years 1920 - 1936. St. 
Martin's Separate School continued to function as a six-room school offering 
instruction in Grades I - XII. The enrolment during the period varied from 
174 in 1920 to 120 in 1936.^ The cause of this fluctuation was principally 
the decrease in the number of boarding pupils at the convent. 2 Financial 
difficulties of the depression years made it impossible for many parents to 
send their children to boarding school. 

Red Deer - The enrolment in the Red Deer Separate School in 1920 was 
149.^ In 1922 a building which had served the Fathers of Tinchebray as an 
Apostolic School was acquired. This provided three additional classrooms and 
a dormitory for small boys. Grades I to XXI were taught in the seven class¬ 
rooms which comprised the school. 

Since many of the pupils who attended the Red Deer Separate School 
were children from the surrounding districts who boarded at St. Joseph's 
Convent, the depression greatly affected the enrolment of the school. In 
1932 only 59 pupils were registered^ after that date there was a steady 
increase. In 1936 the enrolment was 108.^ 

Pincher Creek - In 1920 St. Michael's School was operating three rooms, 
one of which was in the convent, for pupils in Grades I t© VIII. The dis¬ 
advantages of using a rented room and the need for more accommodation resulted 
in a two-room addition with central heating system being built in 1922.^ 

^ Annual Report of Department of Education, Alberta , 1920 - 1936. 

^Statement of the Principal of St. Martin's School. 

3 Annual Report of Department of.Education, Alberta , 1920, p. 150. 

4 lbid 1 1932, p. 81. . 

5 Ibid ; 1936, p. 85. 

^"Minutes of St. Michael's S.S.B. Meeting", May 1922. 























■ 

' 


■ 




. 


i . 


' ,, ■ ■ J ‘i . : - v;; / A>" /: •• t * • 'J ■ • , - / ' j 




V 














. 

, 

; 

•. - V' 















89 

In 1923 Grade IX was again taught in the Pincher Creek Separate School 
in 1924 Grade X was added, but there were still only three rooms in operation. 
In 1925 the fourth classroom was opened for Grades IX, X and XI. The regular 
high school teacher was assisted by two part time teachers.^- Complete high 
school courses, IX to XII, were offered the following year. 

Financial troubles became more and more acute from 1926 to 1936. The 
fact that the Separate School District did not collect their share of company 
and corporation taxes added much to an already difficult situation. 2 st. 
Michael’s parish assisted in various ways$ funds raised at bazaars and dances 
were donated to the school. The pastor. Reverend Father Pilon, did much for 
the school by his efficient leadership and organization. 

Despite the hardships of depression years another two-room addition 
was made to St. Michael's School in 1931; one room was completed, the second 
was not.^ It became increasingly difficult for the School Board to collect 
the taxes during the next few years; consequently a 20$ reduction in salaries 
was effective in 1933*^ Further reductions were made in 1934 and 1935, but in 
1936 salaries were increased. 

The enrolment of the school naturally decreased during the depression 
years for relatively few parents could afford to send their children to 
boarding school. The average enrolment between 1924 and 1936 was 132 P 

Pontmain, Trochu - During the early part ©f the period 1920 - 1936 
Pontmain was a prosperous three-room village school offering instruction in 


^Ibidj January, 1926. 
^ Ibld ; January, 1927. 
3 Ibid ; June, 1931. 
^Ibid ; February, 1933. 


5 Annual Reports of Department of Education, Alberta ^ 1924 - 1936. 









. 




- 

. 


. 




. 




. 


' • . 






. 






- 










. 














90 


Grades I - XII. The depression and successive crop failures affected this 
centre much; there was a decided drop in the enrolment of the school as farms 
were sold and families moved to more promising areas or sought employment in 
the city. In 1933 one of the three classrooms was closed. By 1936 the enrol¬ 
ment had decreased to 35.^ 

Medicine Hat - In treating of the Medicine Hat Separate School system 
it must be remembered that during this period 1920 - 1936, in fact until 1947, 

St. Theresa's Academy, a private school for pupils in Grades I to XII, was the 
only Catholic School which taught high school. Fees were paid by the Separate 
School Board for resident high school pupils and by the parents for elementary 
grade pupils and non-resident high school students, for all pupils who attended 
the Academy. Between 1920 and 1930 the number of boarding pupils in St. Theresa's 

p 

Academy varied between 100 and 125. 

St. Louis' School for pupils in Grades I to VIII was the only school 
operated by the St. Louis Separate School Board. The enrolment in this school 
increased to 203 in 1926^ then declined steadily until in 1936 it was only 97.^ 

No new buildings were erected during this period. 

Throughout these years there was an agreement with the city council 
whereby the mill rate on separate and public school assessment was equal and 
each School Board mad© a requisition on the city for the funds it required over 
and above the government grants.^ The arrangement proved satisfactory to all 
concerned as long ae St. Theresa's functioned as a private school and therefore, 
was not supported by public funds. No change was made until after 1947. 

1 Ibid; 1936, p. 85. 

^Statement of the Principal of St. Theresa's Academy. 

^ Annual Report of Department of Education, Alberta , 1926, p. 68. 

4 Ibid ; 1936, p. 85. 

^Statement of Mr. M. Gray, Secretary St. Louis Separate School Board, letter 
of January 24, 1954. 













































. 














. 








' 




. 

. 

' 


- 

‘ 



















. 








91 


Castor - Theresetta Separate School had an enrolment of 126 pupils in 
Grades I to X in 1920. In 1921 it was decided by the Separate School Board that 
since the high school students. Grades IX and X, were pupils from outside the 
district, high school subjects would no longer be taught. 1 As a result of this 
change the attendance for the next school year dropped to 64. 2 

In 1924 Grade IX was again taught.3 Grade X was added in 1926, Grade XI 
in 1929 and Grade XII in 1931*^ In 1929 a two-story wing was added to the convent 
to provide necessary accommodation for the increasing numbers of pupils. The 
increase in enrolment was, however, only temporary, for after 1930 the attend¬ 
ance declined until 1936 when it was only 63 .^ 

The Separate School in Castor is deeply indebted to Reverend Father 
Leconte who acted as Secretary-Treasurer of the school district from its forma¬ 
tion in 191S until June 25, 1925. But for his encouragement and leadership it 
is doubtful whether the citizens of Castor would have formed a separate school 
district. 

Reverend J. J. 0 ! HaXXor&n, pastor of Our Lady of Grace Church and Missions 
since 1926, has always given the Catholic education of the children of his parish 
an important place* From 1931 to 1941 he taught the Grade XII mathematics 
course. Thanks to his efficient guidance and his work as Secretary-Treasurer, 
Theresetta School has never had any serious difficulties. 

Undoubtedly in a large measure the success of this little school depended 
on the Sisters, Filles d@ La Sagesse, and in particular on Mother Lucia de 
St. Joseph. Until 1949 the sisters provided a playroom and all but one of the 
classrooms. The teachers, too, with one exception were members of this 
congregation. 

ln Mimrtes of Theresetta Separate School Board Meeting", June 20, 1921. 

2 Annual Report of Department of Educat ion, A lberta , 1923, P* 107, 

-^"Minutes of Theresetta Separate School Board Meeting", July 30, 1924* 

%bid . June 17, 1931. 

** Annual Report of Department of Education, Alberta , 1936, p. 65. 













. - . ' ' 








' 


_ 










. 

. . 

. 












. 


. 


: 



. 

. 






92 


St. Aubins, Ch auvin - The years 1920 - 1933 were very difficult years 
for St. Aubin's Separate School. The district had no permanent nor satisfactoiy 
classroom; the financial standing became increasingly insecure; the problems of 
obtaining a satisfactory teacher were ever present. In January 1932 there was 
question of closing the school because of financial difficulties. However, the 
School Board managed to keep on, and in September of that year the sacristy of 
the church, a large room, was used as a classroom. The arrangement proved 
satisfactory. 

In September 1933 a more prosperous era began, for the Sisters of the 
Holy Cross from Montreal opened a convent in Chauvin, and one of the Sisters, 
Sister Mary of Saint-Medard taught in- St. AufoinJs School. There were 23 pupils 
registered that year;^ in the following years the numbers increased steadily. 
Piano and violin lessons were given at the convent while special French lessons 
were given in the school by a second teacher, since St. Aubin's was a bilingual 
school. 


St. Albert - In 1920 St. Albert had accommodation for about 200 pupils, 
although the actual enrolment was 1?3. Until 1927 the numbers decreased 
gradually, but after that date, contrary to the general trend in the Separate 
Schools of the province there was a gradual increase. The enrolment changed 
from 150 in 1927 to 200 in 1933. 2 Grades I to XII were taught. 

Morinville - The remarkable growth in the population of the Morinville 
district between 1910 and 1920 necessitated the building of another wing to 
Notre Dame Convent in 1920. The enrolment in the school had more than doubled 

^Register of St. Aubin 9 s Separate School for 1933 - 34* 

^ Annual Reports of Department of Education, Alberta, 192? - 1933. 













- 


. .Mi. ; -< r; - r i> i , h-'j, 






















-j 




' 

, 




. 


. 






• V . • . « • 





























93 

during those years. 1 The numbers gradually decreased from 178 in 1920 to 12? 
in 1925, but from 1929 to 1936 the enrolment remained about 200. No signifi¬ 
cant change was made either in organization or courses offered in the Thibeault 
School between 1920 and 1936. 

The monetary problems which beset the Separate Schools during this 
period have no parallel in this district as Thibeault is a Public School District. 
Difficulties there were* but only such as all Alberta schools experienced during 
the depression years. 

Smaller Schools - The smaller Homan Catholic .Public Schools) St. Leon 
No, 4) Cunningham No. 5) Belleros® No. 6) lac Ste. Anne, No. 29) Glengarry, 

No, 41) Granger, No. 42) Vegreville, No. 44) Rose Ridge, No. 45) Boulais 
(Volmer), No. 47) and Chorest, No. 51 continued to function during the years 
1920 - 1936. On January 8, 1932, Creuzot, No. 34 was disorganized.3 


X Ibid , 1910, 1920, pp. 31, 120. 

2 Ibid , 1920 - 1936. 

3 ibid . 1932, p. 93. See Figure 1, p. 23 for location of these schools. 








. ■ 










. • 




' f) ■ 






































. 

















CHAPTER III 


THE LARGER UNIT OF ADMINISTRATION 
1936 - 1953 

HISTORICAL AND CONSTITUTIONAL BACKGROUND 

In 1936 in Alberta eleven large units, or School Divisions as they are 
called, were formed by amalgamating, in each case, sixty to eighty small rural 
districts to form a large administrative unit under the jurisdiction of one el¬ 
ected Divisional Board. 

The first eleven school divisions, which comprised a total of 745 local 
districts commenced to function on January 1, 1937. Since that time, 47 more 
divisions have been formed bringing the total to 53 divisions which include 
3,990 local districts. There remained, in 1952, only 179 school districts in 
the province which had not been incorporated in school divisions^ this number 
included the seven cities and 33 larger tows of the province. 

This situation was far different from that which existed seventeen 
years ago when Alberta commenced her program of reorganizing her system of 
rural school administration. The change was not effected without a struggle, 
for it was necessary first to convince the public of the weakness of the exist¬ 
ing system and of the possibilities of improvement and then to provide legisla¬ 
tion which would make the new system feasible. The story has been ably told 
by Dr. J. C. Jonason in a thesis on, “The Large Unit of Administration' 1 . An 
abstract of this study is printed in "Canadian Education 11 Vol. VII, No. 2, 
page 51. 





' 








: 








’ - ■ 








i 
















> . 



















95 

The principal features of the legislation may be summed up as follows: 

1, The control of the affairs of a division is placed in a Board of 
Trustees. It consists of three or five members, elected on a rotating basis, 
for a period of three years. Each member of the board represents a subdivision 
within the division. 

2. When first organised, each school division is composed of a union 
of rural districts only, but the Act does make provision whereby toms and vil¬ 
lages may become parts of a school division._ 

3* Each divisional board' has the responsibility of: 

(a) Providing, equipping and maintaining all buildings which it may 
deem necessary such as schools, offices, teachers 9 residences, etc. 

(b) Engaging competent teachers or other employees. 

(c) Preparing and adopting a salary schedule for teachers subject to 
collective bargaining with duly appointed representatives of the 
teachers. 

(d) Preparing an annual budget and requisitioning the municipal author¬ 
ities for such portion of the revenue as must come from taxation. 

(e) Providing at its discretion necessary medical, dental and nursing 
services. 

4. The Superintendent of schools for each division, who is appointed 
and paid by the Department of Education, serves in a consultative capacity to 
the divisional boards and carries out executive functions delegated to him by 
the board. These Superintendents perform the administrative duties for the De¬ 
partment ©f Education which were previously performed by the Inspector of 
Schools. 

5. The board of each district has the right to continue to function 
as before except that the control of finances and of the teacher is now in the 


* 



. 












■ 

- 


y V. . • . .. ■ ; '■ ■ ' 


.. \j 

, 




















• 



. 












96 

hands of the divisional board. The purpose of the local board is to keep the 
divisional board informed with respect to the requirements and conditions of 
the local districts; for example, it is the right of this body to request that 
religious instruction be provided for the pupils of the district. 

Seventeen years of experience in operating large units have made it 
necessary to amend certain parts of the original legislation which authorized 
their establishment, but there have been no major amendments involving changes 
in any of their basic principles upon which the first legislative provisions 
were drafted. The provisions made to protect the interests of minority groups 
are of special interest in this study. 


THE LARGE UNIT OF ADMINISTRATION 
AND MINORITY RIGHTS 


When the Fathers of Confederation gathered at Quebec in 1864, to dis¬ 
cuss the terms of federal union, one of the most difficult problems they had 
to deal with was "minority 11 school rights. The Fathers were agreed that juris¬ 
diction should be granted to the provinces. The Protestant minority in. Quebec, 
however, immediately became alarmed for they feared the loss of their dissentient 
schools. They found an able champion in A.T. Galt who made minority school 
rights a "sine qua. non" of the proposed constitution. Sir Charles Tupper, one 
of the Fathers of Confederation, speaking in the Federal House, 1896, made the 
following statement: 

I say with knowledge but that for the consent to the proposal of Mr. 

Galt, who represented especially the Protestants of the province of Quebec, 
and but for the assent of that conference to the proposal of Mr. Galt, that 
in the Confederation Act should be embodied a clause which would protect the 
right of minorities, whether Catholic or Protestant, in this country, there 
would have been no Confederation ... It is significant that but for the 
clause protecting minorities, the measure of Confederation would not have 
been accomplished.! 


^G.M. Weir, o£. cit., p. 27. 



- 















97 

It was, therefore, at the instance of the Protestant minority in the 
province of Quebec that Section 93 was written into the British North America 
Act. This section reads in part as follows: 

In and for each province, the Legislature may enclusively make laws in re¬ 
lation to education, subject and according to the following provisions: 

Nothing in any such law shall prejudicially affect any Right or Privi¬ 
lege with respect to denominational schools which any class of persons 
have by law in the province at the Union. 

Dr. Weir, author of the book The Separate School Question in Canada , 
after careful study of the constitutional and legal aspects of the problem of 
minority school rights, makes it clear that, “according to the weight of com- 

o 

petent authority'^ minority school rights in Canada cannot be questioned. 
Therefore, when in 1936, the large Unit of Administration was inaugurated in 
Alberta, the legislators sought t© protect denominational rights by the enact¬ 
ment of a section of the School Act relating to Roman Catholic or Protestant 
school districts that found themselves included in school divisions in which 
such districts were in the minority. The Act empowered a district in a divi¬ 
sion to demand the appointment to their district school of a teacher of the 
religious faith of the majority of the ratepayers in the district. But, it 
overlooked the fact that in many divisions, CathoHc public schools in areas 
entirely, or almost entirely Catholic, would be closed and the children who 
attended these schools would be vanned to other centres where they would no 
longer be educated by a Catholic teacher, and among students of their own 
religious faith. 

The full significance of the result of such a situation is better 
realized when the meaning of Catholic education is called to mind. According 
to T. Corcoran, S.J.: 

Catholic education is the organized development and equipment of all 
the powers of a human being, moral, intellectual, and physical, by and for 


1 rbid, p. 22. 
2lbid, p. 3. 





, 






! J J. ■ ■ -■ 

. w , • r. • 

■ V 

' 

■ 




■ 

. 






. 


■ 













• c • 















9B 

their individual and social uses directed towards the union of these activities 
with their Creator as their final end, 1 

Pope Pius XI says on this subject: 

In order to obtain perfect education* it is of the utmost importance to 
see that all those conditions which surround the child during the period of his 
formation, in other words that the combination of circumstances which we call 
environment correspond exactly to the end proposed. 2 

Nor was this the only outcome of the division organization which militated 
against minority rights. As the large school centres were built Catholic assess¬ 
ment was being more and more committed to neutral public school support. Should 
this action continue over a period of time it would be practically impossible 
for minority schools to function. 

The leaders of Catholic education in the province, concerned about the 
trends in school administration and the possible effects of the pending new 
legislation on Catholic school and educational rights, organized the '’Alberta 
Catholic Education Association" in 1947® The aims and objects of the A.C.E.A. 
as set forth in the Constitutions of this society are: 

(1) To promote all phases of Christian education! 

(2) To study educational problems in the light of Christian philosophy; 

(3) To strive towards the spiritual improvement of its members; 

(4) To promote understanding among educators, parents, and students. 

In the interests of Catholic education and with particular reference to 

the above mentioned situation the A.C.E.A. was to function as a fact-finding body; 
it being understood that if the new school law was to infringe on Catholic rights, 
representation would be made to the provincial authority. At the time the A.C.E.A. 
was formed there seemed reason to fear that minority rights would be endangered for 
Catholic schools were being closed despite the wishes and protests of the ratepayers.^ 

1 T. Corcoran, S.J., cited by W.J. McGucken, S.J., ©£, cit. > P* 7® 

2 Pope Hus XI, op. cit., p, 23. 

^Schools in Provost and Killam Divisions are cases in point. 










































I 










... ‘ 




. 
















. . 





























. . 










99 

Representations were made to the Premier and the Minister of Education 
a number of times with the result that when the 1952 School Act was passed, it 
contained all the provisions regarding minority rights, which had been included 
in the Alberta Act of 1905. 

Regarding the establishment of Separate School Districts Section 9 states 

(1) The minority of electors in any district, whether Protestant or 
Roman Catholic, may establish a separate school therein; and in such case 
the electors establishing a Protestant or Roman Catholic separate school shall 
be liable only to assessments in respect thereof and any person who is legally 
assessed or assessable for a public school in the district shall be liable to 
assessment for any separate school therein. 

(15) None of the provisions of this Act relating to school divisions 
shall effect any right to establish a separata school district conferred by 
this Part upon a minority of electors in a district, whether Protestant or 
Roman Catholic. 

Regarding the formation of Consolidated School Districts the following 
law existss 

22. (1) The boards of two or more non-divisional districts not less than 

thirty nor more than eighty square miles in area, may apply to the Minister 
for the formation of the districts into a consolidated school district. 

Provision is also made for exclusion from the division! 

42. (2) If the board of any Roman Catholic school district or Protestant 

school district forwards to the Minister a certified copy of a resolution 
passed by the board requesting the exclusion of their school district from 
the division on account of dissatisfaction of the board with facilities for 
religious instruction, together with certified copies of resolutions passed 
by the boards of at least two other districts in the same division, support¬ 
ing the first mentioned resolution, the Minister, by order shall — 

(a) direct the taking of a vote of the electors in that district as 
to whether or not the district is t© be excluded from the divi¬ 
sion; and 

(b) fix a date within sixty days of the receipt by him of such 
•certified copies for the taking of the vote. 

(4) If the vote shows a majority in favour of the exclusion of the 
district from the division, the Minister, as soon as possible, shall proceed 
to make an order for the exclusion of the district from the division to take 
effect not later than the thirty-first day of December following the taking 
of the vote. 

(7) The district shall not be again included in a division unless a vote 
has been in the district at which the inclusion Is approved by a majority of 











' . 


- 

■ 
























.’o'. 








: 








100 


the electors voting thereon* and the procedure for the inclusion shall be the 
same* in so far as possible* as that provided for the exclusion of the district 

The following Sections relate to religious instruction: 

388. (1) No religious instruction shall be permitted in a school from the open¬ 
ing of the school until one-half hour previous to its closing in the afternoon, 
after which time any such instruction permitted or required by resolution of 
the board may be given. 

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (c)* in a high school providing depart¬ 
mentalized instruction religious instruction may be given to each class for 
a period not exceeding one-half hour per day* at such time or times as may 
be approved by the board and the inspector of high schools. 

389. (1) In a divisional district the powers vested in the board under sections 
387 and 3&& shall be exercised by the board of the district and not by the 
board of the division. 

(2) If the board of a divisional district that passes a resolution under 
section 338 providing for religious instruction nominates a teacher and 
transmits the nomination to the board of the division not later than the first 
day of August* the board of the division shall appoint the teacher nominated 
by the board of the district if that teacher enters into a contract. 

Seventeen years experience has shown that* while by law* no change has 
been made in minority rights the framework within which these laws function has 
been so modified that in actual practice■the position of Catholic schools in 
Alberta differs much from that which existed before 1936. The Large Unit of 
Administration has affected Roman Catholic Separate and Public schools in Alberta 
in different ways in different parts of the province. 

In those districts in which the majority of ratepayers are Roman Catholic 
the closing of small schools and vanning in of pupils to the divisional centre 
has resulted in a great number of students* who formerly received a half hour 
of religious instruction in the small school* or who received none* being given 
the advantage of a Catholic education. St. Albert is a splendid example of the 
beneficial results of the unit of administration from this point of view. Other 
schools which illustrate this same advantage are: Thibeault at Morinville and 
Fort Saskatchewan. It should be noted that these centres show the desirable 
results of the divisional organization for the majority which in the above 
mentioned cases is Roman Catholic. The Protestant minority* no doubt* consider 
the situation in a different light. 
























. 













' 


■ 














' 




















101 


In areas in which Roman Catholics are a decided minority the larger unit 
has proved beneficial from the point of view of Catholic education. For ex¬ 
ample , in the Foremost, Taber, Lethbridge and Acadia Valley Divisions, arrange¬ 
ments have been made for the giving of religious instruction according to School 
Law, to Catholics who attend these schools. Formerly these students would have 
been in so many different schools that this would have been impossible. 

Divisional organization has affected Separate School Districts in quite 
another way. These schools may still function; they are, in fact recognized as 
an integral part of the provincial school system. Excepting in the larger cities, 
however, the number of parents who may send their children to separate schools 
without bearing a double burden of cost, is very limited. This is due to the 
fact that the right of a Separate School to collect taxes is limited to the 
individual school district as originally formed. There is no provision made 
for transfer of assessment within a school division to the Public or Separate 
school according to the religious faith of the property owner. Separate schools 
are obliged to charge a fee in order to be able to give instruction to the 
pupils of the division who choose to attend these Catholic schools. The parents 
of these pupils must, therefore, pay taxes to the Divisional school and fees to 
the Separate school if they wish their children to have a Catholic education. 

In some cases, Pincher Creek for example, the Divisional Board, pays the 
fees to St. Michael 1 s Separate school for all Catholic children of the division. 
Vegreville School Division, too, has a special arrangement. In these areas 
while these agreements last, the Roman Catholic minority group has a far greater 
opportunity for religious instruction under the new system than they had formerly. 
The arrangement, however, is at best temporary, for it depends on local agreement, 
not on a legal basis. 

While the separate school district is considered the unit for the purposes 
of tax collection, the entire division, or in the case of city and town schools. 










< t •; : ... , : < U«i ; . .t.t . ,, - :?.CQ • ■L0>: t .' 2 W 


■ ' / . t ■: ' " 






. 






. i 




■ •. ' 






























. 


. 0 : i . . • • : • K < joJ ..... 










. 















102 

the public school district, is considered the unit when it is a question of 
paying the equalization grant. Section 5 of the Grant Regulations, effective 
April 1, 1953 states: 

Where a separate school district has been established within a public 
school district the separate school district shall be deemed to be a part of 
the public school district, or of the school division of which the public 
school district may be a part, for the purposes of the determination of the 
grant payable under Section 4 hereof; (regulations regarding equalization 
grant) and such grant shall be apportioned between the separate school dis¬ 
trict and the public school district or the school division, as the case may 
be, in proportion to the number of rooms of each as determined under the 
provisions of paragraph (h) of the said Section 4. 1 

This regulation results in further disadvantages for Separate Schools. 
These will be treated at greater length in the following Section "Maintenance 
of Catholic Schools". 

The problems of the new administrative set-up, in so far as they affect 
Catholic school rights, are receiving the constant attention of the Alberta 
Catholic Education Association. With the disappearance of the old "district" 
unit minority rights are in actual practice disappearing. If the new unit is 
the "division", it would seem logical and right that following the spirit and 
not the letter of the British North America Act, minorities within those larger 
divisions should have the same rights as they had before as minorities in the 
smaller unit, the district. 

It has been suggested that Catholics accept as a compromise the right to 
set up groups of Catholic districts in the nature of the present consolidated 
school area. PicardviHe, Fort McMurray and Manning are such centres. This 
arrangement is not entirely satisfactory; in many regions it is not practicable. 

Members of the Alberta Catholic Education Association, after careful 
study of what has transpired in Alberta relative to education following the new 
organizational set-up, prepared the "Equality" plan which asks for minority rights 


■ kxrant Regulations Effective April 1, 1953, Government of the Province of Alberta 













. I 

: gi '/i-iJ 

■ 


. ■ -■ J ■ - 




























103 


on the divisional level. Briefly the plan is as follows: 

1. The formation of Separate School divisions wherever possible, the bound¬ 
aries of such divisions to coincide with the boundaries of the corresponding 
public school divisions. 

2. The Separate School divisional set-up to be similar in all respects to 
the public school divisional set-up: order by Minister creating divisions, 
three or five sub-divisions, vote by Catholic or Protestant ratepayers, same 
rights of boards all as set forth in Section 205 of the School Act of 
Alberta. 

3. All minority assessment within divisions formed into Separate School 
divisions to be made available for support of Separate Schools,^ 

Pending the realization of the "Equality" plan Catholic educators are 
of the opinion that in the interest of minority groups and in the spirit of the 
B.N.A. Act the following remedial school legislation could profitably be consid¬ 
ered: 

1. That in no case, shall the Protestant or Catholic majority in a local 
district be compelled to send their children to a central school situated 
in an area where the majority of the ratepayers is not of the religious 
faith of the majority of the local districts. 

2. That whenever a centralized school is organised in a division or a sub¬ 
division, the Catholic or Protestant minority may organize a centralized 
separate school within that division or subdivision. 

3. That whenever a centralized High School is organized in a division, and 
the Protestant or Catholic minority has no High School, the Protestant or 
Catholic pupils in the minority group of that area may go to a Protestant 
or Catholic High School outside of that area, and if none exists in the 
division, those pupils may go outside the division and the divisional board 
shall pay the tuition fees and the transportation of those pupils. 4 " 

One of the most common arguments advanced against the granting of equal¬ 
ity to minority groups seems to be that Catholic schools are divisive and in the 
building up of communities or nations, anything which tends to any kind of divi¬ 
sion should be avoided. While Catholics do not agree that Separate Schools are 
much of a divisive force or influence they do understand the reason for the 
point of view. They regret as much as others any divisive elements within the 


^ Alberta Catholic Education Association. Bulletin, March 2, X94B, p. 2. 
2 Ibid. p, 2. 








■ 

,?■ • - ■' ■ • : 

: 

' 

. 

, 

■ 

. 


■ > 

1 .. r ' ' * - ' 1 ■ 1 L '? ^ 

♦ 







• ... 





community or nation, but insist that even if a certain division results because 
of the existence of schools for minority groups, they are logical and right in 
demanding them. In doing so they are only exercising one of the rights recently 
recognized as inherent to all mankind. 

The Charter of Human Rights adopted on December 10, 1945 by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations states: 

Article 26. 

1. Everyone has the right to education. Education shall, be free, at 
least in the elementary stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. 
Technical and professional education shall be made generally available, 
and higher education shall be equally accessible to all on the basis of 
merit. 

2. Education shall be directed to the full development of the human 
personality and to the strengthening of respect for human rights and 
fundamental freedoms. — 

3. Parents have a prior right to choose the kind of education that 
shall be given to their children. 


MAINTENANCE OF CATHOLIC SCHOOLS 

The period 1936 - 1953 is characterized by several important changes in 
the provincial policies regarding maintenance of schools and of Separate Schools 
in particular. The schools of the province continued to be financed by local 
taxation and government grants, but alterations occurred in the laws controlling 
the collection of these funds. 


Taxation 

Before 1936 funds raised by local taxation on private property were 
fairly distributed to Public and Separate Schools where these existed, according 
to the religious affiliation of the property owner who paid the tax. Excepting 
in the larger cities this is no longer the case. 

The unit in the province for taxation on privately owned property is now 
the division. For minority groups it is still maintained to be the district. 


v' ^ V - V . 

o.L c . < v 1 i ' > -O' . ,‘ f ' ' . ; 

. 

. • v. j • .'i; ■ 

o' U’ ■ ,.J .... r.r.i?‘ ■ •" sh.roj an/, 

i oi lS\ ' : - . . . j ‘y < 


.• .. •' 0 L \ 


i i .■ I . • 0 . ■ w 


• . v.. . . C ' o. J/ •• i o.:, 

. . 

- . >. . . I ' . ■ s 


VJ vi J ' v l'.' . .. ! ‘ .U) O. ,S< 

: OJ- . I '.a . c : . .. ■ 1 ./ u ■ ; ; ot: ?i\: f. • J <- ae . .diJ .cr 

c ■■ . V .• ' V ' v ■ o lY. • • • f..o; , vv . ■ <:• *', 

• t ■ 1 l ■ ' .Y' o io . ; •, 










\ > • 




. . wOJ- ’ - . = ■ 

' S.' . .1 : : \-\f’ f « o 


S t •• *.v ' i ' 


. 




. J • 


. 








v\k 








‘ - V. 

V,v\ • .. .. ' .1 ) 


b o *. : « . . : . ' >; ■■ ..j ' y ■> •: „■ 






I -• 







105 

This inconsistency is the source of injustice. The small schools in the division 
have been closed; the children are vanned in to the central school. Catholics 
who live outside the Separate School District who wish their children to attend 
the Separate School rather than the Divisional School, are obliged to pay fees 
to the Separate School while their taxes support the Divisional School. In some 
Divisions the Divisional Board pays the fees, but the fact that the arrangement 
depends on local agreement rather than on a legal basis makes it only a tentative 
solution. This situation is likely to continue until the law recognizes the 
formation of Separate School Divisions within which all minority assessment will 
be made available for support of Separate Schools. 

While the allocation of taxes on privately owned property has been less 
satisfactory to Separate Schools, the basis of payment of company, corporation 
and cooperative taxes has been greatly improved. 

It will be recalled that the law provided for distribution of company 
taxes on the basis of the religious beliefs of the shareholders. In 1936 a fur¬ 
ther amendment in the wording of Subsection 5 was effected. Chapter 86 - an Act 
to Amend the School Assessment Act of 1931 reads as follows: 

The said Act is further amended as to Section 50 thereof by striking 
out the words "any company failing to give a notice" where the same occur 
in subsection 5 thereof, and by substituting therefor the words "any com¬ 
pany not giving the notice". 

Thus amended this became Section 32 of The School Taxation Act of 1940. 

An examination of how this law worked out in practice in the Separate Schools in 
Edmonton will illustrate the trends throughout the province. 

A number of companies from earlier years assigned voluntarily a portion 
of their assessment to the Separate Schools. As the Separate School enrolment 
was for a number of years approximately one-seventh of the total school enrol¬ 
ment in the City that fraction was used by a good many companies in making their 
division. At the same time as these companies were making a voluntary division 


■ 





■ ■ ■ :■ v : . j , . ' • . • t J, h , 

l j .- ■ ■ • • . .. ' 

' • .-Jt'-Cc Jp 'iv' ism oc 


v \c c ; 




> . ./ .".. <•". ‘•■v.c 












'*1 • • ■ s. .. ii , !• •, •; j : 


C- ' .. . ■■ ... ■ . ^ ! 

■ .. .1; j - . . v •. ....v .. -; ..• 








■ . 

































106 


of their taxes a certain number of other larger companies and corporations refused 
to give any of their taxes to the Separate Schools on the grounds that they could 
not legally do so in view of the fact that they could not easily find out the 
religious beliefs of their shareholders. 

Eaton's, the Canadian Pacific and Canadian National Railways, the Hudson's 
Bay, Woodward's and numerous others including most of the Banks paid no taxes to 
the Edmonton Separate School District. When it is considered that upwards of 20 % 
of the population of Edmonton is Catholic and, therefore, the Railways are depend¬ 
ent to that extent on Catholic support, and similarly most corporations are depend¬ 
ent for their business success on the citizens of Edmonton who are about one-fifth 
Catholic, the injustice becomes evident. 

It was not the intention of the legislation of the Alberta School Act 
that this should be the situation, but the wording of the School Taxation Act 
prior to 1952 was such that the Separate School Board could not force a company 
to make a division of taxes if it did not voluntarily do so. The Act evidently 
intended that companies could be compelled, under certain circumstances, to divide 
their taxes but the compulsory features of the Act could not be enforced unless 
the sections were amended and a more workable wording were substituted. 

Consequently, the various Separate School Boards and Church Authorities, 
through the years, made repeated efforts to get the Legislature to change this 
section of the Act. In 1952 amendments were passed. Sections 239-295 of the 
School Act of 1952 provide for the distribution of corporation taxes. While the 
amendments have substantially the same intent as the original statute of 1901 
Cap.30 and 1910 Cap. 6, they are apparently designed for greater clarity and 
concision, to remove ambiguities in wording, to adapt the legislation to the 
divisional set-up, and to extend its provisions to cover the assessment of 
cooperatives. 

tt " 

The School Act 1952 Chapter 80, An Act Respecting Schools* states: 







l . J k *-< •. U C *».•_! * 

d* •• j. 


d.'V o Ou r.:. : J,\ ‘i Xt-.fi c ‘20 \j ’J\ &Vl ^ 0 


■ 

- : bjB 

.... 


’ . M. • ■ ■ ■ . .. f. ’ \ .. 


•J * •. 



■I.i ..d i t. d J. 

i. ■ 

, dv . •. d, , , • d>;o vT. f oA jf: 

■: xx-d'ix ’.if' six*; 

■ - ■. ,> • k - 

- 

. 


1 , 

■ 


•! - v - ’ v ■ ■-1 u ch . . < id . ■ d 

•' ■ • ■ . r < I'-tlLH., :.'o . oid d \rd ( ; : .. ■ d „ \! -i ^orv 


i- • 

-■ -' c, X: d ' .a . .: . o, 

. ...... 'j j j.. '•>‘ :« v c ■ i 

• < . ;:: ‘ \ • 

s do 

■ C , -’J. • • . i ‘0 ■ d i ! F WX i v) '4d : « 


. vtc . 


d> x i i c ’ •. . •: d t .. 1 dj if, m. ' [ 

- ' • > ■ v .• ’ 


. iv i>0- . • \ 1 ;;*■ 

, : < ■ ’ i • ■. . - ■ . . : ■ ■ d d •. n 

. • i < ‘ 1 ■ ' <-o *.,« 1,0.i Ji 

"• - ' ':ud, • ■ ■, • d:j ix'C tioi 


■ • -' ■■ : ■ .>.■;% : ■ i '.j:'.: ■ >i ■ ■ ■ . 




. 

u - ; f ■ ' • : • .v Ui , .. d . . .■ 1 


> • v -• i.d ■ 

. d 

. . 

♦ ' • ■ d • • 












107 


288. (l) In a public school district in which a separate school district 
has been established a company, by giving notice, may require a percentage 
of the property in respect of which it is assessable, to be entered and 
assessed for separate school purposes. 

(2) The notice shall, — 

(a) designate the percentage of the property of the company in 
the district assessable for separate school purposes, which 
shall bear the same ratio to the total assessed value of 
the property of the company in that district as the value 
of the shares of the company held by Protestants or Roman 
Catholics, as the case may be, bears to the total value of 
all the shares of the company: 

(b) state that the percentage designated therein has been approved 
by resolution of the company or of the board of directors of 
the company. 

(3) A co-operative association shall be deemed to be a company for the 
purposes of sections 288 to 295 inclusive, except that the notice, if any, 
given by a co-operative association under section (2) designating the per¬ 
centage of the property of the association assessable for separate school 
purposes shall designate a percentage which shall bear the same ratio to 
the total assessed value of the property of the association in that dis¬ 
trict as the number of members who are Protestant or Roman Catholic, as the 
case may be, bears to the total number of members of the association. 

The Sections of particular interest in the present discussion are: 

292. (1) Where a company has not given a notice under section 288 the board 
of the separate school district, by giving notice, may require part of the 
property in respect of which the company is assessable to be entered and 
assessed for separate school purposes. 

293. Where the board of a separate school district has given a notice 
to a company under section 292 the proper officer of each municipality shall 
apportion the total assessment of that company between the public and sep¬ 
arate school districts in the same ratio that the assessment of persons other 
than companies for public school purposes bears to the assessment of persons 
other than companies for separate school purposes. 

294. (1) The proper officer of each municipality, when providing the certi¬ 
ficate required by section 283, or section 296, shall also send to each board 
a statement showing - - 

(a) the total assessment of all property assessed to persons other 
than companies for public school purposes, and for separate 
school purposes respectively: 

(b) the total assessment of all property assessed to companies for 
public school purposes and for separate school purposes res¬ 
pectively as a result of company notices under section 288: 


•J 




• t ■' f ~ ’ a . 'j' -.>;i!co ooiiall ,.o ! m:. r -or! •; <-ri 

v ’ > v . . • ; . •’ -.oXi f ‘it oo;.x : - o i.J: y/i'U«' c>•, 'io 

, ' : • .< •. ;■ ■ a . . : 


— ...'. 0 ' ; J"; 

e s ■ ■ : .* e ' v m) 

C ‘ Li -• - : • V a- M . U tc . :■ A . Jc' / . . o 

• - -J*. . - ■ . tv, 0.1:,'. ,f ©! w "Z.’.'O'd J ! o 

• J; V.A., ■ iT;.;..0 «: :'J rj \';i ■, ■i.JV.CQ !rY J V t o': £■-.a \[ , \i 

- ' -■ v . v o ev. ... cl/ . • ■ 

• - v . • . • - or- v ( v v 

■ • - .a ;. • ; v 


V. • jrr?c;Vf> ! ., v. J;. v . r.: (c *) 

■ V.: •. ... v. t . v J. •,/ y,\- ,'1T A-J A. in .Li. s; ;.'.r /, 

. ’ ■ . a ' . :.:0 

■ 

.. .0 . v:v A t 0 . y ) 

'■o - • ■ v ' *»'■ -w' : ■ . • • i C;'X t. 0 : .a. . o t /a 

. j no. 'Vj d: me € mlui 'j v: o to £, a; i 

- ■ . ..... . '. ;o'_ .’. , ; ; yj> : • 

' 

•’ ’ n- V. \. vj ' . ■ ... ‘■O'.OXi .'.. ,V c A - . i* . ,i. 

c . .. ", . v. ■ ■. - .. , • odi ... '..-j •. ... . ■ , ■ ^^ ; • , J 

J .. •... . . i M-vit'-'J n, U C O , -J.,: A V. . .A, ' \ . :,£0 

• •' v ■ ■: o . ■. .v j: o. . skjJ y . . ■ x . . ■ 

. • •• . : ' J i ■ :. ... v... vi;; , o\'j Y/J :■ 1 : rj , ) . 

■ . 'v.. a*. ix^i OL oJ ma',., . iv -' 

. ... .... •• • O ore o' 7 . A, v ;,.. i. J. ’’.ij’li. ... A 'j A 

. ■ • ■... • a. ■ Ja , « i:-b : v, ■ . '. a t'..... w't. 

' ' ' V ' ' 

A ' 1 ■ ■ v ' - . I ...\.or-r • A .. A .. i- 0 v j 

■ ... - aO V . J V t a: .'u:,;: -. • rcOvi vt CiC & 

A. ■' v A ' r 'a :y-: e tv.; .< J. : 0' vJ 

aw ■ . l.. o.u ■ Xoofioe -io'i qmoo twiid 

o • •• ■:'. j J *,! 

... i.. •' ; o. .. . ■. :'.'. c ■ . ■. . _ ) yx 

. . •'.’O.'.v. . . 'it yiy l, ;:i.' O': ' O'. : ■ " oj '•! 

- • : -A < / •/ Jr ... A . J £; ■' 

... .■ i. .. . .•• . , stl... / 

.. • . 0 .. o. • y.lr oo • 

: ‘O a - ' *a . ..a. . a , 

1 '• '.i.v Ji ..1 '. c.;A.r;/ . j v o; 

• ■ '• c ' v. - ; A •: . i. o -: 

• t x,' J-i . . ■ . o' J. . .1 v. 0 . . 


v o 

. 











103 


(c) the total assessment of all property assessed to companies for 
public school purposes and for separate school purposes respectively 
as a result of separate school board notices under section 292: 

(d) the totals of the assessments under clauses (a), (b) and (c) for 
public school purposes and for separate school purposes respect¬ 
ively. 

(2) The total assessment for public school purposes and the total assess¬ 
ment for separate school purposes determined under clause (d) of subsection (1) 
shall be used by the public school district and the separate school district 
for the purpose of making their respective requisitions. 

295. (1) Where there are school districts that collect their own taxes, the 
secretary of the public school district and the secretary of the separate 
school district shall apportion the total assessment of each company in ac¬ 
cordance with the notice given by that company or given by the separate 
school board to that company in the same manner as the proper officer of a 
municipality is required to do. 

(2) In respect of each company the assessment roll of the public school 
district shall show only the property of the company that is assessable for 
public school purposes, and the assessment roll of the separate school dis¬ 
trict shall show only the property of the company that is assessable for 
separate school purposes. 

Under the above quoted School Act Sections 292, 293, 294 and 295 it is 
now possible to compel companies or corporations, which do not divide their taxes 
voluntarily, to allocate a certain portion of their taxes to the Separate Schools. 
As a result, the present situation in Edmonton is that a large number of com¬ 
panies continue to make a voluntary division of their taxes while others, which 
previously refused to divide, are now compelled to do so under the improved 
wording of the School Taxation Act. The Separate School Districts of Calgary, 
Lethbridge, Medicine Hat and Hockyford and others likewise receive a just portion 
of taxes. 


In time there should be a fair division of company, corporation and co¬ 
operative taxes in all districts. As yet some Separate School Districts have not 
forced the compulsory measures of the School Taxation Act of 1952; until they do 
so they win be obliged to accept less than a just proportion of this source of 


revenue. 





. *' .. . :■ r, • *. *: 'ic dv. vr $iv<. c JLjsdo* r ! d . (o) 

■ r • . .... <• ■■ ■ ; ; cc- • J c < non u.r duo 

. : . O O 1 :; ". 00c 0'0..0 UK V (, CflUiUO Vi- 


; • • do o.[ ■ d :. J : d (' ,■ 

•Hi? :~‘i ■ ■ •:* , O'; - vj ". . ' Or: V ' c. UftOv-OJ.!' .o ‘ ...00 OiJ tffji 


-i;f- ■ v : i u oi. v" ' l. odd ' 1 C ... , 1 » 0 O'. cic.'O J. OO.o': . [S.) 

v . . . . ■ J.v • ■ 'if 


j * . '. ... ■■ C , I . Oo..‘* vLJ. i Jak r: ■G.V in v, ,jS : ' OC! .1 l.hi a 

• . ■ . ; ' ' 


v. . . v • . . . . . o v ,v . .. •. ...Ov or :. .Loro or. to j. . d o od v-. : ) . Cd- ' 

i>C ’.. • v -v d',.' : • - J r; : v • * v'T ; '. XO 'Of OjJxhi xC 1 vl to. OO't 

V . < \ ■ . ‘ . 0 ‘OCv, . '■ >. *’ - -• ■ : > ;; • v.U . . : . .• . O '1 


. ■ ; • \d- 1.0V UO.,';JO;:. no 1 tr O; 001 OlI/IOO 

'.'.O' o. , o\ c • oioo,;. cod' nl 'M^'co ot:t'J c\J v;x •. •. loooooe 

•. i o : ' it ' . {,, 






lit ;..r ,v. ,i .A/. 1 ; -.0^0 *IC O'j t .".'cl / 


. • --o .o..; y.o . ( v^,to:o.: ; on,i v;lr.«o tc, Uodo JoX’icdXb 

.. : c • '.-v. . do ....'■■ o- . .Or-Or 1 :'o o • : > . r o< "tv. o. du 

‘iO'i ' ot. J \, v' '..v t <. 0 ; i vi i, '.a r. ii&t ' co'.^o: 




,:. : •., ■ Jj. j .to 

. V : 1 . 

..... 

. 

. i.t. A . ■ ,'. Co ' . v. : O ' . vJ ? ' 10 J 

' ■■. . ; t. .uL- ,. c ,o.. , i ,o 


■ • 


o ‘ ' . ' v ' ; .' i : ... ■. ' ;= \ u.‘ / • o r. " u • / 


.' .' r-v ' C • Vo*' 

: '• ' O' 


. 




< . •... ' J ' 


r •_ . Ui • i : .. 












.'■-.Jo v v ,.J • o.i ; o v.' ‘ vU ‘51- ;c 

.■ ' J . <• ; • :■ . ;• ;. : i.< i .'Ovl ; o: 'v '.i 

. : O' Go ■ ‘ V. OO . j:v. , -;’r : cs 

.. 
















109 


GRANTS 

Government grants formed a substantial source of the funds which financed 
education in Alberta in the period 1936 to 1953- Certain amendments to the 
Revised Statutes of Alberta, 1922, were effective after 1937. The daily grant 
for rural schools and for the upper room of a two-room school was reduced to 
$.75 and $1.S0 respectively. To each room in which grades above the eighthwere 
taught the grant was $2.70 per day. Newly organized districts received an ini¬ 
tial grant of $15.00 and $.20 per day for the first two years. An additional 
$.15 daily was given for six years if minimum grading and efficiency were main¬ 
tained. This latter grant could be given in library books or other equipment 
approved by the minister. 

The grants given to village and town schools for aU grades up to and 
including Grade VIII depended on the number of teachers employed. By reason of 
the high school and technical grants the total grant in these schools was not 
reduced. A stimulation grant, 50$ of the teacher's salary, was given for the 
opening of a room for sub-normal pupils. Consolidated schools received in addi¬ 
tion to the ordinary grants a grant for vans. The equalization grant inaugurated 
in 1926 continued to be paid throughout this period. Separate Schools, espec¬ 
ially in the north of the province, benefited much thereby. 

The basis of paying government grants was considerably altered by the 
School Grants Act of 1945 and Orders-in-Council of 1950, 1951, and 1953. The 
broad outline of the present system is as follows: 

Grants are paid on a flat rate per year for each teacher in charge of a 
classroom. For classrooms in which Grades I-VI, I-XX or I-XII is taught it is 
$500.00; for classrooms giving instruction to Grades VXI-IX, $550.00, and VIX-XIX, 
$600.00 is given. For senior high school rooms the grant is $750.00 per year. 






: * -c ' ■ : ' ; ■ . •. :.,'I c >' . ,.. ; 

■ ^ c > vv . _ « • :Iv ■■cijj i .'. ■ i o ;<*$ 

‘ ' ' ? ... . • • , v. -o. : \ .... 

. ■ v •: • ■ v - 

• ' • V ‘ 

- ■ • •■■■•' c*i. ., • . : . . . . f . ji Ixilvt 

• : 

■ 

■;. v. , ' 

, .. : I r ' . 




v ;•* 


ov 




• ‘ - •' ■ ' - •• ■ ’ • ........ ■ ■; 1 i: 

' • - -v» ■: v \ ■:> !. .0, \}c:: >■ <r riJ 

■' : • •' •, . • .. • ■ ■ :.! ' Jr. . ' Kjs'. 

. 


1 ■ • *■ :• • - .. v Jru' r s * e-Jr-w. \ ; i.tno viUf ok noi$ 

’ ^- r :! ■■ *u- ; J t J -.■ ■ ■ ■ i t-.j-v Knoo oS\'I ilk 

• . - - '• < • > ' ■ v.' I ’ V • i.i; : j. * 

... ; w ■ ■ f : . v.'. 

■ . . 1 ■ - v ; ■ .i \; ■. •, 1 . , . v:.« v , • .ix • j'loC 

V , i ■' ■ < 

l 

• r o • 














110 


A grant of $1000.00 is given for teachers of electives which require special 
certification. For principals and other teachers employed for certain duties 
but not in charge of classrooms a grant equal to that given for a teacher of 
the highest grade taught or supervised by such a teacher, is given. Provision 
is also made for a grant to be paid on the basis of pupil enrolment for special 
teachers employed in two or more different schools. It includes 50$ of the 
transportation expenses incurred by the board. The grants to aid in pupil trans¬ 
portation are substantial. A new feature appears in the 1945 School Grants Act 
in the form of a grant to be paid each district operating a dormitory for the 
accommodation of pupils of Grades IX to XII. 

Equalization grants still, form an important part of the system. The 
basis for paying these has been altered. The minimum assessment below which 
the equalization grant is paid had been raised from $75*000.00 to $110,000.00 
in town school districts, $115*000.00 in village school districts, $120,000.00 
in consolidated school districts and $ 130 , 000.00 in rural school districts. 

The grant consists of a certain sum per classroom for each $1,000.00 by which 
the assessment is less than the above sum. In town and village school districts 
the amount given is $9.00 per classroom, and in rural districts it is $16.00 
per classroom per $1,000.00 below the minimum. 

The regulations regarding the payment of these grants to separate schools 
was cited in the preceding section. According to this regulation, for the purpose 
of determination of the equalization grant, "the separate school district shall 
be deemed to be a part of the public school district, or of the school division 




■ ■ ' ... • • ■ '.i.C J.V • ; 

■ - - 
0 ■ • . . „ ■ ■■.■ : ■ •: ' C I J\ J ■ | 

; . 3 ,: :j- : ■ x '■ > - ' ■: 

• • - ’.I e j.c; t>r *. I A X'.jIU 90 <»v *• i*r*o'j Oelr 

. • ... -... Ji j: ?iv: \;o < .. J ni . oj: • : M;>i qs $4 

... .. l . ' ■ s. • • •. 

- J j ■■ .... . 

■ • , •• ■ v :•> ".... f .■ . n - ‘. w i l 

C . : , ■ ■ V • 0 

... . . J‘ • v'::. .! ; f;.C '■ XJ . C! » ‘ . '. U i tXxUi 4 

.. ■■ 1 : , .'i/JAj.l.: c.' ■' ©rar(.'/ ' ■. ’ .A J B. • ct 

.. .. j .• .< Ch, . , • . *. • • ■. t o .. il : .1. c.L o*i i ; < i« ; i. .. u & Qi; $ 

• * - • V V . £ I.L.V * .‘ V. .*- • .. V ■ : ( . ... .. . :. w 0 ■' ' ... .. : : . . C ! ■ ; .. Ou nJj| 

A 

. '.. i'.ui ■ 

.. ..A . V J. c. J V \ i I i -!' '-'l! X 

■ 

‘ , : i • 0 U ... LX ; . v oj' 4 

. .... h\L .. .. oi . . , • 1 o -,a. j 

' .. • ■ : I i o i 0. B 

.. • .. . Ji- ' v U> ■■ .i’. . •: • - xo : 1 1 Bv' : ■ la 

. v I 1:,. 0-iJ. fi.. ' . _.C o“ & Cu Oil 








131 


of which the public school district may be a part.*' 1 There are a number of 
Separate School Districts in the province in which the assessment falls below 
the minimum stated in Section 4 of the Grants Regulation, but because they 
are considered a part of the larger unit they receive no equalization grant. 

A grant which gives evidence of the present provincial trend toward 
rapid increase in population in certain areas is that whereby to any district 
or division in which the net increase has exceeded the average enrolment 
increase in the province, $100.00 is paid for each pupil increase above the 
average. 


MAINTENANCE PROBLEMS 

Roman Catholic Public schools do not have maintenance problems which 
differ from those generally experienced in the provincial educational system. 
Separate Schools continue to have financial difficulties which arise out of 
the very fact that they represent the minority group. 

While Separate School Districts in the cities find their financial 
standing improved in recent years the opposite is true in smaller centres. 
Since the passing of the School Act of 1952 Separate Schools are better able 
to collect their share of company, corporation and cooperative taxes. Not 
all districts have taken full advantage of the laws, but the provisions are 
there. 


■^Section 5 Grant Regulation 1953 Government of the Province of Alberta. 





■ . ■■■i . ' .cK. . i >,l Ic^rlce o.I’, . o.iv .if'.Hv 

l w> , i J- ' f o- i i^c. 

- - v , ■ v j; 

• v v. . ■ .' ■ . • i 

- 

u . U - ' . . 




V 

o ... • . , . ; : ■■ : 

■ ' 
























. 


el 

■ 


. ■ 


■ • • i.v. : :. .' ■ ’■ .. '. L - . < ; ; . : j 


. v ■ v c -v c. , 

.«. • • v •: J ; ... : «. • 

- tt. ' j , ’ ■ < . • ■ • •• ,• Je 




' v.-' ..O'. i'ci . ■ 0 . •( Me! 




'. ■ ■ 


■ 


f -■ ' V. 









•• ■ . . ' . 

























112 


In smaller centres like Wainwright, Clandonald, Rockyford, Vegreville 
and Pincher Creek special maintenance problems arise from the fact that they 
collect taxes only from the original small districts while pupils come to them 
from a number of districts within the division. True, in some cases, by local 
agreement, the tuition fees for these are paid by the Divisional Board, but the 
payment of corporation and company taxes is based on the assessment; consequently, 
these schools receive less than a just proportion of such taxes. The fact that 
in some divisions the parents pay the fee does not alter this situation. 

While the total revenue of Separate Schools is, generally speaking, 
lower, operating expenses per pupil, salaries excluded, are proportionately 
higher than in the Public Schools. This is because, as was stated in Chapter II, 
Section 2, the Separate Schools operate on a smaller unit basis. Since it has 
always been the policy of Separate Schools to keep the mill rate the same as 
that charged by the Public Schools in the division or district, and since the 
standard of equipment and achievement in these schools has always compared 
favourably with that of the Public Schools the only way to meet the difficulty 
has been to reduce salaries. Catholic teachers, particularly members of religious 
congregations have generously given their services for the salaries the district 
can pay in order that Catholic education may be given to as many as possible of 
the Catholic youth of the province. 

ALBERTA TEACHERS 1 ASSOCIATION 

Before 1917 the teachers of Alberta were in a weak position indeed; they 
were socially and financially depressed. In that year a few determined and en¬ 
thusiastic leaders, desirous of improving their economic and professional status, 
and convinced that working individually they could not greatly influence educa¬ 
tional trends in the province, formed the Alberta Teachers® Alliance. The 

^ A.T.A. Magazine , December, 1950, p. 4. 






v . ■- •. . ■ ■. ; , ... 

■ ■'j - . !'v-; . -j . „• ‘ x . j;o•• : [ 

w ' 0; • - . ■ • -I • 'V li t ,-jc 


W-. . 





: - to 

'. ' : S'.oJ£ ■ t ..- 


t: ■ ■ ' i; 1 ui ,• 'J \/l : VC' V u jv . v;-j ‘io 

• ■ - ' • •• cl . >j ■,'oe-i oect’ j 

' . v' v:," ot Out i : ;f( : ■ ' ;. OG id. 


t :■ c. r Kl ‘ ; , V, . ‘.o 3;;: ; v j.. 0 . 0 ., . j .t. 


-V. . ><j. ;; o •:•• o : ci u .;;y . ■v v ,oX 

' • • - ‘ . .. . ■ 


■’Of 


’ ■ t . . j. : . : . , ,. , . 


■ *•* u. -t;. . < ’v ".v’j'.v ,-rj IVl < •• f \jvv/Xj 


c J 


■ 


«■'. 1 Co v/.'. cur- *■;,, i , .J’ ; Jiu v.t’cU",.;r< Vv 


' o ; vi.. '• i v jU.\ o- I; uuio u:.licit) . ••• •• • rx& 


. ■ o.i ■.. -,q .■ . u r-. v : .. 




■ i • ...... 




■ 1 '• ' M .. J-1 -\ .VIo, DA: . ■ : J- .. g/£ 





! O'. '. ' ff.LVf.* • '... Vuv;. .. • -J ,u u i ;)uu rrt wjji 


•• \,v V .* ■' ■■■: ; Ivvc. I J 0 






■ c .: .. ■: O' 






■ ... 




113 


organization is today known as the Alberta Teachers’ Association. Through 
cooperative action provided for in 1917* a number of significant changes in 
Alberta’s educational system have taken place. 

Instead of the voluntary membership of 797 in 1917, 1,763 in 1920 and 
3,362 in 1933, automatic membership of all persons teaching in Alberta is today 
guaranteed by the Teaching Profession Act of 1935 and amendments thereto. This 
Act bestowed certain benefits upon the organized teachers. From yearly engage¬ 
ments, with their accompanying Insecurity and doubts, teachers have now moved 
forward to continuous employment. Among the many other changes affecting 
favourably the teachers' economic and professional status that have come as a 
result of A.T.A. activity and negotiation ares salary schedules, superannua¬ 
tion, representation on curriculum and policy-making committees. 

In the larger cities the Catholic teachers for the sake of convenience 
and expediency have formed their own local A.T.A., since as teachers in the 
employ of different School Boards their routine and immediate problems are not 
identical. In general, however, the teachers in the Catholic schools belong 
to the local A.T.A. They are active workers in the various enterprises which 
the central Association undertake s; they participate in the local conventions 
and assume responsibility in curriculum and policy-making committees. 

In one matter Separate School teachers do not concur with Public School 
teachers, namely, in the matter of salaries. In the case of members of Religious 
Congregations this is particularly true. Everyone is in full agreement with the 
principle that the Religious teachers should be paid on an equal basis with lay 
teachers, and that the salary schedule of Separate School Districts should compare 
favourably with that of the Public School Districts. But, the principle is not 
possible of realization in practice in all parts of the province and is not 
















, ' . - ' . 1 - A • ..' '.! - '.’i ' . J H j ..L '&Xi ;'■< 

; v / : . ■ xf . ' ; v,' i\: J> ■:'Op 

. : . .. , . :: o‘ '/ ;v; - o- x f Ovh odl ;V 

t . i ■ . ■. A . 

• c v' • .*. ..o oix ■ ■ >■«/.:. »:•': ■/ ! i S;6 . x 

j 

o -> .. : .. : • J r t: . i ,-J'j ; . xou JoA- : 

: ■■ ? 0u : t -O "{.oix \;?ii ' . "U ' X . -; .'i r' «3®J 

v.' • \l' ■ , \ - .dm :-AO..' VO ; CCi : \; W10% 

:-;\ w a x\. • ,. x c,:Av\ < >, . t'i&xn-oov UnfcTiomxt ■ r\' .taiiovis} 

‘ ;• . ' . . ■ -X 


j.L j- ixsd: 


. 1 n.'xt 




■ X '.u 


. oJ ■ x .. > x o .. •.. : . ■. 


m s* - •• o . . t «. . ... : o. i ■ ‘ ■ - X \\VH .Lm , v 1 (A 

• . . . • • J: 


.. : . 

- , • , x. ■. - < ■ :ix. X. >■ 00 '-i J 








: • 


‘i.L •: OXa xj> ' •■tMJy-ji Ofio i!,i, 

. l:;c, ' ■ - O . .. ’i'l 1 .;•• •.• X' OJ 

.. r"j i c J J .;,01 nc-D 

■■ . ' .0 • : 1 . '"'J' . ' 0 “ -i . v.: i:x 


' i-x 


Li. 






• 01 . ' : . > * ; v.' h.:‘ O.'Oi’yJi 


■ ■ : •' X ' 1 MX vcl 




! i ■ ■ ’ , O: ■ ■ . S. 1, : '■ • •• CIO 




114 

operative without serious financial difficulty in any Separate School District. 
This is due to the facts which characterize the financial situation of these 
districts as set forth in the previous section. As long as the present situa¬ 
tion continues Separate School Districts must rely on the charity and zeal for 
Catholic education which induces Religious communities to sacrifice part of 
their salaries for this cause. If Separate School Boards were obliged to pay 
the Religious teachers on an equal basis with lay teachers and the provincial 
standards, many Separate School Districts would have to cease to function. The 
problem, therefore, is not one merely of justice towards Religious teachers, but 
of justice towards the whole Separate School System. 


BILINGUAL EDUCATION 1936 - 1953 

With the formation of the large units of administration and the centrali¬ 
zation of schools it was greatly feared in some districts that bilingual educa¬ 
tion would suffer a set-back. In a few instances this actually did occur, but 
the number of districts which lost the right was more than equalled by others 
that gained it. In fact many pupils who formerly received very little instruction 
in French in a rural school, after centralization benefited by the maximum 
provisions of the Departmental program. The great increase in the enrolment 
of such schools as St. Albert, St. Paul, Girouxville, Legal, Mallaig, Lafond, 

Jean Cote, Therien, Labrie, St. Vincent, and Picardville, all bilingual schools, 
testify to the truth of this statement. 

In 1936 and 1950 the Program of Studies regulating the teaching of French 
in bilingual schools was revised. Perhaps the most far-reaching change inaugurated 





115 


thereby was the inclusion of Grade IX in the ''Primary Course in French". 

For years it was felt that the general nature of the provincial program 
of studies resulted in many schools not getting the most out of the time devoted 
to the study of French. The members of the Association des Instituteurs 
Bilingues de L* Alberta, realizing that a detailed program would be of great 
assistance in achieving uniformity of standards and raising the level of efficien¬ 
cy, organized special courses for bilingual teachers in the summer of 194$. These 
courses were offered at St. John's College in Edmonton by French specialists from 
Laval University, Quebec. During the session committees were set up to prepare 
a thorough and complete program of studies for the bilingual schools. The out- 
line prepared followed closely the one approved by the Department of Education. 
Teachers who have used this supplementary program report that the information 
it contains has proven a wonderful guide, and that they note in recent years a 
greater interest in the study of French and in the reading of French literature 
has been developed. 

Yearly examinations in French are still written by all pupils of bilingual 
schools from Grades III - XII. Over the past ten years the average number of 
pupils writing these examinations has been 4,500. Prizes and diplomas are aw¬ 
arded to deserving candidates, 

Alberta's bilingual schools, a3JL of which are Catholic, are taught by 
approximately 160 bilingual teachers. All these schools are found in the central 
and northern sections of the province. Edmonton is the only city which offers 
the special French course for French-speaking children. About 305 pupils re¬ 
ceive this instruction in four city schools* Grandin, Sacred Heart, St. Francis, 
and 3t. Edmunds. In St. Paul, Sturgeon, Bonnyvilie, Clover Bar, Wainwright, 

High Prairie, Lac la Biche, and Vegreville Divisions many of the centralized 
schools are bilingual. 










M.M j v . 0. . v mm . 

- ! ^ < j J'.. - \ \i * ■: ;.i' “jX.\ 


>• oi 


-mJ" Jet. ••:it..cncn {/< . 






- : € , ’ . . ■ O' '.'.c. v • ■ J o.; 

J; .... 0 • . M 1 

f >■• . ■ J- i'.C : l M. , . . M ; ■; J 

’ • ' Q C ,! .■ M < • 'V;.:. . Hm 


: . ^ - 

'• J' ' ’ i .i ' .I'.C, :. : • -i, . ■ j.i : . >... ■ ... o 

^ ^ "• 'C' : >. ' i. < -!<'.&• J ' J i v j vi . C M -M : , ^ ic/r-V.L. ' .r,:'.vxd 

• 

i > %t to ■ t tJ4 .. ' o Jbi i t i 

■ OJ . j- v .. > • ;: * ,. ~ si v . c v : . o u? 

i '' ■■ ° t - : -• i' ..C'C*" iiO/C-’ v ,.‘0 Jjt 

' ••■' • ^ . '.v \-vr, u : ;i i c;.,-, .Mi ' 

.. 

m -■ > «-■ I 

< 1 0 t»4 - ' r * , t V ■ . j •: / • J 




. \0i • ii- : : c.i a,1u ; Mi ;j:c •:? •; a r V 


■::' v .. „•.'. 


. .. . - . M : mm 


* (.4 i 












♦ ' ... -0 r rv UM; C J .htfjb'I# 

•: - 1 • 0 ■, ... . .i.1 *i0.. 1 J’ I 

‘ J;\« :■ m, 

'»'• • • ■ • f - f;- 4 5 V .VC; ,. :) . Mr' J.O a V>i $ 

‘ 0 ■ t •' ' Ic.U ,'j(. ' J j : •, : ‘ i < rr'ojy '' . j/ - M/j'.SO 




t -> ■. ... i (• . i C 


- 






■ 

.. ,■ : ■ .'j fc'J'c ■ 01.: 






116 


NSW SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICTS 

1936 - 1953 

Within the past two decades Canada has developed in a most remarkable 
way; Alberta in particular has given evidence of achievements in industry, econ¬ 
omy and developnent of natural resources. Not less great has been her achieve¬ 
ment in the field of education. The general trend of Alberta’s new educational 
set-up has been treated at length in the early sections of this chapter. The 
effect of the new system on Catholic Schools has been considered. There remains 
only to trace the development of Roman Catholic Separate and Public Schools from 
1936 to 1953. 

St. John’s, Port M cM urray - St. John’s Roman Catholic Separate School 
District No. 32 was established by ministerial order dated October 8, 1935.^° 

It was not, however, until December 1936 that the two-room school was completed 
and classes begun. During that school year there were 44 pupils enrolled, 30 in 
Grades I - 17, taught by Mary A. Redmonde, and 14 in Grades 7 - X, taught by 
Wilfrid Loisells. 

For son© time there was little developnent in this district. Sister C. 
Bailey, a Grey Sister, from the hospital taught Grades 7 - 7III in the spring 
tern of 1944, but apart from that lay teachers only were employed and the en¬ 
rolment increased very slightly. 

In the late forties a decided change took place; rapid developnent began. 
By 1950 the enrolment had almost trebled; it was 115. The organization on July 3, 
1950 of St. Peter’s Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 38, at Waterways, * 2 

a town three miles distant from Fort McMurray, was in part responsible for the 

3 

increase. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta, 1935, p. 1H. 

2 Ibid .. 1951, p. 118. 

*^For location of Separate School Districts organized during this period see 
Figure 5, p. 117. 








_ .. 


, J( c'lHi. d • ■ i. oO! ■•. . 

( ij t> - }■ i : ,o- . J . •; g v I: v \< , , ; j ' rJ. hmm 

o - - , - - 


. o '■ • ■ v< ; j:,.. c-. , ' ■ " - r> _a' »kn 


V . : o_’-' ' -'.o..-,. ' i . • w..i v" O v. -"iJ • o „ ■' 

. 


. 


. C ?. ‘ ■ ■ G • 


' iu : ; :■ i *. r.f.:.;. ■ ,;Jt. , J ' ,c oo>.ul Xu 


, ;.i : . •. « . > ' V 'CV.no v,: - v 'V- t X. GL .7 XX 

, \ v; * AC'.' ( J-' ' *' - ; " 

. ! Ol . . • A. . . ' • - '■ t '• • • “ • ' " 

•xXiJ 








j v : j. J( • . . , v. i ... •• . • X : . X u,d c 1 c 

. • t . • ; . v .. ■ c « - - - ■ i. cj 

• - • X . J 'CA ' J r . ■ :• , • I . , ' :* - J' 

. ....■ ;....' ' , . • 'a .' V •: -G • 


; ■ D . jIl J j . ’o , f 


ecu v \a: ' •'X .■ ; ./-.X 


. . V C ■' ■■ • A.'- J' 0, O'. ... ' X: . ' '■ : ■ X 'Xi 

t . . i G ... G 1 C‘-i- 

I . -A* G< . o-,- ' .. . G- < ■' «. .. •' ■ ■ -G 'O 1 J t 

. 


♦ . • . • . o\ . imnu': 

■ • . ... . ■ 

• • , L-. 1 ■' L - - . • Xv. !•(• \ GG-: 'K>U 

.... , J.\ 







MAP OF ALBERTA 


117 


Showing location of Separate School Districts 
in 1953 


QgOOWH COTHOJ-IC 
Q ROM OH C OTf/OUC 

frOTR' /HO/COT&S 
Moo see) LIT : 



Figure 5 





















. 







. 


. 



























































118 


No school was built in this new district; it was organized to collect 
taxes and thus pay the fees and transportation costs of the 42 pupils who were 
vanned in to St. John’s School in Fort McMurray. 

In order to accommodate the increasing numbers of pupils a two-room 
addition was made to St. John’s School in 1950 and another classroom was built 
in 1951. In 1950 Grades X and XI were taught; in 1952 instruction was given in 

Septcmter 

Grade XII. The enrolment in/\1953 was 140 pupils who were taught in four class¬ 
rooms. A fifth classroom will be in use in September 1954 when an enrolment of 
155 is expected.^ 

St. John’s Separate School District has always collected its full share 

of company and corporation taxes; its financial handicap is the result of a low 

2 

Separate School assessment as compared with the Public School assessment. 

Paradis. Fort Saskatchewan - This rural Separate School District was 
organized on February 8, 193&.^ The school, a one-room stucco and plaster 
building with full basement, was opened in September 1938 for pupils in Grades 
I - IX. Bilingual instruction was given by Miss Madeleine Fortier, the first 
teacher. 

Paradis continued to function as a one-room rural school until the close 
of the school term 1952 - 1953 when it joined the Sturgeon School Division. The 
school building was moved near the new location of the two-room Saskatchewan R. 
C. P. School No. 2, in the hamlet of Lamoureux. In November, when the moving 
and repairing were finished, it became the third classroom of the centralized 
Saskatchewan School. Twenty pupils were daily vanned in from Paradis School 
District. 

^Statement of Reverend J. A. Turcotte, Sec.-Treas. Letter of March 27, 1954. 
2 lbid . 

^ Annual Report. Department of Education. Alberta , 193&, p. 101. 











. : 




r . i J. <: r. m m 


• ■ : ’ • •' :z> : c ' T. 

ud o c > fc B 

l<. ■ V . 1 - • ■ ‘ . • • - 's. ■ - ’ 

i •. .. CM t. ,i .i’: ' ■ ' C'.( r.. . ' j. >- i .i • • w-VVa*' 

. ; ' . ‘ . 

v: . - ' 0 . M "a e , : • •. . . M. ■ ■ - 

■ ... > ■ . : : ^ " ' - 

; v ..j- .. - I _ » . . 0 • • ._ 

V . .. t _ .1 r-.Ot', . , . t \J. t( ' ' : ■ 

*..■<= ■ ... : ' , _f. . O i. 

- 

, J. . *j, > <:?v£. ■ r;.i J Jcm^J*. ri J l j:i .hi J 

. 




•- i i ' ; f.;.b '• !«■'. L\ ■ ■ ‘ 

■ 


' ' • ‘ ' ■ 

■ 


* 


r ■ 


0 .. . . . «J 

. 

< .o, m .1 v. • v vj , ■ ' . : *. i l'i± <•* onA , 


. / . j \ kJ j , j.i v .w i 


. s ^ 


►.o; v m: 




V . Jr, 'jj 










t J‘ 










119 

Sainte Bernadette, Picardville - Although Picardville was settled to¬ 
ward the end of the 19th century by a group of French-Canadian colonists under 
the direction of Reverend Father Morin, it was not until recent times that the 
Catholics of this area formed a Separate School District. Organization was be¬ 
gun in 1939, but by reasons of difficulties it was only on September 30, 1944 
that St. Louis, now St. Bernadette Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 34, 
was officially recognized.' 1 ' 

St. Bernadette’s school was opened in January 1945 with 45 pupils. Miss 
A. Plotkins was the teacher of this group of children in Grades I - VIII. The 
pool haH, then a new building, served as the school room while the first Separate 
School was being built. In September 1945 the two-room school was ready for use, 
but only one room was occupied. 

In 1946 the second classroom was opened. Grades I - IV were taught by 
Miss Campo while a Sister from Morinville taught Grades V - XI. In September 
1947 Grades I - V were in one room, Grades VI - VIII in the second. Grades IX - 
XI were taught in the Public School. This latter group of 22 included pupils from 
both the separate and public school districts. By agreement of the trustees and 
by vote of the ratepayers Sister Marie St. Sauveur, a religious of the congrega¬ 
tion FiHes de Jesus, who had established a convent in Picardville that summer, 
was hired as the teacher. 

In August 1949 the school was moved to its present site. A second two- 
room structure was built about ?0 feet west of the first during the summer months 
of 1950. One of these rooms became the Separate High School, for that year the 
Public High School was closed. It was arranged that the non-Cathoiic high school 
pupils from Picardville should attend the Westlock Centralized High School. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education. Alberta , 1944, P- 98. 










u 0 1 









. 





cc A ',.v ci . v 

o • 







*.< :':.i J 


‘i. : 



'J.i' 

v.; . o . 


•,ol wu- 


- 



v .i • '■ <j4 'JJj 


■ 

t. ■ 

' 

©J 



. w • 








. 



C: 


- j'. ■ c j • v 


; ! 





L/.4J V-C 

... ' i , 

C Vv- • 





■ i o V ! 'vi :• . i . 

■ 


e y 






. - 1 






: : f \ 0 ! 1 ,.S J ' 


. 


'? , ; . ■ . , j .. 




-- . "r ;.= .v 1 J:v 4 i . J. I: i-:. 




. . •: • ■ 


. • , . - : • . • 








o o. ' c , .. ‘ i 1 , 

. o: .. -.'O', v. . . Fx: j.ocuior; i.-ir. Li$ vf? • rftfodM 


fc.V.'C . ' . . 


t - 


ol . J- .V , • : , ■ •. t ■ .. .. 4 


■' > : J 

4..'. • 6 i . . r.v; i '■ ■ r!J J:. '... • 




oi- . •. 


. J ' 1 -V. vV v (. ■. > : ■ ''vt; JTiOO! 




. 


. '■ : j.o» * ,V ai V*. ! J . r o •.o' i t.r-r'vt. ',<• on * .0^1 Wli 

: .. >■ . ■ ■ ■ -if.; o'. 4/ . j 

V ■ 1 l 


t . . t ' „ ; . . . K ' ^ ; • 


' • [Jr 






120 


In Section 2 of this chapter the effects of Divisional Organization on 
minority rights was discussed at length. Reference was made to Picardville as a 
district in which a group of Catholic Separate School Districts had united to form 
a type of consolidated school area in order that all ratepayers of the surrounding 
districts who chose to support the Separate School might be free to do so. 

On December 30, 1951 three Roman Catholic Separate School Districts were 
officially organized: St. Jerome No. 39, St. Jacques No. 40, and St. Gerard 
No. 41. 1 These districts were formed, not with intention of establishing a school, 

Stt 

but of uniting with the Bernadette's Separate School District to form a Catholic 

Consolidated School area. All Catholic children from these districts attend 

St. Bernadette's School. In this bilingual school there were 98 pupils enroled 
2 

in 1953* Four teachers instructed the pupils in four classrooms. 

St. Thomas More, Fairview - Roman Catholic Separate School District 
No. 35 was formed on January 21, 1948.^ When the newly constructed two-room 
school opened in September 1948 there were 71 pupils in attendance. Mrs. F. £bly 
taught 42 pupils in Grades I - V while Mrs. A. B. Kleininger had 29 pupils in 
Grades VI to IX. In 1949 a third room was constructed. Grades I - V were still 
in one room. Grades VI - VIII in a second, and IX and X in the third. 

In September 1950 the Sisters of Charity of Providence took over this 
school. A fourth classroom had been built that year and thus it was possible to 
offer instruction in all Grades I - XII. The enrolment' in 1950 was 90; of these 
24 were high school pupils. 

^Annual Report of the Department of Education. Alberta , 1952, p. 118. 

^Registers of St. Bernadette S.S.D. No. 34, September 1953. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education. Alberta , 1948, p. 107. 










,L . •••< ‘j.4 


0 




0 


i 


i 


( 











■ V 


vj ILL 




9 



j* 













121 


St. Thomas More School is now a six-room school; two grades are taught 
in each classroom. The enrolment has increased steadily; in 1951 - 52 it was 
162. To date it has not been possible to offer special courses in home economics, 
shop or commercial subjects, but in the near future these will become part of the 
high school program. 

St. Marie, Spirit River - On February 23, 1948 St. Marie Roman Catholic 

Separate School District No. 36 was formed in Spirit River. 1 The newly built 

two-room school was opened for pupils in Grades I to IX in September of that year 

with an enrolment of 35. Two Grey Sisters of the Cross were the teachers. In 

1952 the numbers had increased to 43. 

Although the French-speaking pupils are a minority in this school, by 

special arrangement in accordance with the Departmental regulations they are 

given daily instruction in their native language. 

Rosary, Manning - As the Catholic population of Manning increased, the 

demand for a Separate School became more and more insistent. Finally through the 

untiring efforts of Reverend Fathers Claude de Champlain and C. Kindervater ably 

assisted by Mr. S. A. Hartman, Rosary Roman Catholic Separate School District 

r 

No. 37 was officially organized on November 7, 1949. 

A four-room school built with funds that were donated by the Catholic 
population of the district and in particular by Mrs. Anna Dechant and Mr. A. 

Daigle was opened on September 1, 1950 with an enrolment of 160 pupils. Grades 
I and II were taught by Sister Gerard Mage 11a, Grades III and IV by Mis3 
Genevieve Parse ills, Grades V and VI by Sister Mary Daniel and Grades VII and 
VIII by Miss Cecilia Neman. 

1 Ibid. 











. Oc' 

. : v 1j • - m: ^ . : '• 

. ' - 

: . , • r i.i .udo i, I 

. 

. ... . ■ ■ ■ ;V ; >■ ' ^ . - 

odT' 

i t ;.. Ov I r:: .; T a jV b*;/■)&, c J.o< - -• - | 



. 






. , "a . i : di;W 

• ; S 


. 


, . ; , '. • .. ; . . '•> ■ 




, 

' l, ■ '• -• J. V :■ «■ ■ • ' ; . 


' 


I. ' c 


bi . .. n^.o sa. j.oa't/C •''.a v- . no‘1 


...... 


■ . ■ - ; - -■ 




v.' - v . .. '... .... .i.< ■' < • - - 




,. • . ' : t i . ■ r. J J "• ' ' d ■ J 

\ . '.I s .. ... < ! CM " J ' * I ■ '■! ■ ' 

'• -i- 

‘j lLi c ... . . - ‘ ; c,a c- 

. 









122 


Sisters, members of the Religious Congregation Sisters of the Presenta¬ 
tion of Mary, had come from Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, to open a convent in 
Manning. From the first music was taught at school and in the convent. In 
September 1952 the Sisters of Service, a Canadian Congregation whose Mother House 
is in Toronto, replaced these Sisters in the school and convent. 

A one-room school was built in the summer of 1951 to provide the required 
accommodation for increasing numbers and to allow for a classroom for Grades IX 
and X. In 1953 the enrolment in the school was 170. 1 

Rosary School, as were all Separate Schools in the province, was an 
independent unit, although it was within a large division. Taxes for the support 
of this school were collected from the ratepayers of the Separate School District 
only, while Catholic pupils were vanned in from several parts of the division. 

On December 30, 1951, Mazenod Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 42 was 
formed in Buchanan Creek. On December 30, 1952, in Notikewan, St. Monica’s 
Roman Catholic Separate School District No. 44 was officially organized.^ The 
purpose in establishing both these districts was to make it possible to collect 
the taxes of Catholic ratepayers living in these areas in order to help finance 
Rosary Separate School. Thus the three Separate School Districts: Rosary, 

Mazenod and St. Monica form a consolidated school area. 

Immaculate Conception, Peace River - Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic 
Separate School District No. 43 was organized in Peace River on July 8, 1952.^ 

On October 14th the first school, a one-room stucco structure with part basement 
and hot-air heating system was opened in the northern part of the town, ’’the Flat”. 

^Registers of Rosary S. School, 1953* 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education. Alberta , 1952, p. 118. 

3 

Records of the Department of Education. Alberta . 


%bid. 










123 

It was built on property owned by the School Board, but it was not financed by 
the Board. There were 30 pupils in Grades I to VI taught by Sister W. Donnelly. 

In 1953 the building of a three classroom school with playroom was begun 
by the School Board. This school is in the southern section of the town about 
two miles distant from the first school. Pending the completion of building opera¬ 
tions the three classes. Grades I to IX, were taught in temporary quarters in the 
basement of the church from September 1953 until early in 1954. Grades I to VI 
are still taught in the first school. 

Financial problems have been acute in Immaculate Conception School Dis¬ 
trict; the handicaps ever present to minority groups seem to affect this district 
in a particular way. Despite the difficulties real progress has been made. 

Jasper Place - During the past decade Jasper Place, like Edmonton, has 
experienced a most remarkable increase in population. The number of Catholic 
families in the district was high; in order to provide Catholic education for 
the children it seemed advisable to organize a Separate School District. Early 
in 1953 the formalities were completed and Jasper Place Roman Catholic Separate 
School District No. 45 was established by ministerial order dated April H, 1953.^° 

It was decided by the School Board that two ten-room schools would be 
required to accommodate the Catholic pupils of the district in Grades I to IX. 
Although plans were immediately drawn up, it was impossible to complete the con¬ 
struction work before September. It was, therefore, agreed that Grade I pupils 
would be taught in a temporary classroom until the new schools we re completed 
while the remaining children would, by special arrangement, attend the Jasper 
Place Public School. 

After the formation of the Separate School District, Catholic families 
moved into Jasper Place in increasing numbers; consequently when school opened in 

’•Ibid. 







O' V . V . . . J ' J 1 

OC -■ ’..oO : "J ‘:-'o \ : ,o . Jl.L'iu • ' 6 f'i 

. • . 0 ic ; 

. J ' ' , • V 


■ ■ , ■ ..... «. ■ t : 


...• . s. ... ■ I.'". , *.!..!: w . .'J!. » ' r..L •. ■ ...6 . iVu ! dj ;r C: 

. 

■ ’ . ; .\ :,i . . - . , ' 0.. oi: . . Co ' t :rj. ' ! t >.! uOO*, X,/ loi m • i'-I 

v.: • . '■ ■ - • ' 


./ o..> y>±. ; . X «jv;..ooi dr;..-' oXX . ,i. - oo-'.i 1 w ur>i> 

. ' . ■ 

■ . ' V 


. '• • : •' s :■ v,':-' 1 .v '■ i.v X ’ . 1 V • \'i 

- . • •. ... ... • ...v, .. ; r ••• . ■ • '.. v, . 

. 

cv J J'a i j , /.i. X <i>Oc &hc I PO jO.UK< :. .. 0... 

. . v. v : j. ■. . d ’ r. y.i’U-. 6jlC X id v.<:j benjj; 

. 

.v J . «. . X «■=. ' s' I . ;.:i .. ; ro Ic X , 

X . ••• *. ■' i 

X . OV . . . ' ■ « V • C ■ i ; 

H t o 00 $ ' ' ; ■ 0 J a 1 '.I.,..; 

. 


f ' s. sj -. • Cl j .M. :,<■ i. Ov6 ‘icX’iX 

■ •/O:'.' J. s.-O '-! V vit :± i'j&VtfflH 





124 

September 137 pupils registered in Grade I. Forty-two of the younger children 


were not admitted; the remaining 95 Grade I pupils were taught in a single tempor¬ 
ary classroom operated on a haLf-day shift basis. 

The two schools will be ready for use by May 1954. The Grade I class¬ 
rooms will be occupied immediately, but the other rooms will not be opened until 
September 1954. One of these schools will be a bilingual school. 

Since twenty classrooms will not provide sufficient accommodation for 
the pupils of Grades I to IX of the Jasper Place Separate School District, two 
two-room schools, one in the extreme south, the other in the north end of the 
town, are under construction. A high school will be built in the near future. ~ 
Cross Roads, Red Deer - Because of the double burden of payment of 
taxes and payment of fees which must be borne by Catholic ratepayers who wish 
their children to attend a Separate School within the division but outside the 

district to which they belong, Cross Roads Roman Catholic Separate School District 

2 

No. 46 was organised and established by ministerial order on July 1, 1953. The 
number of Catholic pupils in the district is too small to justify the building 
of a school, hence the 16 children attend Sacred Heart Separate School in Red 
Deer. The fees and transportation costs for these students are paid by Cross 
Roads District. 

Since the District was organized too late in 1953 to collect taxes for 
the current year, the government passed a requisition order on August 25, 1953, 

ordering the Red Deer School District No* 35 to pay a requisition grant to the 

3 

Separate School District for the remainder of the school year. 

^"Statement made by Mr. H. E. Beriault, Sec.-Treas. Jasper Place Separate School 
District, Letter of March 20, 1954. 

^ Records of the Department of Education* Alberta . 

^Statement made by Mr. H. Landry, Sec.-Treas. of Cross Roads S.S. District, 

Letter of March 25, 1954. 












.: j o .i.j.• ' 


• c: - V. • v : . , ' ' J L' h[ : '0O^ : L’ X.-. ». C.^’i 

. : : X * . .... 0 J OX • >■ : *J :•. . 

v .. • - 1 v.. ‘ i. o‘(. ; Cv".;oi: ; o y ' ,'iy oo. 

t ' ■ ■: Co • l / j 

... o I ■' •/'. ,. V ■ ' . . </'- .. C 0 : ■■■; . , » v .... ■■: . ■> ■. \..~;a/ j 


■ ■ ..’ . 1 ■ : • ■ ■ ■ • . f ‘ V 


: ■ ■ • - . 'J i ) • . V C • 




... • , .. ■. : on 


<: ■ •• ■. ;. - : ..• • d ; . • ' ■ c * J. r.9jo»d 


. , ■ d- ■ ■ 

. . ... . 8 a. c .. , ;■ ■: . 


'• O V | vi .0 I .)M 

. 


. . t . • 1 i .1-.. v. i "I ' . VC L, •: i; . . J . . Lc ,‘CO 

.. ,. I, v . v/ ex do.c\v }, CvJ ■ X 


:v . i b 1 • c*.; oJ,c,o fr-'.wj&fc hnohM vovMJ. -o ci o.rv ■ ®ot.»r> .xc.c .'oc; a r xo 




i.c'i sA vic, oi n id • < ndp.oo n< ctw-nj hi c occ 








. do j.A o :. : Q siDBOjl 


-• ' : ' . ! t L*.- . J V. J- • 




jj. 'i > ■■ Jro. • . , .. • ■. , ■ ■ . : tv.d 




. 


v •. 

-V o c 


...J ri.CiuMo J 


- !■: - . . .. O'. V. ■ ' . 

• - , • i ' oO j ■ •: Ok Co Cl.f> , vh 


"0 : ' • . - .o. t d a 




.1' : 1 5 , v n ’■ t O :? J.AvicJ.u' 




. ■ .v, 1! _ ^ , . 0 • ' v • V •. 




■ .o- . i I. 


... , 




tC’-. tv . 'i’O ^eSKMjl 










125 

St. Laurent and Duverns.y — On the banks of* the North Saskatchewan River 


in the French-Canadian settlements of Brosseau and Duvernay, St. Laurent and 
Duvemay Roman Catholic Separate School Districts Nos. 47 and 48 respectively 
were established on October 27, effective November 1, 1953. 1 2 * 4 A modem two-room 
school complete with teacher’s room and combination playroom and auditorium is 
under construction. 

It is estimated that 45 to 50 children in Grades I to IX will register 

in the school in September 1954. Five to ten of these pupils will be from out- 
2 

side the districts. 

DEVELOPMENT OF EXISTING DISTRICTS 
1936 - 1953 

Calgary - During the first ten years of this period development in the 

Separate Schools of Calgary was slow. The enrolment increased only 135 between 

1935 and 1945. No new schools were constructed; within the existing system, 

however, several changes worthy of note -were effected. 

Household economic classes for pupils in all separate schools were 

recommenced in September 1937 in Holy Angels' School. Mrs. Mary Mooney con- 

3 

ducted these classes in the newly converted basement. In September 193& Mr. 

Thomas Barry was engaged as general shop instructor.^ The centre for these 
classes, too, was Holy Angels’ School.^ The same year a ninth classroom was 

^"Statement made by Reverend G. Bouchard O.M.I. Pastor at Brosseau, Letter of 
April 14, 1954. 

2 Ibid . 

•^"Minutes of Calgary Separate School Board Meeting" September, 1937. 

4 Ibid , Sept. 1938. 

'’See Figure 3, P- 81 for location of Separate Schools in Calgary. 









126 


opened in St. Mary's Boys' School when the teacher^' room was converted into a 
lesson room, and in St. Mary's Girls' School a commercial unit was opened. A 
temporary classroom was partitioned off in the auditorium for a typewriting room. 

On August 19, 1943 Mr. J. F. Kinahan, who since 191B had been Superin¬ 
tendent and Secretary-Treasurer of the Calgary Separate Schools died suddenly. 
During his 22 years of office Mr. Kinahan had rendered an inestimable service 
to the Catholic School system of Calgary. Reverend V. A. Thomson was appointed 
acting Superintendent until January 1, 1941 when Mr. R. A. Cannon accepted the 
position. 

During the summer of 1941 a small addition was made to St, Mary's Girls' 
School in order to provide a second room for the School Board Office and a ware¬ 
house room. At the same time by changing partitions and reconstructing doorways 
a library was arranged on the second floor of the school. The enrolment in the 
Girls' High School was increasing. To provide the necessary accommodation one 
of the elementary grades was transferred to a room rented in Sacred Heart Convent, 
and the teacher's room was converted into a lesson room. 

In 1946 a four-classroom school was begun on the North Hill to replace 
the old St. Joseph's School. In September of the same year Reverend Father 
WheHhan was appointed supervisor of physical education, and Mr. J. V. Van Tighem 

was appointed supervisor of instruction for the Separate Schools .* 1 The following 

2 

September Miss I. Kennedy was appointed supervisor of music, 

A period of rapid development followed; enrolment greatly increased 
necessitating the opening of a number of new classrooms. The policy of the 
Calgary Separate School Board has been to construct smaller schools in all sections 

1 "Minutes of Calgary Separate School Board Meeting", September 1946, 

" Ibid . September 1947. 










. -v : < . 


- , ■. : '' ;; 1 . .: ill: . 

, 1 

- • . ' ■ •' J..\ ' - ; ,7 

C f . . 1 t - 

■■ - - > x «•.; . -■ >: • J j| 

. 

< ' < ... • i J :.i: 


t 


C‘J : .. H£.\ I .ftg ...'-a: v . • ’ .j '• t ■SSISS& Sflu . r 




... • ■ . - 5 .V•: f • f I' JO'.*-:-, i; : ,/■ 


; 


*■ • ■ • ' o . - :,I"J :■ ;• ... c ;J Jj .1 V 

v 3:6' • . ■ ■ . : ©gffi''* 1 ,:: • 

' v ■ - ' l- ' . . i ■ - ! . 1 .. I ' i; . c; ■ \L>i . i Li 1 : 

• J • ' f 0 V . V ' •« .. •' j ■ . o'. • : •-•.! o . nJ J.0 

-f■ ■■- ■ v.; . v • ■ •. : . , L/ . 






LvC-li f-»: c •. C X : . . ’ilOW'.i-Va C Al 

- ..l-. 1 ■. 






.. , ■ . o ; '• 1 i L' -:. . .mtU.: pii 

, o w ; fj ‘c; . . r i AooVi:ow.A t& 

• . ..o’ .. A . 

‘ . ' < V ■ • V ' ■ ! 

. ‘ ' ; < ' ■, :u .( ' 1 ■ ' : v. o.iU 

■ Jc • ii^oci bu-w J oo' : c', f»*tjSt 


\ .' • (o. 






. 






127 

of the city rather than to build a few large units. It is believed that the 
advantages for the pupil of having a short distance to travel to school out¬ 
weighs the disadvantages of the smaller unit. Economically the policy has 
serious drawbacks, but when education of children is the issue economy must 
not be given first consideration. 

Two two-room schools were purchased from the Caigary Public School 

Board; Glengarry Cottage on 2802 - 21st Ave. S.W. in 1947, and the Manchester 

on Burns land and 50th Ave. in 1949. 1 The first was opened in 1948 as Holy Name 

School for pupils in Grades I-IV; the second was opened as St. Anthony's in 1949 

for pupils in Grades I—VI. One room only was occupied in each school during the 

first year. The construction of two two-classroom elementary schools, St. Paul's 

on 23rd Ave. and Centre Street North and St. Peter's on Kensington Road and 22nd 

2 

Street W. was completed for September 1950. The exceptional growth of popula¬ 
tion in the north and north-west sections of the city made the construction of 
two additional classrooms and an auditorium for both of these schools impera¬ 
tive. In 1951 St. Paul's was enlarged and in 1952 St. Peter's, 

A four-class room school with gymnasium, St. Charles, was constructed on 

3 

23rd Ave, and 24th St. W. in 1952. Early in 1953 the new School Board Offices 

were built on 1347 - 12th Ave. W.^ On September 1 of the same year a by-law 
was passed for the construction of three schools; a six-classroom school aad 
gymnasium in Renfrew, St. Alphcnsus' School, Radford Ave. and Russett Rd., a 
four-classroom school, St. Pius, on Capitol Hill, 22nd Ave. and 18th St. N.W., 
and a four-class room school and gymnasium in Altadore on 42nd Ave. and 16th St." 

■*Tbid. September 1947 and 1949. 

p 

"Annual Report of Calgary Separate Schools" 1950, 

3 Ibid , 1952. 

^Chairman's Report at Annual Meeting September 22, 1953. 

5 

"Chairman's Report at Annual Meeting", September 22, 1953. 






. i ( • J. J 0 -1’J iifcVV & 

' . . • — ■■ - 

. , '■ • V ; .... • 

' - 

.-.J . • ■- V- ; 

.. I 

H'w ' : •. -1 . . .V..' 0 . . ... t '• 

' 0 ' . . - ) 3 ' ’ - • ' - • • 

. . C i . • 

;■ , ' . - - .1 , ' v . . . . 




, * ■ 









* ■ 1 


K & 1 ■ 

P.. : : ujj:©* 



i > S' i‘ 

- V 

St . re- 1 


. . 1 •. t ' V . 











J’ 








■' U 












128 


These schools will be opened in September, 1954. 

The Calgary Separate Schools have always maintained high standards in 
the academic subjects. They have endeavored to guide their students to an 
appreciation of democratic practices and institutions and above all they have 
striven to develop well-instructed Catholic boys and girls. In order to do 
this more effectively the unified course in Christian Doctrine proposed by the 
Diocesan Branch of the Confraternity of Christian Doctrine under the direction 
of Reverend J. Le Fort was adopted by the Calgary Separate Schools in September 
1948. The yearly centralized examinations written by all children of the diocese 
in Grades III to XII have done much to stimulate interest and increase the stand¬ 
ards of achievement. 

At the present rate of growth (the enrolment in September 1952 was 
2423 and in September 1953 it was 2?65) it is anticipated that within the next 
10 years the number of classrooms needed in the Calgary Separate School System 
will be about 1?6 as compared with the 83 now in operation. Thirty rooms will 
be required during the next two or three years. Plans are being made for the 
construction of a six-classroom junior high school at the Sacred Heart location 
on 13th Ave. and 15th St.; a four-classroom elementary school in South KiHarney; 
and a six-classroom elementary school in the Elboya District in 1954. 1 

Edmonton - The period 1936-1953 is one of outstanding development in 
the Edmonton Separate School District. The enrolment more than doubled during 
these years, for in 1936 it was 2720 and in 1953 it was 5454. To keep pace 
with this rapid increase an extensive building program was adopted. 

The financial handicaps peculiar to Separate School Districts in Alberta 
and in fact in most parts of Canada have resulted in serious problems; nevertheless 


1,r Minutes of the Separate School Board Meeting", November 20, 1953. 




















0 

. 










vji ..... .'v ^ 

■ 


v' v' J - C*- . 

- 


' 















' • , • : l.\ ' ■ ;;:i ' ... ' - ' ?: ’ ‘ 1 ^ 

' » . . * ? - 






















129 

the Edmonton Separate School District has been so ably administered that the 
financial standing has been thoroughly sound. A major change in the financing 
of the schools took place in 1937 when the Board, in conjunction with the City 
of Edmonton Public School Board refunded its debenture debt. 

Since its inauguration the Separate School District had 
contracted capital debts by way of debentures totalling $751,400.00. 

By 1937 this debt had been reduced to $322,666.55, all payments on 
account of principal and interest having been met as they became due. 

The 419 debentures making up this outstanding capital debt were, 
under the 1937 refinancing scheme known as the Fortin Plan, called 
in and exchanged for new, callable debentures due in 1967 and bear¬ 
ing interest at the old rates to the original dates of maturity and 
thereafter at 4g$. The debt under the new plan will be retired by 
payment of an annuity of $23,516.68, over a period of thirty years. 
Under the plan, the payments on account of principal will be ad¬ 
ministered by a Separate School Sinking Fund.The saving in 

annual financial charges resulting from this debt readjustment is 
being used for capital purposes.^ 

On August 1st 1945 in accordance with the terms of the above mentioned 
plan all outstanding debentures were called for redemption. New debentures in 
the amount of $284,000.00 were issued, the proceeds of which were used to re¬ 
deem the old debentures. The new debentures were all of the serial type and 
carried interest coupons at the average rate of 3.35$ as compared with the 
average rate on the old debentures of 4.98$. With the consummation of the 
refunding transaction the 1937 Refinancing (Fortin) Plan was discontinued, 
and the Separate School Board Sinking Fund Board of Trustees ceased to function. 

The savings thus effected helped to make it possible for the Edmonton 
Separate Schools to educate between 19$ and 20$ of the school population of the 
city, although they received from the City only 12^$ of the taxes paid in 

3 

Bimonton for school purposes. 


^ The Western Catholic Separate School Supplement June 14, 1939. 
^ Annual Review Edmonton Catholic Schools , March 1946. 

3 Ibid. 









i • - 

.. ,.u ' ; ^ - . CiJ • •• 

. 

j.-. vI- J V. 









■ i . ; , ; v.. : v . i," ; 


. 

. 




. 

J ■ 

, 

. 


. 










. . 





■ 

0 










More recently the change in government regulations governing the alloca¬ 
tion of company and corporation taxes had proved a decided advantage to the 
Edmonton Separate School System. An upward revision of property valuation by 
the City Council, more and more Catholic property owners in Edmonton, and care¬ 
ful checking on the part of the School Board and Officials with cooperation on 
the part of Catholic property owners to ensure that their property is assessed 
for Separate School support baV-e resulted in a decided increase in assessment for 
Separate Schools.^ 

Undoubtedly the fact that the system is now growing rapidly and larger 
units are being constructed is a consideration, for the relative operational 
cost per pupil more nearly approaches that of the Public Schools. 

In 1937 a one-room addition was made to St. Andrew's School, and in 
1938 a two-room addition was made to St. Alphonsus. In 1938 seventeen schools 
including rented buildings were in operation. The teaching staff consisted of 
84 regular teachers, two full time and three part time special teachers pro¬ 
viding instruction in French for French-speaking children, a supervisor of 
music and a part time supervisor of physical education. The Medical Depart¬ 
ment was staffed by a part time medical inspector. Dr. J. H. Conroy and a 
school nurse, Miss G. MacCormack. 

In 1939 and 1941 with funds made available as a result of the Fortin 
Plan schools were constructed at 120th St., St. John’s, and 64 th St., St. Clare's. 
These schools were urgently needed to relieve congestion at Grandin School and 
to provide Catholic School facilities for the children in the Highlands District. 

By this time World War conditions had brought about so many building 
restrictions and such high building costs that most public bodies including the 
Edmonton Separate School Board, adopted a policy of using temporary accommoda¬ 
tion for a few years. This enforced postponement of building activity along 


^ Annual Review Edmonton Catholic Schools , April, 1953* 

2 See Figure 4, p. 84 for location of Separate Schools in Edmonton. 





















. 











• • • ■ • ■ - ' • • - — 

. . 0.' , . , O'. ... .. -.... vj^odH 

0 -• 

. - • . .... , J .... n:>j* ,\bl'-ji :'■< v -< ,;o % 


o 











.• 





















.• * ^: . 






... . . ■. i V. .. - Jil L ‘ i-V. .-uO ■ : C •’., 










. 




... , 


< . . v.: . •' 

.. • -V ' . 




















131 


with the great increase in school population resulted in a postwar period of 
expansion and extensive construction. 

In 1943 due to Department of Education curriculum changes, St. Vincent's 
Commercial High School was discontinued as a separate entity and the commercial 
classes were incorporated into the general high school organization at St. Mary's 
and St. Joseph's Schools. In 1944 alterations were made in St. Francis' Hall 
and St. Clare's School to provide additional classrooms and a portable class¬ 
room was constructed at Fairview School. In 1945 an addition to St. Clare's 
School was completed and the building of a two-room frame school, St. James' 
on 91st St. and 79th Ave. was begun. In September the school, though unfinished, 
was opened for pupils in Grades I to VI. A new classroom was opened in St. 
Joseph's High School and Grades I to III were taught in a rented classroom in 
the Jasper Place District.^ 

Four major construction projects were begun in the early part of 1946; 

an eight-room school, St. Michael's, including offices, playrooms and four 

classrooms on 92nd St. and 105th A Ave.; an eight-room school, St. Andrew's, 

comprising office space, one playroom, auditorium and four classrooms on 114th 

Ave. and 12?th St.; a two-classroom, playroom and office addition to St. Patrick's; 

2 

and a two-classroom addition to St. Anthony's. 

These schools were designed so as to incorporate in them the most modern 
and approved features of school construction. The buildings are of the one storey 
type reducing to a minimum hazards from fire and accidents ordinarily connected 
with stairways. Playrooms and washrooms are bright, well ventilated rooms on the 
ground floor; classrooms are large and adjoining them are workrooms. Special 

^ Annual Review Edmonton Catholic Schools , March, 1946. 

2 

Ibid ., April, 1947. 










132 


attention has been given to lighting. 1 2 3 4 5 

In 194-7 the St. Michael's and St. Andrew's Schools and the additions 
to St. Patrick's and St. Anthony's Schools begun in 1946 were finished. During 
the fall of 1947 three portable schools were constructed at St. Francis School 
to replace the accommodation formerly provided by St. Francis Hall. A fourth 

o 

portable school was built at Mt. Carmel School. 

The enrolment in the Edmonton Separate Schools for December, 1947 
exceeded that for December, 1946 by 197 pupils. The total enrolment was 3912. 

This figure represented a 111$ increase over the twenty-five year period 1922- 
1947. In the same period the Public School enrolment in the city increased 

o 

about 25$. On the teaching staff in 1947 there were 115 regular and eight 
special and part time teachers. 

During 1948 a two-classroom addition was made to St. Clare's School and 
a two-room school was constructed at Jasper Place, 14831 - 98th Avenue. Only- 
half the cost of this school was borne by the Edmonton Separate School Board 
since only about half the pupils who attended it were from within the city limits. 
A one-room and auditorium extension was made to Mt. Camel School.^ 

The building program for 1949 consisted of: a four-room addition to 
St. Alphonsus School; a two-room addition to St. Michael's School; a two-room 
addition to St. Francis School; erection of a two-room school, St. Thomas, in 
Bonnie Doon on 8527 - 92nd St.; and erection of a two-room school, St. Margaret's 
in the Ritchie District on 7114 - 98th St 

1 Ibid. 

2 Ibtd .. 1948. 

3 Ibid . 

4 Ibid .. April, 1949. 

5 Ibid .. April, 1950. 



































133 

Health and medical services continued to be given to the pupils of the 
Edmonton Separate Schools throughout these years. In 1949 the total enrolment 
in the schools was 4,362. In November of this year a special class for handi¬ 
capped children was opened in St. Michael's School. Sixteen pupils from all 
parts of the city were in attendance. In 1949, too, a Retirement and Pension 
Plan (Canadian Government Annuity Plan) was inaugurated for caretakers and 
other non-teacher employees of the Board.^ 

A number of buildings were erected in 1930. A four-room addition was 
made to St. Clare's, a two-room addition to St. Francis' and St. Margaret's 
Schools, and a one-room addition was made to Mt. Carmel School. A two-room 
school, St. Agnes was erected at 11)648 - 72nd Ave. Two moveable classrooms were 
transferred to a new site and were incorporated into a two-room school, St. 
Gerard's, on 8310 - 124th Ave., and St. James' School was transferred from 8935 - 
79th Ave. to 7714 - 83rd St. 1 2 3 

The year 1951 saw a continued expansion in the Edmonton Separate Schools. 
The following additions to existing schools were made; seven classrooms to 
St. Andrew's, two classrooms and combination playroom and assembly hall to 
St. Thomas, one classroom and combination playroom and assembly hall to St. 
Margaret's, four classrooms to Mt. Carmel and two classrooms to St. Patrick's. 

In addition construction on a new high school unit on St. Joseph's High School 
site was commenced.^ 

During 1952 still more schools were constructed. At 11516 - 102nd St. 
an eight-classroom school, St. Basil's was erected; at 10915 - 110th St., a 
four-classroom school, St. Catherine's was built. Two two-classroom schools, 

1 Ibid .„ April, 1950. 

2 Ibid .. April, 1951. 

3 Ibid .. April, 1952. 



















. 


. 

. v . . , -• . , . . .... i ■ - 

1 .0 ■ . . • . . . . . - .... . « ’ V. ■ 

■ „ . L . . •. .' , . ; r j L ..... . ; f , . ' . .. 

; , . 

. o .( ' ■ ■ ■ d • . . <jc * v o , J -• sal. :■ .n . t .,\.v , 

. ... ■ . . . ». - \ It .v . . \ • • ■ . * . ' . ... ' . '. jD I 

. , . . • , . : . 

n . . ■ 

'"f? ■ 

... V 

« '• - - - ' -i • .. A-.' O i ' * * 1 * * - »’ -u Vi . 












. 







■ < 














134 

one at 10530 - 138th St., St. Vincent's, the other at 7330 - 113th St., St. Peter's 
were constructed. In addition four classrooms were transferred and remodelled 
to form St. Vital's School on 12214 ~ 128th St., and construction on the new 
high school was continued.' 1 2 3 ' 

The major project of 1953 was the completion of St. Joseph's High School. 

In addition to the regular classrooms, the school comprises a chemistry labora¬ 
tory with adjoining st ore room and lecture room, a physics laboratory, a biology 
room, a library with adjoining reading and study room, an industrial arts shop, 
a home economics suite of rooms, cafeteria, gymnasium-auditorium, principals' 
offices, teachers' rest rooms, medical rooms, guidance offices, and student union 
offices. 

One classroom wing has been allocated to the girls' classes and one to 
the boys \ while both groups use at different periods such rooms as the science 
laboratory and gymnasium. In this way the advantages of the larger unit are 
combined with the Catholic principle of separation of boys' and girls' classes 
at the high school level. 

There are now 348 girls and 308 boys enrolled in St. Joseph's High 

School. Thirteen teachers are on the staff in the girls' section and 12 in 

the boys'. Most of these students are in Grades XI and XII, as it has been the 

policy of the Edmonton Separate School Board to offer Grade X in several sections 

of the city in order to make it possible for most pupils to get the first ten 

2 

years of their education without going far from home. 

One of the probable early developments in the high school organization 

will be the construction of a second senior high school in South t«dmonton. This 

3 

will temporarily decrease the enrolment at St. Joseph's. 

1 Xbid .. April, 1953. 

2 Ibid . 

3 Ibid. 





■ 

- 

4 - .. •. •- -‘i. 1 • ■ : \ 








i: . ■ • • • 














• ... 

... ■ 

... - V. \. . . 

. ' J. • ■ -• '.D C J. • v...- : Y,olXCil 

s J . u • d: . * ‘ ... id. \j 

. 




I • l ... . . ; ■ 










135 


Completion of the high school unit was only a part of the Edmonton 
Separate School building program for 1953. In addition a new four-classroom 
school, St. James', was constructed on 7814 - 83rd St., and additions were made 
to: St. Clare's, four classrooms and a gymnasium; St. Gerard's, two classrooms 
and a gymnasium; St. Thomas', four classrooms; St. Agnes', four classrooms; 

St. Vincent's, four classrooms; St. Michaels', two classrooms; St. Paul's, one 
classroom; St. Margaret's, two classrooms; St. Basil's, gymnasium, home economics 
and industrial arts rooms; St. Alphonsus', gymnasium. 1 2 3 

The Edmonton Separate Schools had an enrolment of 6136 pupils in 
December, 1953. These pupils were taught by 195 regular teachers in 195 class¬ 
rooms, and 12 special and part time teachers for the five industrial arts, home 
economics and opportunity rooms and special French instruction. The administra¬ 
tion and supervisory staff includes a superintendent, an assistant superintend- 

2 

ent and four supervisors. 

Instruction in the Edmonton Separate Schools is carried out in accord¬ 
ance with the regulations and Program of Studies of the Department of Education. 

In the past financial resources of the district have made it impossible to or¬ 
ganize extensive technical or vocational courses; nevertheless vocational elec¬ 
tives such as typewriting, bookkeeping, shorthand, office practice, and home 
economics have been offered in the senior high schools, and home economics, 
typewriting, and industrial arts have been taught in certain junior high schools. 

A moderate extension of these courses is planned by the Board in the next few 

3 

years. 

In addition to the secular subjects and activities of the school program 

information given by Mr. A.A. O'Brien, Superintendent of Edmonton Separate Schools, 
Letter of April 28, 1954. 

2 Ibid . 

3 Ibid .. April, 1952. 








136 


a half hour at the end of each day is devoted to Religious Education. This 
instruction in Religious Doctrine, strengthened by the Catholic principles and 
entirely Catholic school atmosphere which pervades the whole day should help 
to form boys and girls into desirable Catholic democratic citizens. During 
September, 1951, with the direct assistance and approval of His Grace Archbishop 
MacDonald a revised religious education program, including new texts was in¬ 
augurated . 

The growth of the system made it necessary to increase the adminis¬ 
trative, medical and supervisory staffs. In 1950 a supervisor of elementary 
instruction was appointed, and an additional school nurse and a maintenance 
staff were employed.*^ In September, 1951 a guidance program for junior and 
senior high schools was arranged by the Edmonton Separate Schools under Reverend 
W. F. Fitzgerald of St. Joseph’s High School staff. On a similar half time 
basis Mr. John Dunnigan was appointed physical education assistant. Since 1947 
special physical instruction had been provided for girls in the larger inter¬ 
mediate schools. In order to keep pace with the rapidly increasing population 

and home building, in September 1951 the Board appointed Mr. S. E. Moher as 
2 

assessment officer. 

In April, 1952 an amalgamation of health services, including the City 

3 

Board of Health and the Public and Separate Schools was effected. In addition 
to the regular health services under the amalgamation plan Separate School 
children in Grade I continue to be provided with vitamin capsules free of charge. 
The School Board in conjunction with the Home and School Association also pro¬ 
vides hot drinks for pupils who take their lunch at school during winter months, 

1 Ibid., April, 1951. 

2 Ibid .. April, 1952. 

3 Ibid .. April, 1953. 






. 


; o. :io :$ 

, . ■ JO' 

0 . b r v 






, 


. 

... . OiO:-. ;_C , J. 

■ • • ' . ' - . . ■ 

> 






"... v < c ; -.. n ; 




, • •. . ,. ' ' .' ■' ; ' ' •... ' -J. •• 

- 

. . . . o . • •• ' -V 


. . . " . . ,• ' : 




. c • o. i ’ v, J. J; i/i oq 

*W 

< V. 

t .. t. 




137 

The Edmonton Separate School Board has endeavored to provide modern 
educational facilities including radios and audio-visual aids for all schools. 
Continuing this policy a control film-strip library consisting of some 200 
film-strips was set up in 1951. 

A special class for handicapped children is in operation and night 
classes in basic English and citizenship for new Canadians have been carried 
on since 1943. As part of the regular school program, instruction is provided 
in French language in accordance with the School Act for French-speaking pupils 
in Grandin, Sacred Heart, St. Edmund's and St. Francis Schools. 

Macleod - Holy Cross School in Made ad never recovered from the finan¬ 
cial difficulties of the depression years. In December, 1937, although the 
enrolment was still 32, the school was closed. 1 On December 29, 1937 the dis¬ 
trict was disorganized. 

X^thbridge - Following the plan adopted by many school districts during 
the war years the X^thbridge Separate School Board used temporary accommodation 
for the increasing enrolment and continued to use the older St. Aloysius School, 
although it should have been replaced. It was not until 1949 when building 
conditions had assumed a more normal state and the financial standing of the 
Board had improved that plans for a new high school were drawn up. St. Joseph's 
High School, a splendid nine-room brick school with library, laboratory and 

3 

spacious auditorium-gymnasium was completed in December and on January 3, 1950 

1 "Minutes of the Holy Cross Separate School Board Meeting", December, 1937. 

2 

Records of the Department of Education » Alberta. 

3 

Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta, 1950, p. 101. 












138 


it was opened with an enrolment of 207 pupils in Grades VII to XII. 1 * When 

St. Joseph's was opened, St. Aloysius' School was closed and the elementary 

grade pupils, 136 in number, were transferred to St. Patrick's School. 

Lethbridge developed rapidly during the late forties and early fifties. 

To provide educational facilities for the younger children in the newer section 

of the city, St. Mary's, a six-classroom school with auditorium-gymnasium was 
2 

built in 1952. It was opened in September with an enrolment of 171 pupils in 
Grades I to VIII. The total enrolment in the Lethbridge Separate Schools for 
1952 was 732. 3 

In 1950, with the opening of the new Lethbridge Collegiate Institute in 
close proximity to St. Joseph's High School, the Catholic students were given 
an opportunity to register in shop and home economics courses. This has been 
made possible by a special arrangement between the Public and Separate School 
Boards. A complete commercial course was offered for the first time in St. 
Joseph's in September 1952. 

Wetaskiwin - The enrolment in Sacred Heart School fluctuated between 
1936 and 1940 when it was at the low figure of 31 , but since that date there 
has been a gradual increase. 1 " In 1948 the Separate School Board having re¬ 
covered from the financial difficulties of the depression years, built a new 
two-classroom stucco school complete with playrooms, library, auditorium and 
teacher's room. Reverend J. R. MacDonald did expert work in supervising the 
planning and construction of this school. He himself undertook a good deal of 
the work. 


1 Registers of St. Joseph's School 1949~1950. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta, 1952, p. 112. 

3 Ibid . 

^Ibid. 1936-1952. 








V . L 






















. , V' ; ... - V. . • ■ - .. 







. t, ' : : • ■ - . . . O v O 

... • 

• ' - 




1 



v t .' ’ t 

. 

. . : • > •’ . L ' ■ 







' u 



•. , . , c- ,, o 























139 


The Sisters of St. Joseph were replaced by the Sisters of Charity of 
the Immaculate Conception as the teachers in Sacred Heart School in 1942. Grades 
I to IX are taught. 

Unlike most schools in the smaller centers of the province, the formation 
of the division did not affect Sacred Heart School. Only two pupils from out¬ 
side the Separate School District attend the school. 

St. Martin's, Vegre ville - Between 1937 and 1944 there was a steady de¬ 
cline in the enrolment of St. Martin's School, but since the formation of the 
division there has been a gradual increase.^ It has not been necessary to build 
accommodation as the Separate School still functions as a six-room school offering 
instruction in Grades I to XII. Commercial subjects are taught in St. Martin's 

School. Home economics and shop courses may be taken by Separate School pupils 

2 

at the Centralized Public School. Since 1943 when a Ukrainian Sister was taken 
on the staff, religious instruction has been given in three languages: English, 
French and Ukrainian. 

The Catholic population of the Vegreville Division has benefited much 
by the formation of the larger unit. Through the cooperation and understanding 
of the Superintendent and members of the Divisional Board every opportunity is 

3 

given Catholic ratepayers. They may send their children to the Separate School, 
bus transportation is provided, free text books and school supplies are given, 
and the fees are paid to the Separate School Board by the Divisional Board if 
the pupil's home district is closed. Relatively few of the Greek Catholics 
avail themselves of the opportunity offered for a Catholic education; the bar¬ 
rier of religious rite seems to extend also to education. 

^Annual Reports of the Department of Education, Alberta. 1937-1932 . 

^Statement of the Principal of St. Martin's School, December, 1953* letter of 
November 21, 1953. 

^Statement of Mr. F.B. Facey, Superintendent of Vegreville Division. Letter 
of December 10, 1953. 

















j 











' ' :: i 


.' i /. 


.t; • : Si •(•, . ; 








3 «V4> 0 














; 











> : • '/. , ■».. ■ ; . • ■; .■: ■ .■ ‘. o':.j ■ a f (■ 

.... ■ i o 

; v 'v c.,1 : •: -• --.V •: cl -\j .Vi 








, !• 


•. / 




‘J . V 

h 










'!■ ' 





I 


V-'' 


i , 


;l . .aw ■ 















' 



. . I 





140 

Red Deer - Between 1936 and 1947 the enrolment in the Red Deer Separate 
School almost doubled. 1 * 3 To provide the much needed additional accommodation 
for the 200 pupils who were enrolled, an army hut was purchased in 1948. This 
was remodelled to form a large Grade I classroom and a school auditorium. In 
1950 the Y.M.C.A. army hut was bought, repaired and furnished for classrooms 
for Grades IV to VIII under the name of Sacred Heart School; still another 
Y.M.C.A. hut was acquired in 1953. This, too, was converted into a classroom.^ 

The Red Deer Separate School now operates 12 classrooms in four buildings. 
The total enrolment is approximately 300 pupils in Grades I to XII.^ Commercial 
subjects have been taught since 1924. 

Divisional organization has been in part responsible for the great in¬ 
crease in enrolment. Pupils are vanned in from Penhold and from the newly 
formed Cross Roads Separate School District. Individual pupils, whose parents 
pay the tuition fee, attend from other parts of the division. 

Pincher Creek - From 1936 to 1942 there was slow but steady development 

in St. Michael’s School. With the closing of the smaller schools which followed 

divisional organization a more rapid period of expansion began in 1943. Since 

that date pupils have been vanned in increasing numbers. In 1952 sixty-two 

pupils, in 1953 sixty-eight pupils were brought in from 10 districts. The 

Divisional Board pays transportation costs and tuition fees to the Separate 

4 

School for these students. 

There has been a gradual improvement in the financial standing of the 
St. Michael’s Separate School District. Operational costs are still kept to 
the minimum, but undoubtedly a higher standard will soon be attained, for the 
Separate School Board has, since 1952, collected a portion of company, corporation 

1 Annual Reports of the Department of Education. Alberta , 1936-1947. 

^Statement of the Principal of Red Deer Separate School. 

3 Ibid . 

^Report of Mr. Kyllo, Pincher Greek Divisional Secretary, 1954. 












' 

: ■ v.. . 

• ■ ,,.o. • - ' ■■ , * r 0*I >.'J j 

i. v ; . . v<’ s '.'v .. .'v .. -• ■ 1 

, . , ■ r. ' - ■ <. - " ; ' ' *i ■ 

• . . , l . ' ■ .U . o -a . . d\. 


: . ■ v. .■ : ■*».. .■ 

. . : 

jrc, .i,'. juoesd <;•.J:c.'■ ■ \1V" n,o . . '-k t-'.LviX 

. . 

. ■ - o'.C* ' - 


, $ i _ * •_ ; 

;< >■ 

i 

'• - ''.y ■ ■■ . < ■ 


• 0 






V - ' ' ’ i} -■ -■ 






■ 






V 






141 

and co-operative taxes, and it is expected that a fair share of this income will 
be allocated to the Separate Schools in the near future. 1 2 3 

The academic standing of St. Michael's School has always been high, but 
it has not been possible for the school to offer any special courses. The in¬ 
flux of students from rural areas as a result of divisional organization has 
been an advantage to both rural and resident students: to the rural students 
for they profit by a Catholic education] and to the resident students, for the 
increased enrolment, 197 in 1953* has made possible a better class grouping. 

In 1948 a one-room addition forming the sixth classroom was constructed. 

2 

A three-classroom and auditorium addition are planned for 1954. 

Pontmain, Trochu - As the general conditions of the province improved 
after the hardships of the depression, Pontmain Separate School, too, began to 
regain its former prosperity. By 1940 three rooms were again in operation for 
the 52 pupils in attendance.-^ The increase in enrolment was continuous making 
it advisable to open a fourth classroom. In 1953 registration was 93* thirty- 
five of whom were high school pupils.^ Although Pontmain has only a small 
high school unit a fairly wide range of electives has been offered. Typewriting 
was first taught in 1939* home economics in 1943* bookkeeping in 1952, and 
stenography in 1953. 

Medicine Hat - The development of St. Louis Separate School District from 
1937 to 1947 was continuous; during the past few years it has been marked. Only 
minor changes were made within the system until 1947 when St. Theresa's Academy, 
which until then had functioned as a private school, became a part of the St. 
Louis Separate School system.^ 

iReport of Separate School Board given at Home and School Association Meeting, 
February, 1954. 

2 Ibid. 

3 

^Registers of Pontmain School 1940. 

^Ibid. 1953. 

^Statement of Mother Anne, Superior of St. Theresa's Academy. letter of 
August 12, 1953. 








.. ... sm . . , . - v . o f o- o ■ 

e *d fix a . o • ■■ d d i oo. 

.... . J 8 OX 

; dds , .. < c ... ©Idles < h Jk 

*XC . - fe 'tO 4 ■ • ' • ■' ... 

aJ: . . , ,v oo :eooz d; • or,, i zzo. :.jro cj ■, v:j imd | 

... z *io‘i t :.. v i.iU'i;3v. wzo,ud ' J i ixo 0■ .o. 1 i u ox J.odjxd z %6 ddio-iq -sriX *ici j 
. i ... , - .. I ai y t d .... • 

. j vjoi ■ ^..ji> i !,■ c-tiowO .ozdz z;zj ,.i ncld'i iiUOC*X~ono z: :■ 4 '■ ;d ril 

.-;'C . - ■ - . i' ...:. iv-j.,'. • .. \ . ,..L . ,;..io. lcxo ...... d • vl o: J *\ 


-- - ■ - ' . , .. - . J £ ' 

. 

- ■ - IS ... ‘ .. £ . .. ■ 1© ... • v ' d 

- 

•-a z " .. vx ox..-.z.r o-i ozo o i..;dd •■■■ . vJdiot,zone, *^i;riOX tox '■ 

djidAxi aoz ».t doooo j j x;...Io" , ,rd oai;. o-ioi.i oil... .eonzd.oovd: a.sdojurj odd*! 

do.' :■ f - . drzo, ...' i*;. Ad ' . i-.oc.,o;l ozlo rijoj'oi z uxc. od ©Irixe xvrus dj. J 

- - z d..;zx aixi d. - -.0 4 dx.d. ,;r i.m xot d d z- ;ioow *io ovidl 

. . ....... . x 

z, ,dcvd od .z.', ^,z;,Uo d'xzd id sodzcizzoo i-zzz. ,v;\d fix O' , J da*.id ejswJ 

. CO • • .1 \;i .- z;;.u ; eJa I 

•' z_ <-0. ICOOO. O "... . , . . J d/) O' z , .. Z V w z J., o . ;.j .. . 

• • v J ' : . xd . . v CV X 

• it. . d... .,• ,o'Z YAz. ' dir ■ od;-. . •od z...r: o'.. ./• nil.O Ooo dm 1 

Qrid U d* Z , £>©d . . 0fj ... . z . o . i II o. .. 

^.•uoda -...a J.uoooo z • i zv oi;*Ot.L.| 

v z. ... I . . v.. . . .. V’ ; : ; . . . :m. : z , ■ : . d.C doo x ' 

C i u*u ' 

. 

.dd : Jv,'. Jo:, :■ x . z • 

. 0 . . . ' 

•' - ... ....z. '. . „o ' z. 1* z •! .dT.-Oilid: o'tx : 

. t .d. d-; ; .oz,i*. ; 








142 


A rapid rise in the Catholic population of Medicine Hat necessitated 
the construction of a new elementary school, Marian School, in 1948 and an ele- 
mentary and intermediate school, St. Patrick's in 1952 . 1 The enrolment in the 
four schools of the Separate School District in 1952 was 489j 2 * * 5 thi 3 was more 
than three times the 1937 figure. 

The above mentioned change and development affected the financial arrange¬ 
ments of the Separate School Board. After 1947 when the requisition of the Board 
on the City increased to meet the needs of financing the high school and the 

elementary schools of the city, the old agreement mentioned in the previous 

3 

section seemed less satisfactory to the City Council. In fact the city deficit 

for school purposes in 1930 was only met by a special tax on the sale of gasoline 
• .4 

in the city. Late in 1931 the Separate School Board was informed that they 
could collect money raised on Catholic assessment only. Since at the time very 
few company and corporation taxes were allocated for Separate School support, 
there was a great increase in the mill rate for that year. In 1932 the Separate 
School Board collected a just portion of company, corporation and cooperative 
taxes.^ 

Commercial courses were offered in St. Theresa's Academy after 1926. In 
1940 shop courses were begun for the boys and since 1951 home economics has been 
taught. 


Castor - There was little change in Theresetta School until 1949 when 
a sudden increase in enrolment took place as a result of divisional organization. 
Since the existing accommodation was insufficient a three-classroom stucco school 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education , Alberta, 1952. p. 113. 

2 Ibid. 

^Page 105. 

^Statement of Mr. W. Gray, Secretary of St. Louis Separate School District 
January, 1954. 

5 Ibid. 












..'1 

■ 






• • 




: 














, 

..... .. ii'.j '. 




. 


: 




. . ", * 


•. • ; - 


. 









































143 

with laboratory and library was begun in 1949. 1 Classes were transferred to 
the new building after Easter 1950. The 112 pupils enrolled in this school are 
in Grades I to XII. No special courses are offered in The re sett a School, but 
the academic standard is high. This is evident from the number of awards and 
scholarships merited by pupils from this school between 1934 and 1953. 

St. Aubin 1 s t Chauvin - St. Aubin's Separate School developed slowly but 

steadily. In 1940 there were 33 pupils; in 1950 there were 40. That year a 

2 

new two-classroom school with library was constructed. Since the formation of 
the division and the centralization of schools, pupils are being vanned in to 
St. Aubin's and are for the first time having the advantage of a Catholic educa¬ 
tion in a larger school. The enrolment in 1953 was 61.^ 

Fort Vermilion - The only change worthy of note in the organization of 

Fort Vermilion Separate School is that in 1939 instruction was offered in 

4 

Grades X, XI and XII. The enrolment was still 45 in 1940, but since that date 
there has been a gradual increase. In 1952 it was 63. Plans are being made 
to open a third classroom in September 1954. 

St. Rita's. Rockyford - There was no significant change in the organiza¬ 
tion of St. Rita's School in this period until 1945 when Grades XI and XII were 
first taught. A basement room was equipped as a classroom for the purpose. 

When Wheatland School Division No. 40 was formed and rural schools were gradu¬ 
ally closed between 1943 and 1951, Catholic pupils in increasing numbers regist¬ 
ered at St. Rita's, despite the fact that the parents of children in Grades I 

1 Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 1950, p. 101. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 1951, P* 110. 

^Registers of St. Aubin's School 1953. 

^Registers of Fort Vermilion Separate School 1940. 















• . . .V ^ . *. . , . 

I V £ . .• . i . W- ■'... . '■ ■ - . C . j . - .> 

. 1 v .. v 

, j,... ' . . I t t. . .. ... v.':. v . i, Xi!w 









.. 




. •. •. : 

v - •. /._ ,'• c. .• E-vac* .< i: vJ.Vv f.£ ovow war d Ccnvi’ ii ..^vig 

. .,'.0 .. : 7 . . ... ' ". fcuj’oj' .... 7 V W 7 vui/ 1 -/V : . ; , ' . v •: - ' ;.. vooj 

; ..'. .... .<■ •/ . 00 . :• ...i t . .■ V,:. ... . .1... . \ ,70 V 

. . v.■ v. . .• v vv a. .‘:C .tv //. ... w -o'.. & , r . 1 • . ,» 



\ 7 . v v . 


. 



**0 7 :/■ .; i; OdUi lc 7r,.. .,,;,£> V.L;0 07 




. 


:v 0 / 7 ■ L- 

'. • . i 



. 

. . 

■ 

• 






' 



.-..ovd 


c ■ . . • ■ 






■ ■ /. : vJi . . . ... . . ... //, o . 7 : ... 

..' j : „./ • .. ....■ -v . . . . ,7 1 , 7 • 


... 

/ • ... ... . ' ... 










■ 



















to VIII were required to pay the tuition fee. Since the closing of the Rocky- 
ford Public High School in 19AS, St. Rita's is the centralized school for pupils 
in Grades XX to XII of the surrounding districts. 

To provide necessary accommodation an R.C.A.F. hut was purchased in May 
194£. It was moved to the school site and made ready for use by March 1949. 

There are two classrooms, a kitchen and an auditorium in this building. The 
enrolment in 1953 was 102; thirty-eight of these pupils are in Grades IX to XII. 1 

Home economics was taught by one of the Sisters to Grades VII, VIII and 
IX from 1940 to 1945; a portion of the basement was equipped for the purpose. 

Since 1945 the instructors in home economics and general shop have been travelling 
teachers from Wheatland Division. From 1945 to 1951 the courses were offered to 
Grades IX - XII, but since that date Grades VII and VIII pupils, too, are per¬ 
mitted to enroll. Typewriting IA has been offered since 1945; shorthand IA since 
1949. 


St. Joseph 8 s t Grande Prairie - The growth of St. Joseph's Separate School 

between 1936 and 1953 was remarkable; there was an increase in enrolment from 70 

2 

to 230 during this period. Divisional organization was in part responsible 
for the increment. To provide the required accommodation a number of changes 
have been effected. In 1939 the unused fourth classroom was opened, in 1946 
three classrooms for high school grades were built, and construction of a new 
high school was begun in 1953. 

Music has always been taught in St. Joseph's School. Home economics and 
general shop courses were introduced in September 1944 in conjunction with the 
Grande Prairie Public School. 

ClandonaM - Like other schools in the province Ciandonald Separate 


Registers of St. Rita's Separate School, 1953. 
^Registers of St. Joseph’s Separate School, 1936 - 1953* 













. , c : 










. . 




l .. . v . ' ... 


x -« . . 


J ' J: 1 j,W ■ C i. 


y ’ 


' 


■ 


* 







V ■ . . . 

. .... • . 

. «. • _ . v 1 ■ _ /• _ • ^ 

. 

■ 

. • ■ v : ' . - . . . v :. 

. 

. 

. • , • . ... .. V 




















145 

School has had a continuous increase in enrolment since 1936. 1 In 1942 a two- 

classroom school was built; the third classroom in use was rented in the convent. 

A fourth classroom was opened in the convent when the enrolment increased to 100. 

In 1952 a two-classroom addition with typewriting room, laboratory and auditorium 

2 

was built to replace the rented rooms. No special courses are offered in this 
school. 

The Catholic assessment in Clandonald is low; moreover, the Separate 
School District does not receive a just portion of company, corporation and 
co-operative taxes. ^ As a result it is impossible for the Separate School 
Board to provide accommodation for the Catholic children of Clandonald who live 
outside the Separate School District unless the parents pay the tuition fee. 

For pupils in and above Grade IX the division pays the fee, provided their grade 
is not taught in their home school. 

Guy, McLennan - Until 1942 only two classrooms were in operation at Guy 
Separate School, McLennan. By that date the yearly increase necessitated the 
construction of a new classroom to accommodate the 102 pupils who were enrolled 
in Grades I to X. In October 1945 a second room was added to the annex and in¬ 
struction was offered in all Grades I to XII. By 1947 a fifth and sixth class¬ 
room had been opened in the former church. The opening of a dormitory for 
pupils whose homes were in the surrounding districts caused a rapid increase 
in the attendance at Guy Separate School. The two classrooms which had been 
provided in the old church in 1947 were replaced in 1950 by a four-classroom 
school with laboratory, typing room and library.^ In 1952 eight rooms were in 
operation with an enrolment of 255 pupils. ^ 

^Registers of Clandonald Separate School, 1936-1953. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Educat i on, Alberta , 1952, p. 112. 

3Statement of Mr. P. Convey, Secretary of Clandonald Separate School, Letter 
of January k, 1954. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 1950, p. 104. 

5 Ibid. 1952. 














146 

Wainwright - From 1937 to 1943 there was no significant change either 


in organization or enrolment in the Wainwright Separate School. Since that date 
there has been a gradual growth as a result of the formation of the large unit. 

In 1953 forty of the 168 pupils in the five-room school were brought in from rural 
districts.^ The Wainwright Separate School Board receives no taxes from the par¬ 
ents of these children, since all must be paid to the division; neither do they 

2 

charge the parents a tuition fee. The financial burden on the Separate School 
District is heavy. The parish is conducting a campaign for a Building Fund in 
order that it may be possible to construct additional accommodation in the near 
future. 


St» Albert - There was little change in St. Albert Roman Catholic Public 
School District until it was absorbed into the Sturgeon School Division and be¬ 
came a centralized school. In 1946 a two-classroom stucco school was constructed; 
in 1951 two rooms were added.^ Another building was erected in 1952; it consists 
of five classrooms, an auditorium-gymnaslum, a laboratory, a typing room, a 
library and shop. * 2 * 4 

Since 1949 Grade XII has been taught in this school. Bilingual instruc¬ 
tion is offered for the French-speaking pupils as nine of the sixteen teachers 
in the school are bilingual. Four hundred and fifty pupils attend this 15 
room school.^ 

Morinville - Until 1942 the private school in Morinville continued to 
function as a separate unit. In that year it combined with the Public School 

Statement of the Principal of Wainwright Separate School, January 1954. 

2 Ibid . 

3 Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 1951* P* H4. 

4 Xbid . 1952, p. 114. 

^Registers of St. Albert R.C.P. School. 














147 


and formed a part of Thibeault Roman Catholic Public School District No. 35, 

although classes were still conducted in the convent. The increase in the 

school enrolment was gradual until 1949 when it became more marked, as students 

began to be vanned in from other districts of the Sturgeon Division. Thibeault 

does not belong to the division but it accommodates some 65 to 70 Catholic 

pupils from small school districts which have been closed."^ 

In 1950 a third school consisting of four classrooms, a playroom, and a 

2 

laboratory was built; in 1952 an additional small classroom was arranged. The 
school now consists of 14 classrooms in which bilingual instruction is given to 
the 440 pupils who attend. 

Smaller Roman Catholic Public S chools - Since the formation of the 

larger units several of the smaller Roman Catholic Public Schools have been 

closed and the pupils vanned to centralized schools. Children from St. Leon 

R.C.P. No. 4, from Cunningham R.C.P. No. 5, from Granger R.C.P. No. 42 and from 

Volmer R.C.P. No. 47 attend St. Albert. The Catholic pupils from Bellerose R.C.P. 

No. 6 also attend St. Albert while those from Rose Ridge R.C.P. No. 45 are taken 

to either St. Albert or to Morinville.^ Chorest R.C.P. No. 51 is centralized 

4 

at Beaumont No. 741, a Catholic School, and Catholic pupils from Vegreville 
R.C.P. No. 44 may attend St. Martin’s Separate School.^ Lac.Ste. Anne R.C.P. 

No. 29 was changed to Lac Ste. Anne Public School District No. 29 in 1951. ^ 

7 

Glengarry R.C.P. No. 41 is operating two rooms. 

Statement of the Principal of Thibeault R.C.P. School, August 1953. 

^ Annual Report o f the Department of Education. Alberta , 1950, p. 101 . 

^Information given by Mr. R.J. Scott, Superintendent of Sturgeon Division, 

March 1954. 

^■Information given by Mr. J.C. Jonason, Superintendent of Clover Bar Division, 
December, 1953. 

^Information given by Mr. F.B. Facey, Superintendent of Vegreville Division, 
December, 1953. 

^ Records of the Department of Education, Alberta . 

?For location of schools named in this paragraph see Figure 1, p. 23. 











. 




' 


, : . ■ , ; : 






. 






. . , 


. - . 






. 


, 1 


. 


. , . 




. 






. 


' 












. 






Saskatchewan Roman Catholic Public School District No. 2 has undergone 
considerable change in recent years. In 1951 St. Claire's No. 4577 and 
Saskatchewan R.C.P. No. 2, both one-room schools, were merged to form a cen¬ 
tralized school. Pending the completion of necessary building operations the 
parochial hall was temporarily partitioned to form two classrooms for the 50 
pupils in Grades I to X. In the summer of 1952 the Saskatchewan R.C.P. school 
building was moved to its present location in the hamlet of Lamoureux, and 
another room was added. It retained the name of Saskatchewan R.C.P.S.D. No. 2 
since it is still in the original district. In September 1953 Paradis Separate 
School District No. 33 joined the Sturgeon Division and the school building was 
moved near the two-room Saskatchewan School. This three-room stucco school 
with full basement has an enrolment of 73 pupils in Grades I to XI; 60 of these 
pupils are daily brought in by vans. 

Two Sisters of the Holy Cross teach in this bilingual school; the 
principal, too, is a bilingual teacher. All the pupils in the school receive 
special instruction in French; the 10 English pupils do so at their request.' 1 ' 


^"Statement of Mr. H.J. Fortier, Principal of Saskatchewan R.C.P. School, 
Letter of January 16, 1954. 








149 


CHAPTER IV 

A SUMMARY OF GENERAL OBSERVATIONS OF THIS STUDY 

The North-West Territories Ordinance of 1884 authorized the establish¬ 
ment of denominational schools with powers equal in every way to those of the 
Public Schools. Between 188? and 1901 a number of Ordinances gradually changed 
these educational provisions and substituted a unified, centrally controlled 
system for the denominational one first instituted. The Alberta Act of 1905 
by which Alberta became a province established an educational system which 
was essentially the same as that which was provided for by the North-West 
Territories Ordinance of 1901. 

Thus in the spirit of the British North America Act provision was made 
for the organization of Separate Schools by minority groups. They are subject 
to the same regulations as the public schools, they have the same text-books, 
the same inspectors, and their teachers must have the same qualifications. This 
affords a practical guarantee of the same standard of efficiency, and reduces 
to a minimum the difference between Separate and Public Schools. Mr. Justice 
Anglin of the Supreme Court of Canada said regarding the interpretation of 
Section 17 of the Alberta Act, “Equality of treatment and equal rights and 
privileges for public and separate schools would seem to be the spirit of the 
school law’ 3 . ^ 

Until the formation of the larger unit of administration this equality 
of rights and privileges was maintained. The present system inaugurated in 
1936 whereby the unit for minority groups, namely the district, does not corres¬ 
pond with the unit for the provincial system as a whole, that is the division, 


%.M. Weir, op. cit., p. 73. 































xi ■ ■ ■ 


■ : . . . , ; !© ... 






. 










■ 


- 
















v. 




V 




















. 








150 


would not seem to be in keeping with the spirit of the Alberta Act and the 
British North America Act. The larger Separate School systems are not affected 
by this inconsistency; the smaller units are in a different position. Advantages 
accrue by reason of the new legislation, but disadvantages, too, result. 

In the matter of finance, difficulties have existed in many districts. 
Those which arise from inequality of funds raised through local taxation are 
unavoidable; those which stem from unequal allocation of company, corporation 
and co-operative taxes have been to a large extent remedied by the 1952 amend¬ 
ment of the School Act; those which are the result of the above mentioned in¬ 
consistency are overcome in different ways. Government grants for school 
purposes have always been appropriated without discrimination. 

The provisions for bilingual education in the province are generous. The 
effective organization and the activity of L*Association Canadienne-Francaise de 
L'Alberta and L 1 Association des Instituteurs Bilingues de 1*Alberta have resulted 
in an increased interest and standard of achievement in bilingual schools. 

The remarkable growth and development of Roman Catholic Separate Schools 
in Alberta in the period 1885-1953, despite the disadvantages which beset them, 
indicate that every advantage was taken of the provisions made in the interest 
of minority groups. In 1885 there were 90 students enrolled in the only Separate 
School. In 1953 there were 11,982 students enrolled in the 63 schools of the 
33 Roman Catholic Separate School Districts. 

In recent years apart from the outstanding development in the larger 
Separate Schools units of Edmonton, Calgary, Lethbridge, Jasper Place and 
Medicine Hat, the most interesting trend of the Separate School Districts has 
been the formation of consolidated school areas in Fort McMurray, Manning, 

Pi card vi lie, Red Deer and Brosseau in order that the privileges granted minority 
groups may be enjoyed by a maximum number of pupils. 















* ' i' ■ 










v • ; 


• , 


■ 

. . ... ' : C ... u 
















, . . . .. . 













151 


APPENDIX A 

NAMES OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FIRST SCHOOL 
AND OF THE FIRST TEACHERS OF 
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICTS 


Calgary R.C.S. No. 1 

Edmonton R.C.S. No. 7 

Holy Cross R.C.S. No. S 

Lethbridge R.C.S. No. 9 

St. Anthony R.C.S. No.12 

Gleichen R.C.S. No.14 
Sacred Heart R.C.S. No.15 


School Board Members 1885 
J. W. Costello Chairman 
Arthur Ferland Treasurer 
Louis Roussel Secretary 

School Board Members 1888 
George Roy Chairman 
Luke Kelly Treasurer 
Antonio Prince Secretary 

School Board Members 1888 
Thomas H. Steadman Chairman 
Philip McCartin 
Michael Gallagher 
Joseph Ryan Sec. Treas, 

School Board Members 1889 
W. F. Gay Chairman 
M. E. Roy 
Joseph Noel 

School Board Members 1894 
Mr. Garneau Chairman 
Mr. Fitzgerald 
W. H. Bedard 

J. C. Connelly Sec. Treas. 

School Board Members 1900 
Unknown 

School Board Members 1901 
J. P. Cross Chairman 
S. Swoboda 

A. Genz and M. Thereux 
A. Rehaume Secretary 


St. Martin's R.C.S. No.16 School Board Members 1906 

B. Tetreau Chairman 
E. Poulin 
J. Stanton 

Reverend A. Bernier Sec. 


BOARDS 


IN ALBERTA 


Teachers 

Sister Mary Greene F.C.J. 
Sister Augustine Higgins 
F.C.J. 

Teachers 

Sister Julia Coghlan F.C.J. 
Sister Anna O'Neill F.C.J. 


Teacher 

Win. J. MacDonald 


Teacher 

Christopher McRae 


Teacher 
M. M. O'Brien 


Teacher 


Teacher 
James Quinlan 


Teacher 

Miss Anna Doyle 




0 






L>- 












• - : • , . 

■ 


.( iv o . ... 

. 

- .... c 
. . 

. 

, 


























152 


Red Deer R.C.S. No.l? 

St. Michael's R.C.S.No.18 

North Edmonton R.C.S.No.19 

Pontmain R.C.S. No.20 

St. Louis R.C.S. No.21 

Grouard R.C.S. No.22 

Theresetta R.C.S. No.23 

St. Aubin R.C.S. No.24 

St. Theresa R.C.S. No.25 


School Board Members 1908 
J. Alex Martin Chairman 
Reverend H. Voisin 
A. Wiart 

School Board Members 1909 
T. Lebel Chairman 
T. Bertles 

F. Lynch 

G. Dionne 

Rev. Hetu, Secretary 

School Board Members 1911 
A. Briere Chairman 
P. Bernier 
A. B. Lambert 
V. Mooney Secretary 

School Board Members 19H 
Leon Eckenfelder Chairman 
Napoleon Gregoire 
Edward Potts 

Leo Blanchfield Secretary 

School Board Members 1911 

Rev. A. Cadoux Chairman 

J. C. Millar 

F. B. McKinnon 

J. B. Barreau 

L.T.G. Noel Secretary 

School Board Members 1914 
Unknown 

School Board Members 191? 

John Barnes Chairman 

Tony Wiart 

A. D. McCormack 

J, B. Remillard 

Reverend L. Leconte Sec.Treas. 

School Board. Members 1919 
J. Poirier Chairman 
Mr. Auclair 
Mr. Aubrien 
Rene Page Secretary 

School Board Members 1920 

John Meagher Chairman 

John Cawkell 

Joe Dube 

John Oliver 

Fifth Member unknown 

E. J. Melville Secretary 


Teacher 

Sister Marie Aimee 
de Jesus D.W. 


Teacher 

Sister Guillenot F.de J. 


Teacher 
Vincent Mooney 


Teacher 
Sister Laigre 


Teachers 

Sister Mary Veronica St.L. 
Sister Ann Mary St.L. 


Teacher 

Sister Marie Aimee 
de Jesus D.W. 


Teacher 

Mrs. L. Corriveau 


No School constructed 




V 


■ 





■ 


cl- 

. 

. 









153 


Fort Vermilion 


St. Rita's R.C 


St. Joseph's R, 


Clandonald R.C 


McLennan R.C.S 


Wainwright R.C 


St. John's R.C 


Paradis R.C.S. 


Ste.Bernadette 


St.Thomas More 


R.C.S.No.26 School Board Members 1923 Teacher 

Reverend P. Habay O.M.I. Sister Lucy of Venice 

Chairman F.C.S.P. 

Leon Eauclair 

Reverend C. Deman 

Brother P. Bedard Secretary 


S. No.27 School Board Members 1926 
George Kennedy Chairman 
Arthur Cammaert 
J. B. McGuire 
F. E. Ryan Secretary 


Teachers 

Miss Frances Walsh 
Miss Justine Walsh 


C.S. No.26 School Board Members 1928 Teacher 

Edmund Lanctot Chairman Miss Anne MacDonald 

Frank Spicer 

Patrick Croken 

Reverend J. A. Josse O.M.I. 

Secretary 


S. No.29 School Board Members 1930 
Reverend F. M. MacDonald 
Chairman 

George Dynes 
P. Minici 

No.30 School Board Members 1930 

M. J. Hagan Chairman 
T. J. Giroux 
Eugene Dubrule 

S. No.31 School Board Members 1932 
L. J. Killoran Chairman 
Reverend W. Doyle 
Win. Goulet 
Eugene Grogan 
Tom Bisson 


S. No .32 School Board Members 1935 
James O' Kara Chairman 
L. Romanes 
Lena McDonald 


Teachers 

Sister Ruth O.S.B. 
Mrs. Sherbeake 


Teacher 

Miss Alice Boisjolie 


Teacher 

Reverend Sister Edwina C.S.J. 


Teachers 
Wilfrid Loiselle 
Miss Mary Redmond 


No.33 School Board Members 1936 Teacher 

Isidore Paradis Chairman Miss Madeleine Fortier 

Others unknown 


R.C.S.No.34 School Board Members 1944 Teacher 

Leon Breault Chairman Miss A. Plotkins 

A. Deslauriers 

Mrs. A. G. St. Louis 


R.C.S.No.35 School Board Members 1946 
Carl Frank Chairman 
W. A. Detiling 


Teachers 

Mrs. F. Ebly 

Mrs. A. B. Kleininger 


Alex Schneider 

Reverend C. Kindervater Secretary 

































154 


St.Marie R.C.S. No.36 


Rosary R.C.S. No.37 


St. Peter's R.C.S. No.38 


St. Jerome R.C.S. No.39 


St. Jacques R.C.S. No.40 


St. Gerard R.C.S. No.41 


Maze nod, R.C.S. No. 42 


Immaculate Conception 

R.C.S. No.43 


St. Monica R.C.S. No.44 


School Board Members 1948 
Alex Perra Chairman 
Alfred Labrecque 
Josaphat Labrecque 
D. Dion Secretary 

School Board Members 1950 
Seraphim Hartman Chairman 
Archibald Daigle 
Frank Dechant 

Reverend C. de Champlain Sec. 

School Board Members 1950 
Wm. Hyska Chairman 
W. C. Anderson 
K. J. Plamondon 
Reverend S. J. Lesage Sec. 

School Board Members 1951 
Hector St. Louis Chairman 
Lucien Nadeau 
Pierre Deshoux 

Reverend R. Barbeau Sec. Treas 

School Board Members 1951 
Christian Rosendale Chairman 
Ernest Page 
Romeo Provost 

Reverend R. Barbeau Sec. Treas 

School Board Members 1951 
George Borlee Chairman 
Gerard Riopel 
Gedeon Nadeau 

Reverend R. Barbeau Sec. Treas 

School Board Members 1952 
Antoin Dechant Chairman 
Ralph Diliman 
Joseph Schoenberger 

School Board Members 1952 
Wilfred Martz Chairman 
Edward Glasser 
Gerard Cadioux 
John Stuffco 
Frank O'Neill 

Reverend Albert Bouchard O.M.I 
Sec. Treas. 

School Board Members 1953 
Peter Boos Chairman 
Mrs. Mary Boos 
Stephen Kover 
George Keieman Secretary 


Teachers 

Sister Berthe Eugenie 
Sister Augustin 


Teachers 

Sister Gerard Mage11a 
Sister Mary Daniel 
Miss Genevieve Farseille 
Miss Cecilia Newman 

No school constructed 


No school constructed 


No school constructed 


No school constructed 


No school constructed 


Teacher 

Sister W. Donnelly S.O.S. 


No school constructed 







155 


Jasper Place R.C.S. No.45 School Board Members 1953 

Walter Faryna Chairman 
George Gordon 
Raphael Gour 
Kenneth McBryan 
Louis Mireau 

H. E. Beriault Sec. Treas. 


Teachers 

Sister Mary Denis C.S.J. 
Sister George Arthur C.S.J. 


Cross Roads R.C.S. No.46 School Board Members 1953 No school constructed 

G. R. He many Chairman 
J. Roth 
Henry Landry 


St. Laurent R.C.S. No.47 School Board Members 1953 School under construction 

Leo Marceau Chairman 
Hector Corbu 
John Oberkirsh 

Joseph Alex Brosseau Sec. Treas. 


Duvernay R.C.S. No.4S School Board Members 1953 No school will be constructed 

Bernard Weir Chairman 
Rene Robinson 
Norman Mailloux 

Joseph Alex Brosseau Sec. Treas. 







156 


APPENDIX B 

ENROLMENT IN ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 1886-1930 1 

Summer Term 


District 

1886 

1890 

1906 

1910 

1920 

1930 

Calgary 

115 

143 

347 

447 

1498 

1701 

St. Joachim 


63 

250 

551 

1822 

2720 

Holy Cross 


21 

43 

21 

42 

32 

Lethbridge 


37 

232 

302 

507 

572 

St. Anthony 



49 

140 



Sacred Heart 



59 

67 

77 

64 

St. Martin 




84 

174 

111 

Red Deer 




60 

149 

109 

St. Michael's 




161 


146 

Pontmain 






52 

St. Louis 





165 

149 

. Theresetta 





128 

97 

St. Aubin 





25 

23 

Fort Vermilion 






29 

St. Rita's 







St. Joseph's 






45 

Clandonald 






49 

McLennan 






27 

Total Enrolment 

115 

264 

980 

1933 

4587 

5926 


1 Report of Board of Education of North-West Territories 1886, 1890 
Annual Report of the Department of Education, Alberta , 1906-1953 
Registers of the Schools 

























' 


































157 


ENROLMENT IN ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 19AO-1953 
Tern ending June 30 


District 1940 1945 1950 1951 1952 1953 


Calgary 

1713 

1717 

1939 

2153 

2254 

2552 

Edmonton 

3142 

3646 

4551 

4936 

5164 

5681 

Lethbridge 

598 

581 

663 

716 

732 

780 

Sacred Heart 

31 

61 

84 

83 

75 

69 

St. Martin's 

124 

127 

16? 

146 

159 

137 

Red Deer 

138 

170 

222 

246 

248 

266 

St. Michael's 

132 

153 

154 

169 

193 

197 

Pontmain 

52 

57 

80 

73 

76 

82 

St. Louis 

200 

258 

499 

505 

489 

561 

Theresetta 

68 

79 

81 

100 

102 

U3 

St. Aubin's 

33 

37 

40 

46 

54 

64 

Fort Vermilion 

45 

50 

53 

52 

63 

46 

St. Rita's 


63 

94 

102 

100 

96 

St. Joseph's 

114 

141 

168 

177 

173 

186 

Clandonald 

66 


no 

101 

89 

107 

Mclennan 

90 

135 

210 

235 

255 

303 

Wainwright 

103 

100 

107 

128 

132 

148 

St. John's 

40 

42 

48 

109 

107 

116 

Paradis 





15 


Ste. Bernadette 


2? 

89 

98 

101 

105 

St. Thomas More 



67 

162 

150 

145 

Ste. Marie 



42 

40 

43 

32 

Rosary 



159 

163 

174 

166 

Immaculate Conception 





30 

30 

Total Enrolment 

6639 

7444 

9727 

10,542 

10,978 

11,982 































































STUDENT ENROLLMENT 


GRAPH SHOWING THE ENROLMENT IN ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOLS 
IN ALBERTA 1885-1953 


/SOOO 






























/«?. OOO 















// S'OO 















//. ooo 















/o. sod 















/ 0 . OOO 















7.soo 















7, Ooo 















& SOO 















to.ooo 






Is 









7, SOO 






fi 

* 









7, o oo 






Ul 

* 







* 


6 .S 00 






K 

u. 

0 




> 

0 

N 



-fr 

Si 

ki 

* 


a 

bJ 

V 0 , coo 




Lu 

u 


S 




S| 

&L 



S| 

* 


_1 

7=is soo 




$ 

$ 


! 



/ 

r 

?^/4 



4. 

Q 


q£ 

rfj s. ooo 




Ct- 





/ 

1^, 



Is 

* 

Si 

•f 


f— 

-3» 4. foe 




52 


* 

<* 


/ 





\ 

a! 

c> 

-^ 


Lu 

r\ 

^ -4f ooo 




§ 


0 

i> 

/ 






b 

s. 

L» 


1 — 

CO 3. sod 




f- 

(V 


5j 




•V 



Q 

Q 


3. Ooo 




b 

05 

-j 

Ct 






5 

Q. 



£ 

* 

<* 


£. O '00 















<7, OOO 






* 









/. foo 















/, ooo 















/** /) A 















v/ l/v 















/t 

rs <t 

» v! 

r /<, 

> 

*00 c 

os- / 

'r 

p 

o / 

'EAR 

S c 2 

’£? .? 

P 

r 3 

'o J, 

7 4 

P 

o 4 

S S, 

Ckrc 

o sz 


Figure 6 




























































































































































159 


APPENDIX G 

THE COUNTY ACT 


This study would be incomplete were not a brief consideration of the 
County Act, the most recent statutory enactment affecting the Provincial Education 
System, included. Since its application is still in the experimental stage, the 
underlying principles only will be dealt with. Complete treatment of the Act with 
all its implications and effects may well form the topic of a further study. 

The Edmonton Journal of March 14, 1950 summarized the purpose and prin¬ 
ciples of the Act as follows: 

The purpose of the County Act is to bring under one administration 
and control the functions now divided between the municipal district, 
the school division, and the municipal hospital district. The county 
would be carved out of a selected municipal district, improvement dis¬ 
trict, or special area, with the school districts and hospital districts 
or portions of them affected. 

The principle involved is an important one. It means the abolition 
of school boards and hospital boards in the county, with the county 
council assuming full powers over all municipal, school, and hospital 
adndnist ration.1 

Since the County Act was introduced in the legislature in 1950, it has 
been the subject of much discussion and numerous editorials expressive of public 
opinion regarding its educational implications. The Edmonton Journal in 1950 


expressed the following views which were later quoted by Mr. Walter H. Worth: 

The separation of education is an important essential in the 
decentralization which is one of the great strengths of our present 
system of municipal government. (. . .) provincial ministers and of¬ 
ficials, impressed by their heavier dollar contribution to the cause, 
may come to feel that this should be accompanied by more centralized 
control and more detailed provincial direction of education, to the 
detriment of the diversity which gives unity its vitality. 2 


^Editorial, the A.T.A. Magazine , April 1950 Reprint from The Edmonton Journal, 
March 14, 1950. 

^Walter H. Worth, "The County Act - a Public Demand", The Alberta School Trustee , 
January 1954, p. 16, citing The Edmonton Journal, March 14, 1950. 









: • ' . . 


’ 


. v -o ■ v> .( m. L'j 


: : ■] 






. 


r.J .( . 1 


■" ! .. ,, .. l; v ■ v ■ ; ;' 

Jj 1 


CT: Cau 


■ i'/v j ' 








' 1 ■ • ■ !v j. . ^ • .i ’ ‘ , I :i,. 


■ 


J 


o.:.a' ,.i .5 






- v. ' 

• ; • 

■ ; ■•= '■ : t ' ■ ■ •••' t .'V ;• .; ‘1 < .{ . ' . .1 ,V ;; 

. 




• • 0 ■■ ■ . o 

• ’v : » .i-'X . i-i In ' . !v 3 ! ; > ,V 



' > > •* :ij t 'm.. ; . f 


* • • vti Fi 


... U.' . 

. . I ■ < j 


■ 


J 









160 


Attention is also drawn to the fact that the County Act contains no 
provision for dealing with minority schools. It is true, 

The Act .... apparently would apply only in rural municipalities 
not in urban centres, but in those districts formed into counties, towns 
happening to lie within the county's boundaries would be more or less 
under the thumb of the county council.1 

While it is true that the ultimate outcome of the County Act could be 
detrimental to our educational system and to schools which represent a minority 
group in particular, to date this has not been the case. On the contrary, many 
of the advantageous features of the new organization are being proven. 

Two Counties, Grande Prairie No. 1 and Vulcan No. 2 were established 
January 1, 1951. That of Ponoka No. 3 was established in 1952; Newell No. 4 
was established in 1953. The relation of the newly established counties to the 
Department of Education relating to schools in matters of Education is in almost 
every respect the same as that of the school divisions. The report submitted on 
each of the counties indicated "problems of transition and organization exist as 
yet, but in each case there is an apparent desire for harmonious cooperation in 
municipal and school administration".^ Within Grande Prairie County No. 1 there 
is a small amount of property owned by Catholics who live in St. Joseph's Separate 
School District. The County accepts the yearly requisition made by the Separate 
School Board without question, and pays the amount in four allotments - April, 
July, September and December.^ 

A Commission, Co-terminious Boundaries Commission, with Mr. W. J. Dick 
as chairman was appointed by statute at the 1953 session of the legislature. The 
purpose of the commission is to effect a readjustment of school divisions and 

^ Alberta Catholic Educ ati on Association Bulletin , April 1950 reprint from 
The Edmonton Journal, March 14, 1950. 

^ Annual Report of the Department of Education 1951, P* 34. 

■^Information given by Sister Lucy, Principal of St, Joseph's School, Letter of 
May 8 , 1954. 


























. 








' 


























. 

.1 ■*. . ’■.:.>%* j'' ■ r. 




. 




















161 


municipal districts to make them co-terminious. Once established, the undertaking 
will be permanent J and will simplify administration and will eliminate much of the 
present duplication of effort. The Commission has been carrying out their pro¬ 
ject since April 1953. Many are of the opinion that this is the preparatory move 
to the setting up of counties throughout the province,^" 


■^Editorial The Alberta School Trustee, October 1953* p. 1 and 2 













162 


APPENDIX D 

APPROXIMATE LOCATION OF ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE 
AND PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICTS RELATIVE TO EDMONTON OR CAIOARY 

ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE SCHOOL DISTRICTS 


Name of District 

Location (Direct distance is given) 


Calgary (originally Lacombe) 

180 miles south of Edmonton 

Cross Roads 

90 miles east of south of Edmonton 

Duvernay 

105 miles north of west of Edmonton 

Edmonton 

180 miles north of Calgary 

Fort Vermilion 

450 miles west of north of Edmonton 

Gleichen (disorganized 1952) 

45 miles south of east of Calgary 

Grouard (disorganized 1918) 

170 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Guy, McLennan 

200 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Holy Cross, Macleod (disorganized 

1937) 

Immaculate Conception, Peace River 

100 miles east of south of Calgary 

230 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Jasper Place 

West-end suburb of Edmonton 

Lethbridge 

110 miles south-east of Calgary 

Mazenod, North Star 

290 miles north-west of Edmonton 

North Edmonton^ 

Edmonton 

Our Lady of Good Success, Clandonald 

115 miles east of Edmonton 

Paradis (centralized in 1953) 

25 miles north of Edmonton 

Pontmain, Trochu 

135 miles east of south of Edmonton 

Rosary, Manning 

295 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Red Deer 

95 miles south of Edmonton 

Sacred Heart, Wetaskiwin 

St. Anthony's, Edmonton^ 

40 miles south of Edmonton 

South Edmonton 


Amalgamated with St. Joachim's, to form the Edmonton Separate School District No. 7 
in 1913. 





a XL,,:.. 


» J . : 'X 8 X I Jo- 'i 1 , 8 I Li. iDh. V 


o . -. - v. o ■ - ) . c xd* o < 






I . .. . Xu . JOU8 

eolXri 

031 

• 9 

j J .j ( 8 ..(..' 0 9 ■ ' 



DUviuUJ ,:.9. V.9 

. u .. 

aslxii 

iiOI 


5 1 c o'.-. 

S9.Ub'.c 



.. X\ 0 - Xc 9- , •. 

aolxni OiJX 

X : - • • ' 

• 01 ... u Xc fld'jjuc 

t olio 

. cix 

. , J i 1 

Xo d>j9v.-x:d*xon 

8 w. : .Xal 


X. C J_9 il.iv.X 

XC u'9 99'- i i0'10i. 

8 ilXijTl 


, Xo 

11J .• 0 ; X 02J3c. 

8'. Xli i 



Xo Jc-OVv-tid'-ic n 




nuvX o .iui.c 

Xo C 

f* life 

fji ,0-Je ox 

i, ; x d, 


uUC'8 8 

89.x, oxx 

I . . i [ v f!.. •. 1 Xc Jo 

. 

9,oi. e 





1 A • • - .i lUi.X\ . 



' L. 




i iJxun 

8 ; . '-! X!; l 8 - . 



j:98' i. 


- no..( 1 ■. X. X . o, : 


Uoi l 0, 


' i.(Vi'. . i.f. 

Xo 

ri J i rc.a 



xo 





ncdnoi. 

iii .. v.. *j0‘ ) 




i . ■ 'c . • : : o . 


■ '• • . ...... V . i 

. > . V . . O. •. : V X X \vi ■ XX. 

. 


d’O'XMviyXX. Xo :.x., X: 

o ....... X Jt'io) :. . 

oi.vc. eecnO 
\J.'i oviru 
nodne, ju.ud 

xn.XX;; :xo'V j-.co r ‘i 

{xcxx bvr.h xx.ij.) ix, x.tv x. 

( ...- ©si ‘io o, j;y ;) i/iJ3XjfC *1 J , 

i ,. I iioJ.0 .1 . ;G 

Ix'u .X,:. j .... u±o.:; . . ;:ci(/,.v' ^ I. . . 

(VXv-L 

, v.X 90.9. t (X:.X.i.'X.cX ©djSlilOA5.<flfiI J 

90X9>' ' c0 .» o X 
'O,. X C.jj 1 vj Su | 

x ■. Jv i d\ioii 1 

'io . :ic;,i .. XXo.X. 

XXv'X ui Xooj:J.J.tuxX oxbBoxXi 1 
j, oc\ t X x.X'noX J 

. ■ 

b. I 

J ... .. 8 'X t «J*?.'■•'. ' 0 ; 9 .. a 

i ,i■ . : 1 ,t■ ii J i . do j 

• • . J ilJ-i. ilaJ I 

. 




163 


Name of District 

Location 

St. Aubin, Chauvin 

130 miles south of east of Edmonton 

Ste. Bernadette, Picardville 

40 miles north of Edmonton 

St. Gerard 

37 miles north of Edmonton 

St. Jacques 

35 miles north of Edmonton 

St. Jerome 

45 miles north of Edmonton 

St. John’s, McMurray 

240 miles west of north of Edmonton 

St. Joseph's, Grande Prairie 

240 miles north-west of Edmonton 

St. Laurent, Brosseau 

110 miles north of west of Edmonton 

St. Louis, Medicine Hat 

165 miles south-east of Calgary 

Ste. Marie, Spirit River 

260 miles north-west of Edmonton 

St. Martin's, Vegreville 

60 miles south of east of Calgary 

St. Michael's, Fincher Creek 

110 miles south of Calgary 

St. Monica, Notikewan 

300 miles north-west of Edmonton 

St. Peter's, Waterways 

237 miles west of north of Edmonton 

St. Rit a's, Rockyford 

50 miles north-east of Calgary 

St. Theresa, Drumheller (disorganized 

in 1920) 

St. Thomas More, Fairview 

65 miles north-east of Calgary 

260 miles north-west of Edmonton 

There-setta, Castor 

125 miles north-west of Calgary 

Wainwright 

120 miles south-east of Edmonton 


ROMAN CATHOLIC PUBLIC SCHOOL DISTRICTS 




Belierose * 

8 miles north of Edmonton 

Chorest * 

20 miles south-east of Edmonton 

Creuzot (disorganized in 1932) 

25 miles north-east of Edmonton 

Cunningham * 

25 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Glengarry 

30 miles north-west of Edmonton 

Granger * 

15 miles north-west of Edmonton 


* These districts have ceased to exist as distinct Roman Catholic Public School 
Districts since they .joined the division. 









jGoi 


xx idaood 

i < ■. OO J'0;.X . J a, .1 in. Oi-L i 

i uo: * j/i/i.. lo j. eolixi G+i 

1 1 ' x A i : j O 1 do < 1 ; L ... 

XX a o.i a J.I'DO j.( , o '. k'.i 0 0.1 Xf:l G' 

xx v 1 1 ! x a . V; x!J*io.£ aol i: ; cd , 

I • >• . ■ .. . u‘ii j, . no- exx:J;x 1 4 <• '. . 

I - d Ik •• A . lo oL‘Jw~l JXOj 

ixcdi wilv; lo dcu/’.v 'lo xwxor. oolxx Oil 

- o • d c O.U' c a. j— i Col 

iX.A ; ^ . .. . ‘iO J X ... - iHOf .X 0,1.1. . i x£ : 

lo lax a lo ddm o ei Go' 

'■ -■•xl) lo rdxoci -Kid:-; ( ’J ' ci:j •lOfioii.l .s'.Vc:':):. .Jl 

I: - : ; ; -*• docxox a.. ...i :■ x- ixxv.xxldT. t .'o.lsi oil xi; 

X Go 1 uaax..ix: V' e'o,n/a axxv; ^ x.; ' X'.X'O . d,, 


.0. ' v.' 

1.0 J -. ;£—,f ■ JOOii 

soli . Li.... 

• ■. a . t ... lx.,:. 

XloOl'i : il),\ 

lo. da£o--f!d , iOio 

lo laow-xl Jxoxi 

«. . V i 

• a- I-' r ;.-. o.i ) ox: ■ , .‘.x: .ox.aaa rl .dlj 

v xi. 

vv. '.i-.L-iu . ■. x oj:-ic. rIT . 1 


v- 1 uOOv\ -ild'IOi i 

iXbj.jj.i £‘i. 

X 1 . 0:J o i-aOXOX'iV 


duXo-xfdxK.a 


drir,j:xv;nifiW 1 




: 


lot jrJvo. lo lichioj 

o 0.1 i , & 

A ' su *if>.L o’di 


'.a j . \ ,/< ; . 

i.ull.i Cl 

'* j; :0XOiID i 


iO 'J 1 J . ' O >J '• ■ 

e-:io 

aj. C y , . ■ v 

f i. . , 0-1.! V: 

-jtidu 

aali. Cl 

“ :xx iXn.i.i ixxuD 1 

1 <- w . V 

lo doOW-nd’U,!: 

x. • ..I l L€ 


IIQv- 1 : ; ... , 

lo d';xov;-iid-jox:i 

;. a.. :... C-i. 

O' OX'Ixll 


■-V !.d. .. . ' . >; Joni-o'...l ) £. O 

d'l. . o - d ... . o .,\Ji . Jjax.,: 00,1 d- 


doi’ifJroI, lo ora.*-.:'! 

i -- i 1 . i j; . 

o.< XV 0. OX . ^ ' a. o OX.i', , SJ 

„£ 

* ox i .dl; 

ouo'ioi, . di 

. 

o.l. .!'• ..... : . a : 1 cool . do 

. , ■ . o • 

d 

'io ..1 dix.'. .... .. . .. 

■ t o . . . : l:-:. v. . v. 


164 


Name of District 

Location 

Lac Ste. Anne (changed to Lac Ste.Anne 
P.S.D. No. 29 in 1951) 

Rose Ridge * 

35 miles west of Edmonton 

20 miles north of Edmonton 

Saskatchewan 

18 miles north-east of Edmonton 

St. Albert 

10 miles north-west of Edmonton 

St. Agnes (became Beauvais P.S.D. 

No. 18 in 1910) 

St. Francis Xavier (closed in 1886) 

120 miles south of Calgary 

4 miles north-east of Edmonton 

St. Leon * 

7 miles north-west of Edmonton 




St. Thoms Duhame 1 (became Duhame 1 60 miles south-east of Edmonton 

P.S.D.No.627 in 1901) 

Thibeault 20 miles west of north of Edmonton 




Vegreville * 

60 miles east of Edmonton 

Volmer (originally Boulais) * 

20 miles north-west of Edmonton 


These districts have ceased to exist as distinct Roman Catholic Public School 
Districts since they joined the division. 











00.,:. Xolllelu lo Sitae 


" ;4$ ..... v - v. o . ... Q 

;->■ . Li 1'. . ....... 

lie - ■ . lo iJ‘ • . o:. 1. 11 ' -A- y ■ :• CLi r. 


iXiJoojrililv Xu 

Oa • ' Co- oell.'.. 


.>Cv;. : ciai.l 

-..uJil re -. It 

joovr-J'J'ion oolla 01 


v - . . o' , 


1c (iovjc-fi l sj l.v. Oil 

. .1 8lovesuo 

O'. . c . ... j w ...i. .Jo 



: iOiVi 1:1 

81 . til 

f; CvltdliLc.. lo 

J'lOi't cell,,' .j.:, 

■ y,ut oil cl coco It;; ' 

~--l... -1 cl Oil. ;ol. • . Jl; 


lvjl ) t,L \.i lo tfeovt-dthon sollm V • *;<• .-ecu . j 

J - • --■ *3- - " ' -• ! • i C lx.:.. 00 Is..., :: la. o, .00 -v , la.:-.'; ;ol SootUT .Jo 1 

. .... 

nojilihd:, ■ 2c ,iv'iuj. It Jer . sail, •. 0£ JljJLod ±ciT ’* 

LUs.L..ULX 1C JO.OS ciOlli.:.. Co J olllvc*XI-OV | 

Ix.Jil. i o... 10 j ..licit CO...1.0 cl * (ux.i-.Lr: . "1 j ;,lcc / 0.0 ;_lxV 



1 • '' ' L , o,. v . o :j ■ .'.aC.L.a 0 ' til ... < ,1 Cac . -0 C; *■. I 8 J'O i.o;\l, 11 OC 5-3i'I T 

..OO.l.lvl C J •• ri/rlol l. A.,. z)Ui 1-. : JOlotJolU, 






165 


APPENDIX E 

QUESTIONNAIRES USED AS ONE 
OF THE SOURCES OF INFORMATION FOR THIS STUDY 

QUESTIONNAIRE SENT TO PRINCIPALS AND/OR 
SECRETARIES OF ROMAN CATHOLIC SEPARATE AND PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN ALBERTA 

1. What is the official name and number of your school district? 

2. When was it formed? 

3. Who was the most active person who brought about the organization of 
the district? 

4. What was the initial enrolment? When was the school opened? What grades 
were taught and by whom? 

5. If the first teachers were members of a Religious Community please give the 
official name of the community and a brief comment on the Congregation and 
its work in the field of education. 

6. If a Religious Community undertook the work in this school after its organ¬ 
ization please give the exact date and interesting details. 

7. What was the exact location and nature of the first school? 

8. Was a boarding school opened to provide for Catholic education of children 
in. neighboring districts? If so, when was it opened, and how many pupils 
were enrolled? Please give an outline of subsequent growth. 

Were provisions made for any special training in music, home economics, 
shop, or commercial? When in succeeding years were such classes opened? 


9. 












■ 


































166 

10. When were additions made to the school building? What type of structure 
was erected? How many classrooms were opened, and how many pupils were 
accommodated in each of these changes? 

11. Have additional schools been built in the district? When? What grades 
were taught, and what was the enrolment on opening? 

12. Was there any particularly successful period in the history of the school? 
What was the nature of this success? 

13. Have there been periods of difficulty? Of what nature? 

14. Does your school system provide supervisors in any field? When were such 
appointments made? 

15. Did the formation of the school division affect your set-up? In what way? 

16. Has any individual contributed in a special way to the success of the 
school? In what way? 

1?. If high school is taught, when was the first class opened, what grades 

were taught, and what was the enrolment? If the high school was gradually 
built up, please give date of each change. 

18. If your school gives bilingual instruction, please give essential points 
in this field of education. 

19. If a private school was in operation before the school district was organized, 
please give details as to date of inauguration, enrolment, grades taught, 

and growth. By whom was such a school operated? 

20. Who were the members of the first school board of the district? 




. ' ... ... • 


v 


; . 










167 


QUESTIONNAIRE SENT TO SUPERINTENDENTS OF AREAS 
IN WHICH THE RESIDENTS ARE PREDOMINANTLY OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC FAITH 

1. In the area now included in the Division were there, before centralization, 
any schools in which Catholic pupils were regularly given religious 
instruction? 

2. What were the names and district numbers of such schools? 

3. How many of these schools have been centralized? What was the approximate 
enrolment of these schools? 

4. What provision, if any, is made for the religious instruction of these 
pupils in the centralized schools? 














e. • . \ v.'.' i. . to. , fj .. • ‘.u v. 

. 


' 












. 














! ■ ■ • . . ' 










. 





168 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Bayne, D.C. Calgary School District No, 19 of the Province of Alberta 

1885-1935. Pamphlet in Library of the Alberta Legislative 

Assembly 


Chevalier, P.J. Rev. O.M.I. L'Crigine et les Premiers Developpements de Calgary , 

Calgary, Paroisse Sainte-Famille, c. 1934, p. 164. 

Gore sky, I. The Beginning and Growth of the Alberta School System . 

Unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Alberta, May 1944 

Hughes, K. Father Lacombe , Toronto, William Briggs, c. 1914, 467 p. 

Hutchinson, J.M. The Educational System of Alberta , Calgary, Alberta Job 

Printers, c. 1916. 63 p. 


McGucken, Wm.J., S.J. The Philosophy of Catholic Education , a Summary of 

Fundamentals and Objectives. New York, The America Press,47 p. 

McGrane, J.C. Rev. After Twenty Five Years (1909-1934), Pamphlet in Blessed 

Sacrament Convent Library, Wainwright, Alberta. Publisher 
not given. 


Morice, A.G. Rev. Histoire de L'Eglise Gatholique dans L>Quest Canadien , 

Montreal, Granger Freres, c. 1912. 3 Vois. 1364 p. 

Pope Pius XI Encyclical, Christian Education of Youth , New York, The 

America Press, 2nd Printing, c. 1936. 47 p. 

Stanislaus, Rev.Father Life of the Viscountess de Bonnault D'Houet . Longman's 

Green and Co., c. 1913. 367 p. 


Weir, G.M. The Separate School Question in Canada . Toronto, Ryerson 

Press, c. 1934. 298 p. 


Statutes of Canada 1870, 1875, 1888, 1905 
Statutes of Alberta 1905-1952 

Ordinances and Journals of the North West Territories 1884-1904 


Records of Department of Education, Alberta. A manuscript book in the files of 

the Department of Education containing information relating 
to Roman Catholic Public and Separate School Districts. 

Reports of the Board of Education 1886-1891 

Reports of the Council of Public Instruction 1896-1900 

Reports of the Department of Education of the Province of Alberta 1906-1953 















is A. 


''; - _ Vo. V:iVV:. ; Y‘V . '■■■■<■ ;Y- .< • oo o.V. IconoV; 

•-•'• ■ <- - ■- - - ...■:. oj o' ‘ a ;i •. i::2 o V 


• • 




Os ccV'.'J. ; ; , ,U\ \.t iMOli'-a'/i C..... jj 


■ 0 XO'X . ; 


-- . .YU;. . K \i iVViVOlV 


• > ; o ; ; •__ b rid'wo'j;y! V Air, U.: - SfiT 

«.-<—- —* 1 - -C - s v j./ ^i £ **iOo Cd r i dl/ 1 - .tit/ 




• v t .o t .1 . -c. t ; 0.001: v t Ga' lO^doYi 


, iT . ■ : ^ . 

V/l .O . o ;.\ 


..V t 2 ori;,jLfI- 

• • 


uVV'Yv V; vs.:. . jVv Y iV V* /'P.Y.° .'i.'.'. V V . 0 , v t .u., . f . 

Y-i'-c . is .; ic .co\J.co- a.!..,:o',.i.i.;,.' '..iiXf''- 


• i t •. -V- r;,:.. oY ... • ■ • ,o : . . 

• •'••YiU:... t J'Y VloT,.j;. . Idil! OU9VjtaO v - . si oo. . 

.• V •' , o'C'.i, 


. 




1 : 

* .0 i • ruv;: V u-.*v - •' - 


<V-‘-< • -.V.iV ,_..Yv . ; /Y'ps': ._ ;.• .Vo. V. 

- .0 -.''ii' . a t oci : i l r,o . x-\ 


1 KJ.fi 


; ' . . 

I .c ..... 


' o J '. 


C-Vs t . . Y''- • .'..'.'s', s' V- l , j.l o'u 

V.... . -- 0 . \.i .... V ■ : . o.i'i.Jj . 

o j.i:■ ■ rJ V..i oV V'...iIJ'xv. -j: J Vo eliii/i;.;c • ; . .. Kojs^nlb'sC 




1 1 • o A',"O'. 


i . V'.oV t fK Lo. i li J. 


■ ' : 


*• - u • - I..vi i-lf 0.0'. 01 -.i :■ *10 j.LiO, : o*j . . Olio' 

..• .- 0;. I..', , OX-UiaJI OXj.Oi oJ' 


IY'Vi.“o8dl. out,. Vo b'u.vl. o.;^ Vo od^OvVOil 

v. 1 .. ;l-o\ . .. oxioi.; Vo lio,,'* ;:. j Vo .f^KO '0*i 

^ ^ : 01 J ■•.C.' • • a: , Vi .v . .s ' );,j. V;(4 cJou; 









169 

Annals of Sacred Heart Convent , Calgary, 1885-1900. Unpublished Manuscripts in 

Sacred Heart Convent Library. 

Annals of Immaculate Conception Convent , Edmonton, 1888-1900, Unpublished Manu¬ 
scripts in Sacred Heart Convent Library. 

Annals of St. Aloysius Convent . Lethbridge, 1891-1900. Unpublished Manuscripts 

in Sacred Heart Convent Library. 

Annals of St. Anne's Convent , Prince Albert, 1884. Unpublished Manuscript 

in Sacred Heart Convent Library. 

Annals of the Sisters of the Assumption , 1929. Unpublished Manuscripts in 

Assumption Convent, Edmonton. 

Archives of St, Theresa 1 s Academy , Medicine Hat, 1913-1953. Unpublished 

Manuscripts in St. Theresa's Library. 

Archives of Immaculate Conception Convent , Vegreville 1906-1953. Unpublished 

Manuscripts in Immaculate Convent, Vegreville. 

Chronicles of Our Lady of the Rosary Hospital . Castor, 1913-1953. Unpublished 

Manuscripts in the Hospital Library. 

Records of St. Joseph' s School , Red Deer. 1908-1953. Unpublished Manuscripts 

in St. Joseph's Convent Library. 


The A.T.A. Magazine 1920-1953. Official Organ of the Alberta Teachers' 

Association published monthly. Barnett House, 

9929 - 103 St., Edmonton. 

Alberta Catholic Education Association Bulletin 1948-1952. Official Organ of 

the Alberta Catholic Education Association pub¬ 
lished quarterly by Survivance Printing Ltd., 

10510 - 109 St., Edmonton. 

Annual Review Edmonton Catholic Schools 1945-1952. Yearly publication of 

Edmonton Separate Schools, 9807 - 106 St., Edmonton. 

Canadian Educati on 1952 Official publication of The Canadian Association 

published quarterly by the Canadian Education 
Association, 206 Huron Street, Toronto 5, Ont. 

Alberta School Trustee 1953. Official Organ of the Alberta School Trustees 

Association published monthly. 736 Tegler Bldg., 
Edmonton. 

The Edmonton Bulletin 1880-1890. Weekly newspaper. In the Library of the 

Alberta Legislative Assembly. 


The Western Catholic 1939. 


Weekly newspaper. 15126 Stony Plain Road, Edmonton. 





















f-.C t 





c 




t K-'JTiC'L 


J bv'i’ fi_ ii.* tU / 1 4 

. 

j : ' 1 ..<J . .• • 0 . J! >■: ■ k r,< j.O ©s * Ij cOv:J so .' -r-'i ;v 

. ; •... . Jin • v u' o • • no: 

■n : J:. . .:> . ... J • . O' . ». : , I.,, : a . . J : ; ; / ; ,0 

♦ . j : ■ v. v 0*.\ ' : o\ J u.vc.. i j; 

O' . o i ■ . o'KX ! • zi-ji . J\; ‘Xu ;.. imjA 

, ‘I J/.j. OnV'V - J'" :..c) •. I.a*- r.': 

• : .' . ■ ‘ ' $ ■ ■ w. .Hi;0 ‘ C-' 

. i -X o ;V ; i;, ; t O'- r>. ■ fjold uuu-; 

, C C •' c • . . o' 

. l : . u 1 .. :• ' . ox x J: 


. .. - -C j. . 0 . J •. .... • r..o: . ‘.O' a..' 

Of : : V. . O’’.;., ■ ‘ • . v I. \ ■ 


• * , •: < \ J-- ; V ... , J r 10 . © . 1 • \i ••. u •• • 1 ;... v l.:.oss 

; ; <0i'u . u .0 .. j J.UO./X1 .... a! c0> . 

■ i;» .. v • - • v'l. v ; ' ;; ; .. : • i 

. • ... . -i- ... ’ O 

OX ir v .r.A. \ ! i ] ‘.0. >_ 3inOp^i 

. *i( Is, Of.' • . s 1 l ©sol * 0 . ni 

o 3* ■ ol* ■ ... 

\ • O' o • ■. ' ...- . •. O ! ■ :, j. i C •: A . . ... v v. 

. • • ■ . A •• " ? . u F l . / 

i .. ' o ' 0. . v. .. . 0- ■ .-..O' j.o. ; ji .’..O'. ;■ /AO'i'XiiA 

. - r.clO' •Jj^oac'.i .' .;. .o • 

4 « OiJ J ..... • o. O .. .. L-. A..’.., 

... O'; ■ ■ t . 0 K’OJ- ’■ >'.••0.^1 ... 

.;.0\>OX V i .... Cloodoi, ©1.1. C-i -0 . • L:X‘ Of A/v-lva' 1 • 

' • , .X . 1 s . ■ . ' ©. . ©OhXU j C O- 

o : ... . ©lid .• ' . . '.... ; 

; >. ■. /.. . /0; ;■ ; 0 . j'.l -un .. ©Of;!..], dsji 

- t '. • w •• . , t J , <i r Wy< J ss j.OOCl; '• 

’ : . { 

' 

. 

0 ' \ ’ ...... .. 

. is yv0.J : •.\ .'O’i■ 

. 









170 


Minutes of School Board Meetings of the following Catholic Separate School 

Districts: Calgary; Clandonald; Cross Roads, 

Red Deer; Duvernay; Edmonton; Fort Vermilion; 

Guy, McLennan; Holy Cross, Macleod; Immaculate 
Conception, Peace River; Jasper Place; Lethbridge; 

Red Deer; Sacred Heart, Wetaskiwin; St. Aubin's, 
Chauvin; St. John's, McMurray; St. Joseph's, 

Grande Prairie; St, Laurent, Brosseau; St. Louis, 
Medicine Hat; St. Martin's, Vegreville; St. Michael's, 
Pincher Creek; St. Peter's, Waterways; St. Rita's, 
Rockyford; St. Thomas More, Fairview; Theresetta, 
Castor; Wainwright. 

School Registers of the above named districts and in addition of: Pontmain, Trochu; 

Rosary, Manning; St. Bernadette, Picardville; 
Saskatchewan R.C.P. No. 2; and Thibeault R.C.P. 

No. 35 , Morinville. 

Parish History of St. John the Baptist Parish, Morinville; St, Benedict's Parish, 

Picardville; Blessed Sacrament Parish, Wainwright. 





o- Jjx-'l. • V.C ; y: ' j. .. j o . .o ; 

. i-c. i >. ■ ; ... .v : cI'ops ctcj .r.. 

,:j:c..cj.i V . > : : ,, j/’.i L V,.n! :‘I9DU 

- . , - .. ... i ; jj 

■ i v‘. . : VO-f.:. V \ W>J!Ob 

( t-- - - . 0 . jn.'*; :t v\! boil 

- : • c< o < ‘ . • •. ' . : 

. r-t . J' \ : > ., 

•- • : ' . ■ : Jv.-: , ,Z ; I , ; C.\ ' ;v.'..;i "J , j 

, : ' . j • . ... . ■ 1 V: :■■■ , , : : • I i •? 

•; 7 :.:vj.viZ-.\ t wu- , l;k'-iC.i:T .di, ^ 

>d'\'\ 

* ' - - : soiiibbfi l i*. o„ ©j oj 

'■ F J . . • o j ■ . J . ; ,.U. . . ... . 

. . . - - ' . . . ■ . ■. ;.-o. , 

. *.J:vA/in*; ■, .uj 

. «« • - - ...t. . . , -i J . •. 

. ^ • e : .. J'j... • . ",; yj i.l vdnruS,. 















