











































































0.x UBRM 
mwmsmaais 

SUBBIMIIISIS 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/sanderson1923 



















UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that 


they have read and recommend to the Committee 
on Graduate Studies for acceptance a dissertation 
on " Criter i a for the Determination of the Upper 
Cretaceous Sandstones in Alberta " submitted by 
James 0. G. Sanderson, B.Sc. in Arts, in partial 
fulfilment for the degree of M.Sc. in Arts. 


Edmonton 


April, 1923 



Professor of Geology 


a. 



Research Professor 

















CRITERIA FOR THE DETERMINATION 
OF THE UPPER CRETACEOUS 
SANDSTONES IN ALBERTA 


by 


JAMES 0. Gr. SANDERSON, 
B. Sc, (Alberta, 1922), 


University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, 

1923 


Signature of Author, 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Part I. 

Chapter I. INTRODUCTION . ... 1 

General Statement . 1 

Object of Investigation • . 4 

Acknowledgements . ...... . 7 

Bibliography . .... 9 

Chapter II. 

Previous Geological Investigations ... 14 

Summary of Cretaceous History ...... 16 

Detail of Montana Group . .. 26 

Chapter III. 

Structure and Distribution of Formations 
Investigated .............. 32 

Structure in General ......... 32 

Distribution of Formations 

Investigated ............ . 35 

Chapter IV. 

Location of Rock Specimens Examined ... 37 

Chapter V. 

Outline of Problem ...... . 41 

Part II. 

Chapter VI. TECHNOLOGY OF INVESTIGATION ... 43 

Microscopic Examination ......... 43 

Mechanical Analyses .. 58 

Description of Apparatus ....... 60 

Method of Operation ......... 62 

Units of Measurement and Methods 

Used in these Tests ......... 63 

Instrument for Gauging Roundness 
of Grains .............. 66 

Chapter VII. DISCUSSION OF RESULTS ...... 73 

Results of Megascopic Examination .... 73 

Results of Microscopic Examination ... 74 

Results of Mechanical Examination .... 78 

Possible Genesis of Bentonite .... 79 























TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued) 


Chapter VIII. 

Application of Results to Field 


Determination of Sandstones ....... 85 

Chapter IX. 

Summary and Conclusions ......... 88 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


Plates. 


I - IX. 

Paleogeographic maps showing extent 
of various Upper Cretaceous seas . . 

26a 

X. 

Areal geology of Alberta, map show¬ 
ing localities from which specimens 
were collected ..... . . 

54 

XI. 

Photograph of elutriation apparatus , 

59 

XII. 

Photograph of roundness gauging 
instrument.. 

69 

Tables. 



I. 

Table of formations and correlation 
of formations of Cretaceous period . 

17 

II. 

Correlation table of Belly River 
strata throughout Alberta ...... 

29 

III. 

Showing order and location of speci¬ 
mens studied . . . ... . 

59 

IV. 

Showing results in percentage of 
mechanical separation of materials 
in sandstone samples ... . 

68 

V. 

Showing mineral constituents of sand¬ 
stones determined microscopically . , 

76 












ILLUSTRATIONS (Continued) 


Figures, 

1. Diagram showing condition and relations 


of Cretaceous strata in Alberta up to 

the end of the marine period.23 

S. Diagram showing relation of marine and 
continental sediments in western Upper 
Cretaceous . . . ..24 

3, Showing elutriation apparatus as used 

in operation.57 

4. Actual size diagramatic section of 
roundness gauging instrument ...... 67 








1 


Part i, 

CHAPTER I. 

INTRODUCTION 
Greneral Statement 

This paper is presented as part of the re¬ 
quirement from the writer for the attainment of the 
degree of Master of Science in Arts at the University 
of Alberta. The subject was suggested by the head 
of the Department of Geology, Dr. J. A. Allan, in 
October 1922. 

The exact subdivision and correlation of 
members of the geologicl section in Alberta by 
studies of the fossil fauna and flora has been found 
difficult and in some respects practically impossible, 
because of the fact that during the time of deposition 
of this part of the stratigraphic column, living con¬ 
ditions for both plants and animals varied but slight¬ 
ly. The result is that gradual transitions in type 
species prevail, and no definite lines of strati¬ 
graphic division can be recognized in some cases. The 
writer feels, therefore, that there is good reason for 
the suggestion of the above problem for research, that 
recourse to some other determinable criteria in dif¬ 
ferentiating these sedimentary deposits, scientific¬ 
ally, is entirely justifiable. 

The problem as set forth in this paper is 





2 


a study of the sediments themselves. Criteria are 
sought from an analytic study of the constituents of 
the various strata in the geological group involved. 
Mechanical and petrographic analyses of type speci¬ 
mens have been made and comparison of these tests 
should yield the information desired. 

An investigation of such a problem requires 
that the investigator should have ready recourse to 
the field and to sources of definite information. 

This factor, then, makes this university the ideal 
point for this investigation as it is equipped with a 
geological department already well supplied with de¬ 
sirable suites of the rock specimens necessary for 
study, and with instructors who are thoroughly acquaint¬ 
ed with the nature and location of the outcrops of the 
strata over this province. The investigation of this 
problem at this time, by the writer, is also timely, as 
he has spent three seasons in the field, as geological 
assistant, on problems closely associated with the sub¬ 
ject of this paper. He realizes also the importance 
of the problem, and the possibility of the application 
of positive results to further geological work in 
Alberta. 

In explanation of the form this report follows, 
the writer wishes to state that prior to carrying out 




, 

- 










. 














■ 




■ 

. 






















. 

■ 













actual experimental work, all available sources of 
information in our libraries bearing on (1) such an 
investigation, (2) the description of Upper Cretace¬ 
ous rocks in Alberta, were perused. The appended 
bibliography, divided as above, contains the main 
publications made use of. No reports were found of 
the results of an exactly similar investigation, the 
writer had therefore to establish his own precedents 
in part, and evolve a mode of proceedure toward a 
systematic study of the problem. Some of the tech¬ 
nical apparatus used in the experiments had also to 
be devised. A part of this paper deals with the 
methods of experimentation, and description of details 
of apparatus. 

Attention is also drawn to Chapter II. 
Ordinarily a strictly technical paper would not in¬ 
clude so much historic background. In studying the 
sedimentation relations involved in this problem, the 
writer could find no concise statement of the sedi¬ 
mentation record, which was satisfactorily complete and 
comprehensive for the subject in question. Ceneral 
descriptions do exist but these are usually too general, 
likewise, detailed descriptions wqre encountered but 
these applied to local regions only. The description 
found in Chapter It is an effort to describe the gen¬ 
eral conditions as they effected Alberta as a whole. 








. 


. 




. 

, 




















. 






■ 

























4 


The amount of experimentation accomplished 
and the number of analyses made were not at all ade¬ 
quate to complete this study, much more time spent in 
actual field study and collecting, as well as labor¬ 
atory work would be necessary. It is felt, however, 
that with methods of proceedure attested, and some 
preliminary studies completed, which indicate the 
existence of determinable criteria, that an advance 
has been made. Further investigation, at a future 
time, on problems similar to this one will have at 
least a working basis. 

Care has been taken that standard conditions, 
units, and materials were used, where at all possible, 
in order that any future work might be thus facilitated. 

Introduction and Object of Investigation . 

When the pioneer geological work of this 
province was begun the country was still in a wild 
state. Ho highways or railroads gave access to the 
regions that needed investigation, the first geologists 
followed in part the Indian trails from one region to 
another. Despite this and other scientific diffculties 
the country has been mapped geologically. Needless to 
say there are many imperfections and mistakes now 
apparent. 




5 


A further reason that helps explain the in¬ 
accuracy of the present map, is the fact that the 
geology of the province has been described by men of 
vastly different training, some were paleontologists, 
some petrographers, others mining engineers and some 
stratigraphers. The correlation of the ideas and 
descriptions of such heterogeneous talent has caused 
some confusion, although a great deal of valuable in¬ 
formation has been thus accumulated. The study of 
stratigraphy as such dates back as far as geology does. 
The names of Wm. Smith (1790), Sir R. Murchison, and 
Prof. Sedgewick, will always be regarded with great- 
respect, however their methods of correlation, though 
thorough and satisfactory in general, have proven to 
be inadequate. Consequently in quite recent time 
when the need became apparent, men began t£ie study of 
sedimentation proper, and use their results in con¬ 
junction with paleontologic data. 

There no longer seems to be any doubt that 
these principles of stratigraphic study could be 
applied to Alberta's Upper Cretaceous problem with 
beneficial results. 

It is in view of the lack of a definite set 
of criteria, in differentiating these rocks as to apre, 
that the writer has been encouraged to seek what in- 








* 




























. 










. 


. 

















6 


formation may be available from such a study of the 
sedimentation. The problem of recognizing correctly 
the age of rock outcrops on the plains of Alberta is 
much complicated by the nature of the surface of most 
of the province. During later Quaternary times the 
retreat of glaciers which had come from the western 
Cordillera and the pre-Cambrian shield deposited a 
mantle of glacial clay over most of the province. This 
mantle varies in thickness, but is usually thick enough 
to effectually mask the bed rock. A few isolated 
outcrops of bed rock away from the stream-cut valleys 
do occur, but these are not common enough to simplify 
the matter of defining the areal geology of the pro¬ 
vince very accurately. Hence, it becomes necessary 
to fully recognize the age relation of a rock from very 
small outcrops, or well records, etc. 

In unglaciated territories like Texas and 
Oklahoma the work is straightforward as outcrops can be 
traced on the surface, and so the structures can be 
worked out and transitions marked. The uppermost beds 
in Alberta except where highly disturbed, are of Upper 
Cretaceous age (see table I). These beds are mainly 
fresh to brackish water in nature, and they bear a very 
similar fauna and flora, from top to bottom. These 
two factors combine to make it difficult to determine 
the age of these beds in the field. 








. 



















. 








. 



. 

















































7 , 


The establishment of different criteria for 
determining these age relations would be an immense aid 
to the field geologist. The beds composing the strata 
in Alberta were laid down in seas or sea margins, the 
different seas being of varying extents, it seems reason¬ 
able then to assume that the sources of these sediments 
would be from different localities and terrains in each 
case. It is upon the strength of this assumption that 
the present investigation was undertaken and the re¬ 
sults that are given in Part II shall test the validity 
of this assumption. 

To make more clear the geologic relationships 
of the formations investigated, a chapter has been 
written on the history of Upper Cretaceous times in 
Alberta (with maps). This is described only in a gen¬ 
eral way in order that the reader may gain a better con¬ 
cept of the problem in hand. A series of photomicro¬ 
graphs of thin sections of the sandstones was taken, and 
these accompany the petrographic descriptions. They 
show the shape and style of aggregation of the grains 
in these rocks. The technique and manner of investig¬ 
ation are dealt with in Chapter VI. 

Acknowledgements 

The writer wishes to acknowledge the assist¬ 
ance and advice of Ur. J. A. Allan, Professor of Geology 









































> 




. 
























, 











8 


at this University and of Assistant Professor P. S. 
Warren, also of the Geology Department. Their helpful 
criticism at all times was invaluable to the writer in 
the successful completion of the work. Valuable sug¬ 
gestions were also received from Mr. C. £. Wentworth 
of the State University of Iowa and from Dr. D. B. Dow¬ 
ling, of the Geological Survey, Ottawa. 

The idea for the development of an instrument 
for guaging the percentage roundness of sand grains 
was received from Mr. Wentworth, while the maps used 
in Chapter II were originally prepared by Dr. Dowling. 

In the preparation of the photomicrographs 
of thin sections. Dr. Ralph Shaner of the Department of 
Anatomy here, kindly lent his camera and advised the 
writer in its manipulation. 

In the descriptive part of this subject, the 
writer was guided by various works tabulated in the 
bibliography and more particularly by those of D. B. 
Dowling, Hatch and Rastall, and Milner. Much of the 
data regarding the geologic descriptions and correlation 
was obtained from the reports of the Canadian Geological 
Survey, Ottawa, and the United States Geological Survey. 










. 


. 






. 














. 












. 

. 





















Bibliography 
Geological References * 

Allan, J. A. 

1. Section along North Saskatchewan river. Geol. 
Surv.,Can., Summary Report, 1917. 

2. Second and Third Annual Reports on the Mineral 
Resources of Alberta, Edmonton, 1921 and 1922. 

3. and Cameron, A. S., Preliminary Report on the 
Pouce Coupe Oil Fields. Eng. & Min, Jl., Vol.26 
Sept., 1921. 

Barrell, Jos. 

4. Relative Geological Importance of Continental, 
Littoral and Marine Sedimentation, Jour, of Geol. 
1905. 

Bowen, C. F. 

5. The Stratigraphy of the Montana Group, with spec¬ 
ial reference to the Judith River group. U. S. 
Geol. Survey, Prof. Paper 90-1, 1915. 

6. Gradations from Continental to Marine Conditions 
of Deposition in Central Montana during the Eagle 
and Judith River epochs. U. S. Geol. Survey, 
Prof. Paper 125-B, 1919. 

Brown, Barnum. 

7. Cretaceous Eocene Correlation in New Mexico, 
Wyoming, Montana and Alberta. Geol. Soc, Amer. 
Bull., Vo 1. 25, 1914. 

Cairnes, D. D. 

8. Moose Mountain District, Southern Alberta. Geol. 
Surv., Can., Memoir 61, 1914. 

Dawson, G. M., and McConnell, R. A. 

9. Report on the Region in the Vicinity of the Bow 
and Belly rivers. Geol.Surv., Can., Report of 
Progress, Part C, 1882-84. 

Dowling, D. B. 

10. The Cretaceous Sea in Alberta. Trans. Royal Soc. 
Can., Sec. Ill, Vol. IV, 1915. 






10 


11. The ‘Eastern Belt of the Canadian Cordilleras, 
an Inquiry into the Age of the Deformation. 

Trans. Royal Soc., Can., Sec. IV, Vol. IV, 

1922. 

12. The Southern Plains of Alberta. Geol. Surv., 
Can., Memoir 93, 1917. 

13. Investigations in the Gas and Oil Fields of 
Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba. Geol. Surv., 
Can., Memoir 116, 1919. 

14. Coal Fields of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta 
and Eastern British Columbia. Geol. Surv., Can., 
Memoir 53, 1914. 

15. The Edmonton Coal Field, Alberta. Geol. Surv., 
Can., Memoir 8, 1910. 

Numerous lesser contributions to Summary Reports 
of the Geological Survey of Canada. 

Knowlton, F. H. 

16. The Laramie Flora of the Denver Basin, with a 
review of the Laramie Problem. U. S. Geol. 

Survey, Prof. Paper 130, 1921. 

Leach, W. W. 

17. Blairmore Map Area. Geol. Surv., Can., Summary 
Report, 1911. 

Mailoch, G. S. 

18. Bighorn Coal Basin, Alberta. Geol. Surv., Can., 
Memoir 9, 1911. 

McConnell, R. G., (see Dawson, G. M.) 

19. Summary of Explorations, north of Lesser Slave 
lake, between Peace and Athabaska rivers, Alberta. 
Geol. Surv., Can., Annual Report, Part A, 1888-89. 

MeLearn, F. H. 

20. The Cretaceous Sections on the Crowsnest river, 
west of Blairmore sheet, Alberta. Geol. Surv., 
Can., Summary Report, 1914. 



11 


21. Mesozoic of Upper peace river, B. 0. Geol. Surv., 

Can., Summary Report, 1920, Part B. 

22. Little Smoky river, Alberta. Geol. Surv., Can., 
Summary Report, Part C f 1919. 

Meek and Hayden. 

23. U. S. Geol. Surv. of the Territories, Yol. IX, 
1876. 

Parks, W. A. 

24. Presidential Address. Trans. Royal Soc., Can,, 
Sec. IY, Yol. XYI, 1922. 

25. Building Stones of Canada, Mines Branch Report, 
Ottawa, Yol. IY, 1916. 

Pirsson, L. Y., and Schuchert, C. 

26. Text Book of Geology, Yol. II, Historical Geology, 
1915. 

Rose, Bruce. 

27. Wood Mountain- 1 #illowbunch Coal Area, Saskatchewan. 
Geol. Surv., Can., Memoir 89, 1915. 

28. Reconnaissance along the Red Beer, James, Clear¬ 
water and North Saskatchewan rivers, Alberta. 

Geol. Surv., Can., Summary Report, 1914. 

Selwyn, A. R. C. 

29. Observations in the North West Territory on a 
Journey across the Plains from Fort Garry to 
Rocky Mountain House. Geol. Surv., Can., Report 
of Progress, 1873-74. 

Slipper, S. S. 

30. Sheep River Gas and Oil Field, Alberta. Geol. 
Surv., Can., Memoir 122, 1921. 

Stanton, T. W., and Hatcher, J. B. 

31. Geology and Paleontology of the Judith River beds. 
U. S. Geol. Survey, Bull. 257, 1905. 

Stebinger, E. 

32. The Montana Group of Northwestern Montana. U. S. 
Geol. Survey, Prof. Paper 90, 1915. 



12 


Stewart, J. S. 

33. Geology of the Disturbed Belt of Southern Alberta. 
Geol. Surv., Gan., Memoir 112, 1919. 

Tyrrell, J. B. 

34. Summary of Explorations in Alberta south of the 
North Saskatchewan river. Geol. Surv., Can., 
Annual Report, Part*A, 1886. 

35. Report on a part of Northern Alberta and portions 
of adjacent districts of Assiniboia and Saskatche¬ 
wan. Geol. Surv., Can., Annual Report, Part E, 
1886. 

Willis, Bailey. 

36. Index to Stratigraphy of North America. U. S. Geol 
Survey, Prof. Paper 71, 1912. 


Technical References. 

Barton, D. C. 

37. The Geologic Significance and Genetic Classific¬ 
ation of Arkose Deposits. Jour, of Geol., Vol. 
XXIV, 1916. 

Burton, T. H. 

38. Petrography of Sands. Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc., 
Yol. 73. 

Condit, D. D. 

39. Petrography of Ohio Sands. Jour, of Geol., Yol. 
XX. 

Davies, G. M, 

40. Petrography of Sand, Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc., 
Yol. 68, 1912. 

Gilbert, G. K. 

41. The Transportation of Debris by Running Water. 

U. S. Geol. Survey, Prof. Paper 86, 1914. 

Goldman, M. I. 

42. Petrographic Evidence on the Origin of the Cat¬ 
ahoula Sandstone of ftxas. Amer. Jour. Sci., 
Yol. XXII, 1915. 







Hatch and Hastall. 

43. Text Book of Petrology, - The Sedimentary Hocks 
London, 1913. 

Milner, II. B. 

44. An Introduction to Sedimentary Petrography. 
London, 1922. 

Phillips, J. A. 

45. Grits and Sandstones. Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc. 
Vol. XXVII, 1881. 

Sorby, H. C. 

46. Studies of Angle of Deposition. Quart. Jour. 
Geol. Soc., Vol. 64. 

47. Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc., Vol. 34, 1880. 

48. Quart. Jour. Geol. Soc., Vol. 36, 1880. 
Wentworth, G. K. 

49. A Scale of Grade and Glass terms for Clastic 
Sediments. Jour, of Geol., Vol. XXX, 1922. 

Ziegler, V. 

50. Factors Influencing the Hounding of Sand Grains 
Jour, of Geol., Vol. XIX, 1916. 













■ . 









■ 















































14 


CHAPTER II. 

Previous Geological Investigations (Summarized ). 

The earliest study of the rocks of the mid- 
North American Cretaceous period dates back to 1854. 
During that year Messrs. F. B. Meek and P. V. Hayden, 
then in the employ of Jas. Hall of the New York State 
Geological Survey, visited some of the exposures of 
these rocks in Wyoming and Montana, and reported upon 
the geology and fauna of the beds. Prior to their 
reports certain disconnected data had been furnished 
by the Lewis and Clark expedition of 1804-6. The 
former work was however, the first of a truly geolog¬ 
ical nature. The investigations of Meek and Hayden 
were continued until their retirement, and most of the 
significant features and divisions of the period were 
worked out by them. Their reports stand as classics 
yet, especially the parts embracing the fauna of the 
Cretaceous (23)^. 

In Canada it was not until 1870 that geolog¬ 
ical investigation of our great plains was commenced. 
At this time A. R. C. Selwyn became director of the 
"Geological Survey of Canada." One of his first 
official activities was a reconnaissance expedition, 
first to Fort Garry, thence on to the foothills of 
the Rockies (29). 

1. Numbers in brackets refer to bibliography numbers. 









15 


Following this, in 1873 G. M. Dawson travers¬ 
ed the country as geologist and botanist on the North 
American Boundary Commission. 

With the advent of these men our knowledge 
of Canadian Cretaceous history began and grew. They 
were followed by equally able and energetic investig¬ 
ators in the persons of R. G. McConnell, J. B. Tyrrell 
and D. B. Bowling who all had very much to do with the 
description, sub-division and mapping of the Cretaceous 
rocks. 

The first complete and still classic sub¬ 
division of these formations was submitted by G. M. 
Dawson in the "Annual Report of the Geological Survey 
of Canada for 1882-4." Much of the complementary 
detail has since been ascertained, but there are still 
many major details and phases of the main problem to 
be investigated and reported. In more recent times 
much information has been added by the works of D. D. 
Cairnes, J. A. Allan, Bruce Rose, J. S. Stewart, W. W. 
Leach, G. S. Malloch, and D. B. Dowling. 

On the American side the problem has received 
careful interpretation in the works of T. W. Stanton, 
Hatcher, C. F. Bowen, E. Stebinger and a number of other 
geologists of the United States Geological Survey. 










. 


. . 


















16 


Summary of Cretaceous History * 

The results of the surveying and observ¬ 
ations of all these men yield a certain unanimity of 
conclusion regarding the broad general history of 
Cretaceous times in this part of North America which 
is in general as follows. During the later Jurassic 
period incursions of the sea from the west as great 
north-south bays, laid down sediments carrying a 
semi-boreal fauna and composed largely of shales with 
an occasional area of sandstone. These seas did not 
extend far to the east of the present Cordillera. It 
is believed that the rest of the present continent re¬ 
mained a land mass with exposure mainly of Upper 
Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian) and Devonian rocks. 

After the retreat of the Jurassic sea 
a period of erosion and minor continental deposition 
took place. Thus the continental sediments and 
coal of the Kootenay and lower Dakota (Blairmore 
sandstone, Stewart) are account^for. See table 
of formations given below for relations of these 


formations 




18 


This condition prevailed Just prior to the 
great incursion of the Cretaceous sea which encroached 
from the south by way of the Gulf of Mexico. 

In explanation of the orogenic conditions 
causing these sea movements, I refer to an extract 
from a paper written on this phase. (D. B. Dowling- 
Trans. Royal Society of Canada, 1915, Sec. IV). Here 
Dowling states,"From a very early period the region 
embraced by the great plains was covered by the sea. 

In Carboniferous times land in the form of an island 
appeared in this sea within the limits of what is now 
the interior plateau of British Columbia. It was 
maintained and gradually increased in area by a contin¬ 
ental uplift and by other earth movements, the result of 
tangential strains which were quite pronounced during 
Jurassic times. This general uplift culminated in the 
withdrawal of the sea from the mid-continental area as 
is shown by deposits of continental formation which 
occur in the early part of the Cretaceous period. It 
was not until Middle Cretaceous times that marine de¬ 
posits in Alberta again appear. The re-entry of the 
sea was probably not due to a relaxation of the crustal 
strains but to the weakening of the arch between the 
western highlands and the old continent by unequal 
loading. This had been produced by the greater depos- 












' 













































■ 


































ition over the submerged area which was near the 
newly elevated land areas or islands to the west, as 
compared with that from the older land surface which 
is now called the Canadian Shield. This unequal 
loading caused a deformation of the arch and with in¬ 
creased tangential strain, a downwarping of the extreme 
western area commenced. Through early Cretaceous time 
the trough thus formed was kept filled and maintained 
as a land area by the coarse material brought from the 
highlands to the west; but the tangential stresses to 
which the western part of the continent had been sub¬ 
jected lessened throughout the latter part of Cretace¬ 
ous time and subsidences of more or less amount are 
found to have occurred -- most noticeably in the 
interior of the continent. With this subsidence 
mention may be made of volcanic activity in at least 
one area of the western part, as shown in the Crows- 
nest volcanics near Blairmore. We have thus the 
advent of the Cretaceous sea which covered a broad 
band stretching from the Arctic ocean to the GJ-ulf of 
Mexico;” also, ”The fluctuations of the sea margin are 
taken to be an expression or reflection of the earth 
movements in the comparatively new land areas to the 
west and, therefore, not liable to be local in character 
The latter portion of this extract refers to later 
Upper Cretaceous sediments. In the first part of it the 































20 


explanation of the causation of the incursion is apparent 
The strictly marine phase of this sea was pre¬ 
ceded by the deposition of a bed known as the "Dakota 
sandstone and shale formation," This formation rests 
unconformably and disconformably on the older form¬ 
ations, there being a time break between it and the 
Kootenay fresh-water formation. That these sands 
were the shoreward facies of a transgressing sea coast 
is now becoming accepted as the explanation for their 
origin, although they have been described as wind 
blown continental deposits. Regarding the origin of 
the Dakota, Schuchert states on page 890 of his text 
(26), "The previous Comanchian submergence finally 
vanished from all or at least the greater part of the 
North American continent. After an interval of un¬ 
known duration the Gulf of Mexico again began to invade 
the continent, and more extensively than ever before 
daring the Mesozoic. This was the Cretaceous overlap 
of vast extent all along the region east of the rising 
Rocky Mountains from Central America into the Arctic 
ocean. 'The invasion began earliest in the Gulf border 
area, spreading sandstones as a rule in the United 
States and Canada (Dakota formation) and then muds 
(Benton) when the sea attained its greatest proportions. 
In many places, however, the sediments did not begin 



21 . 

with sands hut with muds. Further, it is probable 
that the invasion began about the same time in the 
Arctic region, spreading southward and uniting with the 
waters of the Gulf of Mexico, This then was the great 
inland Coloradoan sea,” 

This brings the history of this sedimentation 
up to the sequence with which this paper is to deal* 

The Upper Cretaceous is sub-divided differently by 
different writers, some even placing the Dakota in the 
lower division. Much contention has also arisen as 
to the classification and division of the Montana group. 
Dawson and Dowling, and most of the writers following 
them place all the sediments, marine, brackish water 
and fresh lying above the dark Colorado shales and be¬ 
low the Edmonton and St. Mary’s formations in the Belly 
River series. American writers, however, subdivide 
these sediments into a number of divisions, viz. Eagle 
(Virgille) sandstone, Claggett shale, Judith River or 
To Medicine brackish water deposits, and Bearpaw shale. 
The interrelations existing are clearly seen on table 
I which shows the correlations which have been made. 

The table shows a distinct dissimilarity in stratific¬ 
ation between the central Alberta section and the 
Athabaska section. There is a possibility that this 
may be due to the factor mentioned by Schuchert, a con¬ 
temporaneous invasion of this Cretaceous sea from the 

































. 




. 








. 









22 


Arctic would no doubt be governed by slightly differ¬ 
ent drainage, rate of sedimentation, etc. which would 
result in such a dissimilarity. 

The greater part of Alberta is effected 
however, by the invasion from the south, and it is 
with its history this paper is concerned. After the 
deposition of the Dakota and Benton sediments the 
marine waters temporarily receded and a period of 
alternate transgression and regression occurred. The 
general effect on the character of the deposition re¬ 
sulting is graphically shown in figures 1 and 2, the 
thickness and dips in both are not considered accurately. 

Regarding the source of the material making up 
the sediments of the Upper Cretaceous, there is no doubt 
that most of it'is from a terrain west of the present 
eastern Rockies. On this point Dowling remarks on 
page 181 (11), "The amount of material removed from the 
uplifted area is so far in excess of that removed from 
the area to the east that an early subjection to erosion 
is a necessary postulate and it is put forward here 
that the western Rockies appeared first in Mid-Cretaceous 
time, although earlier uplifts of the same mass are no 
doubt.indicated in the conglomerates of the Kootenay 
which are so persistant and extend as far north as the 
Smoky River coal basin." Dowling states further, "The 


■ 

















































23 






















I 








1 

I 

m 

rH 



>iP 

d 


d 

03 


6 P 

cd 

o 

d 

o 

P 

02 

d 


P 

d 

O 

•rH 

d 

d 

-p 

HD 




p 

0 

•rH 

a3 

0 


o 


o 

d 

cd 


pu ra 

d 

0 

0 

•r-f 

P 


p 

cd 

£*sP 

d 

4-^ 

P 

o3 

cd 


03 

P 

•H 

d 



6 

0 



r C 

o 

p 

CO 


n «h 

o 


a 

cd 

a3 

o3 

cd 

O 

p 

P 


0 


0 

03 



d 

HD 

d 

d 

d 


0 

t>s 

0 

d O 

0 

c3 

0 

0 

P 

d 

cd 


p 


P 

d 

< — 1 

0 


d 

aj <h 

P 

•H 

Cd 

'P 

0 

d 

p 

O 


P 

d 

<P 

d 

0 



0 


o 

•rH 

•H 

P 

60 0 

P 

P 

60 r a 


U P d 60 03 o3 

03 U P fO OrCj-H d 
S O 0 0) P P 'G H 

•d P 

o a c-o 

P^JpiO^NMKi 
P O P P 

p fn co >s d >5 03 

o d 60 aJ P 60 o 3 0 

P 0 O & P 

03 O ncJ O 60 

£ Phtd 0 0 0 £ d 

OdcdSSdcdcd 

•h o U 0 d U 

P Jh O d 0 to 60 60 

cd 60 P p m p a 3 d 

' • o M cd P .H 

0(3)0© PG P>j 

d d 13H 5 h 

cd 0 $3 £ 03 cd 

0 p p o cd p >■ 

p d p r d 

P O a to • P P 
a) ^'h o 0P cd 
p- o p co go d 

O 0 PH 0 o a 

fHrCj ftO I ^ 0 

PhP O 0 P d P 

P CO GO ^ O fn 

6D*H *00 0 P cd 

d O 0 H Xj P <o 

•-H P -p .H d 

O -P H 5) O O 


P 

d 




p 

pmp 

03 

0 

d 

• 

d 


0 



& 

o 

0 

o 

r c 

p 

d 

s 

•r-f 

p 

d 

03 

d 


o 

cd 

TO 

60 

cd 

£ 

d 

03 

•rH 

d 

0 

0 

p 

cd 

o 

d 

p 

60 

03 

d 

P- P P 

o 

cd 


cd 

•H 

P 


W 

60 

•H 

Ph 


































25 


subsequent history of the basin to the east of the 
earlier formed mountains as disclosed in the character 
of the later sediments is, first, a narrowing of the 
sea, probably largely confined to the northern half 
of the Canadian area; then a wide-spread subsidence of 
the southern half; and, lastly, a final retreat of the 
sea from the north accomplished in two stages as re¬ 
gistered in the shore deposits. In general, after the 
subsidence, there was an extended period of tranquility 
closed by an uplift, along the western margin, consist¬ 
ing of short periods of uprise and settlement during 
which the Belly River series was deposited, and then 
followed a partial advance of the sea before its final 
retreat during which the Rdmonton formation was laid 
down. The movements during this period probably in¬ 
dicate^ alternating compression and tension in the crust 
and no doubt some deformation was accomplished in the 
land mass to the west. In the north the later Cre¬ 
taceous sediments were probably land deposits, but as 
they have been largely removed we can only surmise that 
the compressive strains in the north which caused de¬ 
formation before the deposition of the Tertiary measures, 
were contemporaneous with the general uplift marking the 
disappearance of the Cretaceous sea." 

This explanation for the source of the sediments 
is no doubt without fault, but the writer believes that 



26 . 

a large part of the material making up the beds of the 
upper Belly River, Rdmonton and Paskapoo, was derived 
from the recently upraised terrains of the formations 
immediately underlying. By comparing the size and 
probable shore lines, of the basins occupied by the 
Cretaceous sea at various stages, it will be seen that 
new land masses of poorly indurate^ sediments were ex¬ 
posed during these temporary recessions. Consequently 
this material was easily swept down by erosion and made 
up a large portion of the newer beds being deposited. 

Thus an exposure of the muddy arenaceous shale of the 
lower Eenton would provide the dark grey to almost black 
shales of the lower Pierre, which resembles it closely 
(lithologically), likewise the extremely shaly nature 
of the brackish facies of the Belly River formation could 
be accounted for by streams running through the freshly 
upraised Bentoh and Pierre terrain, carrying-their tur¬ 
bid load to the newer base of sedimentation. 

Similar relations seem also to exist between 
the Belly River and the Sdmonton formations, and the 
Edmonton and lower Tertiary sandstones. This point 
will be referred to in the discussion of the analyses 
later. 

Detail of Montana Group .- Having dealt in general with 
conditions effecting the stratigraphy of the Upper 
Cretaceous in general, a slightly more detailed version 













































































. 

. 









. 



















. 













LEGEND 





























































































































LEGEND 














































































LOWER BELLY RiVER (Sha\lou/ wafair barwxj) 

PLATE BT. 








































































. 


. 

' 




i 

. 








. 


* 









* 































LEGEND 






































































> . 

. 






















. 

. 














' 


< / 












































LEGEND 



Non-m^ine B«Hy riv 



Manne (jhosG, folly nV< 















































































LEGEND 


Probable brc^ki'sh Ufo* 



£o.u) 5eo.(M^mc 
























































































BE EPMONTON STAGEfPEARPAV/5EA) 

PLATEYOT. 































































































26 a 


LEGEND 




Peskalpoo 




V-mr\ce A Fox hills 
Equivalent's. 




































































27 


of events of Montana time follows, as it is the variations 
and inter-relations in this group with which this paper 
is concerned. 


The most interesting and involved division of 
the Cretaceous period in Alberta is the Montana group. 

Here we have alternating deposits of marine, brackish 
and fresh water continental deposits (see fig. 1). Be¬ 
ginning with the recession of the last Coloradoan sea 
a marine shore phase sandstone member was laid down. In 
Montana this bed is known as the Eagle sandstone, named 
by W. H. Weed (U.S.O.S.Atlas folio 55), a lower portion 
of the Eagle was named Virgelle sandstone by E. Stebinger 
in 1914 (32). This bed in Canada has been recognized 
by D. B. Bowling who named it the Milk River sandstone. 
Further north in central Alberta it is not recognizable 
as a marine sandstone, although it has probably got a 
stratigraphic representative. In the north F. H. Me Learn t 
(22) finds no sandstone in its stratigraphic position but j 
correlates it with part of the upper shale of the Smoky 
River formation. The eastward lateral extent of this 
bed is not clearly defined, becoming completely buried 
by the undisturbed remaining beds of the Upper Cretaceous. 
That it pinches out to the east in a short distance may 
be surmised for S. E. Slipper (13) gives it a thickness 




of only ten feet at Medicine Hat which is but 150 miles 




































. 















28 


southeast across strike, from the frontal limestone 
escarpment of the Rockies. It should be expected there¬ 
fore that this member would extend along the strike of 
the mountains, a fringe about 150 miles wide, varying 
from place to place as shore and drainage conditions 
varied, following the receding sea. Its presence in 
central Alberta is not definitely proven as it would 
lie deeply buried under the deposits of the upper 
members. 

Upon this sandstone member was deposited the 
lower part of the Belly River brackish and fresh water 
sediment. This bed is not clearly defined as it merges 
into the Milk River sandstone below and the marine lower 
Pierre above. It has not a great eastward extension. 

Apparently but a short period had elapsed when 
a reincursion of the marine waters occurred, and the 
lower Pierre (Glaggett) marine shales were deposited. 
This re-entry was probably caused by a slight but re¬ 
latively sudden subsidence of the central plains region, 
which allowed the marine water level to again extend 
westward a short distance. The Glaggett or Pakowki 
shale (marine) invasion did not reach to the present 
foothills region, it was not found by either J.S. 

Stewart or D. D. Cairnes who worked on the Cardston- 
Pincher Greek and Moose Mountain areas of the foothills. 


' 

■ 




















. 

















































29 


Following the Pakowki-Claggett shale de¬ 
position the marine waters again retreated eastward, 
and probably southward and the coal-bearing fresh to 
brackish water deposits of the Belly River series was 
laid down. These sandstones and clays extend far out 
through Alberta and Saskatchewan, and perhaps into the 
western side of Manitoba as fresh to brackish water 
sediments. The group is known as the Belly River 
series and has been subdivided differently in differ¬ 
ent sections of the province. The following is a 
partial table of correlations showing the relations 
tentatively held. 



Pale 



Myrtle Creek 

Pale beds 

u 

0 

beds 

Allison 

form¬ 

Brazeau 

form¬ 

Pakan 

Variegated 

beds 

> 
P’s *H 
—1 PI 
rH 

0 

pq 

Foremost 

beds 

ation 

ation 

Victoria 

Shandro 

Brosseau 

Birch Lake 
GriMly Bear 
Ribstone 
Creek 


Table II. 

This formation varies greatly in thickness 
from west to east, and on its eastern edge becomes 
irregular, as the Shandro shale and a part of the Birch 
Lake sandstone have yielded marine faunas, probably 
representing minor incursions of the marine waters. 

Conformably over this series comes another 
marine phase known as the Bearpaw shale or upper Pierre 
marine shale. It represents the last big adjustment 
of the Cretaceous sea before its final retreat to the 
















30 


south. This marine shale is of a shallow water nature 
and had a more irregular western shore line, its ex¬ 
tent was not so great as that of the Claggett. The 
definite limits of its western extent have only been 
determined at a few points. It seems however, that 
a lobe to the south of the province penetrated much 
further westward than in the central or northern por¬ 
tions of Alberta where the Bearpaw is either missing 
or very thin. 

With the retreat of this sea comes a re¬ 
currence of conditions notably similar to those follow¬ 
ing the lower Pierre invasion. E. Stebinger remarks 
three distinct cycles of deposition from marine to fresh 
water conditions in the rocks of northwestern Montana. 

Fig. 2 shows this point, basal marine beds (Benton, 
Claggett and Bearpaw) form the beginnings of cycles 
which run through to fresh-water deposits in each case. 

The brackish water sediments following the Bearpaw r are 
known as the Edmonton formation. It does not become 
very thick at any point and is notable for many features 
as a deposit. Its extent is indicated in Plate VIII. 

It probably represents a silting up of the Bearpaw shallow 
sea, as renewed erosion due to the - beginning of the Ter¬ 
tiary revolution to the west, began. 

Over part of Alberta long after the marine in¬ 
dications had been obliterated by the Edmonton silts and. 




























- 







' 











































































31 


shales, a fresh-water lake remained. Into it coarse 
sandy detritus was unloaded by apparently rejuvenated 
streams. The deposits thus accumulated have been 
called Paskapoo by J. £. Tyrrell in 1886. The account 
states that the pressure which caused the gentle up- 
arching of the central plains region, was relieved at 
the end of Edmonton time, by the uplifting of the Rockies, 
The plains sank again beneath the surface of a sea which 
was now land-locked, and was converted into a great 
fresh-water lake. This as it became loaded with sed¬ 
iments sank until approximately 5000 feet of sand¬ 
stones were deposited in the deepest places. 

The last geological event effecting Alberta 
was another period of elevation after Paskapoo time 
which folded the foothills to their present condition 
and drove off most of the water of the Paskapoo lake. 

Plates I to IX give a general idea of the 
various invasions and extents of deposition since 
Eenton time. The maps have been adapted from D. E. 
Dowling’s paper "The Cretaceous Sea in Alberta,” pub¬ 
lished in the Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Canada, 1915 (10). 

















































































32 


CHAPT3R III. 

Structure and Distribution of Formations Investigated . 

Structure in General .- A complete knowledge of the 
various structural relations of the geology throughout 
this province does not yet exist. Reconnaissance field 
work has been carried on over most of the province, 
which has given a general idea of the main flexures 
and displacement of the rocks. In general it is 
found that very little dislocation of the strata has 
occurred along the eaatern boundary. The dips are so 
gentle that they cannot be differentiated from sedi¬ 
mentary dip in most cases. 

An important exception to this condition 
exists in the southeast corner of the province. Here 
the Sweet Grass hills extrusion and the Bearpaw mountains 
igneous activity have caused an upwarping locally which 
exposes the whole section from Carboniferous to upper 
Montana, especially on the flanks of the Sweet Grass 
hills. Thus in general it might be stated that on the 
east the original flat-lying sediments are only very 
slightly disturbed. 

Coming west to the central belt of the pro¬ 
vince longitudinally, the structure of the strata is 
a gentle monoclinal fold, one flank remaining nearly 
horizontal and the western side dipping gently west- 






33 


ward. This westerly-dipping portion forms the eastern 
flank of a broad syncline which extends across Alberta 
to the zone which felt the effect of the last Tertiary 
mountain-building disturbance. This line is indicated 
on the accompanying map (Plate X) where the coloring, 
indicating the various formations, terminates. 

To the south this broad syncline narrows 
gradually until, near Lethbridge, it has become only 
a few miles wide. The east side has now changed from 
a monocline to an anticline (the Bow Island anticline) 
whose trend seems to have been governed by the Sweet 
Grass uplift. The southern boundary shows still 
another structure. The Sweet Grass arch of a some¬ 
what quaquaversal nature here brings the Colorado beds 
to the surface, just the northern extremity of the stru¬ 
cture being made apparent in this province by the sur¬ 
face exposures. To the north erosion has removed 
most of the beds which apparently lay upon the Devon¬ 
ian and pre-Cambrian more or less undisturbed. 

Throughout the central portion of the pro¬ 
vince, local flexures and faults may be encountered, 
for example, near Drumheller in the valley of the Red 
Deer river a local fault of 75 feet throw is encountered 
in the beds which are regionally dipping 2 to 4 degrees, 
northwestward. No doubt these represent the effects of 






' 






























. 

’ 




























































34 



LEGEND. 


Tertiary 


Edmonson 


B&ar £>ctu/. 


Belly Rw'er 


JB anWm. 


A^-Geol 

bou n <tqry. 











































































35 


the passage of the glaciers of Quaternary times with 
their subsequent local readjustments of equilibrium. 

Lying between the areas described and the 
front ranges of the Canadian Rockies is a zone known 
generally as the disturbed belt. The belt varies 
in width from 15 to 50 miles, being shown by J. S. 
Stewart (33) to be approximately 15 miles wide and 
found to be 50 miles wide in the region west of Rocky 
Mountain House and Red Leer. In the south the 
structures are more tightly folded, and westward dip¬ 
ping faults prevail. Along the North Saskatchewan the 
anticlines and synclines are broader, being separated 
generally by faults with no prevalent direction of dip. 
This disturbed region brings to the surface exposures 
of all the strata from the lower Cretaceous to the top 
of the section (see bibliography numbers 33, 17, 18, 8, 
and 28). 

Distribution of Formations Investigated .- The areal 
geology map (Plate X) indicates in general the present 
geographic distribution of the outcrops of formations 
studied. The Benton (light green) is exposed mainly 
in the northern part of the province. A small exposure 
occurs on the south boundary of the province in the 
vicinity west of Coutts, Alberta. It also makes fre¬ 


quent appearances in the folded region of the disturbed 








36 . 


belt. No study was made of specimens from this form¬ 
ation as it is readily recognizable as a black to grey¬ 
ish marine shale. 

Five specimens were studied, taken from 
Belly River horizons. This formation is shown in 
blue on the map and is seen to constitute a major part 
of the geological outcrop over the province. The area 
indicated however, represents the surface exposure of 
all of the beds from the Belly River series, and in¬ 
cludes formations from marine to fresh-water in char¬ 
acter. 

The next formation, the Bearpaw, is a marine 
shale and is not of great thickness. It is shown 
occupying a rather narrow strip from Lethbridge to a 
point just south of Lesser Slave lake passing a few 
miles north of Edmonton. It has been eroded from a 
great part of southern Alberta, owing to the upfolding 
of the Bow Island anticline, but it comes into the south¬ 
eastern corner of the province and is quite extensive 
in southern Saskatchewan. The two last formations, 
the Edmonton and Paskapoo are shown occupying a broad 
depression. The Edmonton occurs outcropping as a 
border around the central Paskapoo portion, which 
evidently represents the deposits in the trapped 
waters of the lake formed after Edmonton time. 







. 







■ 












. 























. 










. 


. 


















37 


CHAPTER IV. 

Location of Rock Specimens Examined 

Rock samples from eleven localities were 
examined. In each case care was taken that the speci¬ 
men was typical of the whole bed and representative of 
that part of the formation. The specimens were taken 
during the field seasons of 1916, 1921 and 1922, being 
collected by members of the Geology Department of this 
University. 

A specimen was taken from the Paskapoo ex¬ 
posure at Rocky Mountain House, Alberta. The east 
bank of the river for four miles downstream from the 
town takes the form of a sandstone escarpment. This 
specimen. Ho. 1, was collected near the base of this 
cliff. 

There are five specimens of Edmonton sandstone 
two were collected from along the North Saskatchewan 
river near Edmonton and three from the Red Leer river 
near Lrumheller. No. 2 was taken from an exposure 
on the south bank of the stream about five miles west 
of the city, while No. 3 came from a point downstream 
four miles from Edmonton. Nos. 4, 5 and 6 came from 
the Edmonton formation exposures just south of the town 
of Rosedale, which is five miles southeast of Lrumheller 
Nos. 4 and 5 arg samples from between coal seams 6 and 
























































38 . 

7 (see Third Annual Report, Mineral Resources of 
Alberta) and from points not far separated laterally. 
No. 6 was taken from lower in the series and from a 
harder stratum of sandstone. These harder bands of 
sand occur commonly in the Edmonton formation in 
places having the effect of causing flat-topped 
buttes. 

From the Belly River formation five samples 
were also taken. Numbers 7 and 8 came from the 
southern boundary of the province while Nos. 9, 10 
and 11 are from along the North Saskatchewan river 
east of Edmonton, Alberta. No. 7 is a specimen of 
the Eagle sandstone collected from a point just a 
few hundred yards south of Coutts, Alberta. This 
stratum forms precipitous hillsides where it out¬ 
crops. No. 8 is from the same horizon but the 
locality in this case is on the south bank of Milk 
river about seven miles northeast of Coutts. No. 9 
is a specimen of Myrtle Creek sandstone which is the 
upper member of the Belly River series on the North 
Saskatchewan river. The sample was taken from a 
point one-half mile upstream from the mouth of Myrtle 
creek. No. 10 is from the Victoria sandstone, a 
lower member in the series, the location being three 


miles nort 


t of Pakan P. 0., about 78 miles 



39 


downstream from Edmonton. Ho. 11 is from the Bros~- 
seau member of the Belly River fresh to brackish water 
series. It is the lowest member in this series. 

The specimen was collected from the river bank just 
below Brosseau ferry which is in section 35, township 
55, range IE, and about 125 miles downstream from 
Edmonton. 

Below is a table showing age and location 
of the specimens studied. 


Ho. 

Age 

location 

1 

Paskapoo 

North Saskatchewan river - Rocky Moun¬ 
tain House, 

2 


North Saskatchewan river - 5 miles 
west of Edmonton, 

3 


North Saskatchewan river - 4 miles 
east of Edmonton, 

4 

Edmonton 

Red Beer river - Between seams 6 & 7, 
Roseda'le, Alberta, 

5 


Red Beer river - Between seams 6 & 7, 
Rosedale, Alberta, 

6 


Red Beer river - Between seams 3 and 4, 
Rosedale, Alberta, 

7 


Just south of Coutts, Alberta, 

8 ; 


Milk river - 7 miles northeast of 
Coutts, Alberta, 

9 


i Mile upstream from mouth of Myrtle 


Belly River 

creek 

10 

3 Miles below Pakan P. 0., North 
Saskatchewan river, 

11 


Hear Brosseau ferry - Sec. 35, Tp. 55, 

R. 12. 


Table III. 






















40 


The red dots on the areal geology map (plate X) indic¬ 
ate approximately the location from which the speci¬ 
mens studied, were taken. 



41 


CHAPTER V. 

Outline of Problem 

Taking for granted as pointed out in Chapter 
II, that the Dakota sandstone was the shore phase 
sandstone of the transgressing Upper Cretaceous sea, 
this member will not be considered as one of the 
sands for which criteria are sought® Its strati¬ 
graphic position and geographic location of outcrop 
are as a rule sufficient data for its determination. 

The Benton or Colorado does not contain 
sandstone members of importance which are hard to 
define by ordinary lithologic field distinctions. 

This paper then neglects these two groups, and the 
investigation deals specifically with rocks in the 
Montana group. As mentioned in Chapter II, the 
rocks of the Montana group that are outcropping over 
the larger part of Alberta, are members of three cycles 
of deposition from marine through brackish water to 
fresh. The common feature about the whole three 
cycles (see fig. 1) is the close resemblance that 
exists between the members of these cycles as seen 
in the field or in rock specimens; that is, there is 
little difference in appearance between say, the 
brackish water portions of the upper Belly River, 
Edmonton and lower Belly River. All contain dark 




42 


shales, sandstone bands, and closely related fresh¬ 
water invertebrate fauna as well as reptilian remains. 

The difficulty of the field geologist on 
encountering an isolated exposure of one of these mem¬ 
bers is a very considerable one. The problem is 
therefore, to ascertain some definite criteria other 
than fossil fauna or flora which may be used in deter¬ 
mining the position and age of such an outcrop. 

To accomplish this end the writer has con¬ 
ducted mechanical tests for determining the grades of 
material present, and microscopic (petrographic) ana¬ 
lyses to detect the actual minerals in a number of 
type specimens from widely separated localities. The 
location and description of the samples tested are given 
in Chapter IV. In the mechanical tests the samples 
were graded for roundness, composition of matrix and 
relative amounts of grains, silt, and fine mud present. 
The method of testing is described in Part II. The 
microscopic examinations were on thin sections cut 
from the rock specimens, the minerals being determined 
by their optical properties. 



43 . 


Part II , 

CHAPTER VI. 

TECHNOLOGY OF INVESTIGATION 

In order to determine the physical constitu¬ 
tion and mineral composition of the various sandstones 
studied, two types of analyses were adopted. Thin 
slices of the solid rock were prepared and studied under 
transmitted and reflected light with a petrographic 
microscope. Also the samples were carefully disinteg¬ 
rated and passed through a mechanical grader, that is 
subjected to an elutriation process which by hydraulic 
means divided the sample into grades of size. 

This report shall be divided into two parts, 
one giving the results of the microscopic examination 
and the other the mechanical analyses. 

Microscopic Examination 
The thin sections were prepared from chips 
of the rock and polished down to a thickness of approx¬ 
imately .03 mm. These were studied by the usual 
petrographic methods to determine the identity of the 
transparent and translucent minerals present. Some 
difficulty was encountered in differentiating the 
quartz and feldspar grains as the grains were so small 
that the optic characters yielded by so small an area 
proved insufficient to give a clear cut identity. In 






44 


differentiating these two minerals where cleavage and 
twinning were not apparent, the writer had to resort 
to a study of the interference figure of each grain. 

To do this convergent light was passed through the 
particular grain and a high power (381 diameter) image 
obtained. In most cases the uniaxial or biaxial 
figure obtained was sufficient to determine whether 
that grain was quartz or feldspar* Many grains how¬ 
ever, as will be seen from the photomicrographs that 
follow, did not yield a figure sufficiently well de¬ 
fined to give a distinction. In the case of each 
photomicrograph a number of outstanding grains have 
been lettered to indicate their composition. 

In each case rough Rosiwal measurements 
were made to ascertain the approximate relative per¬ 
centages of quartz and feldspar grains present; these 
two being associated as the predominant mineral matter 
present in all specimens. For determination of the 
opaque minerals such as magnetite and coal or carbon¬ 
aceous matter, the examination was by reflected light. 

A white paper was placed under the slide, on the micro¬ 
scope stage and a beam of light from a carbon electrode 
arc directed upon the slide. This brings the opaque 
minerals into high relief and they are readily recogn¬ 


ized 



45 


The photomicrographs were taken by means 
of a vertically directed camera adjusted to the 

barrel of a Leitz petrographic microscope. A low 
power objective was used and part of the magnification 
was gained from the focal length of the camera. 

The objective lens was 32 mm. (numerical 

aperture). 

Machine factor for the camera - 6.6 seconds. 

Time of exposure - 20 seconds. 

The light used was transmitted through the 
slide by a mirror, upon which a beam from an electric 
arc light was directed. A blue filter was placed in 

this beam to give clearer definition to the image. In 
each case a short description of the megascopic char¬ 
acters of the sandstone is given although this factor 
is not of major significance in the determination of 
the specimens. On the following pages the detail 
description for each sandstone with a photomicrograph 
is given. 



Specimen No. 1 


PASNAP00 SANDSTONE 


Megascopic Chara c teristics. 

Color - Buff colored on weathered surface, pale 
bluish grey on fresh surface; dark impurities 
lend a pepper and salt appearance to the sample. 
Texture - Soft sandstone, much crumbly matter in 
grains, which are rounded and of uneven size. 

Microscopic Characteristics. 



(a) Mineral Composition - 
approximately 60 per 
cent, of grains are 
quartz; 15 per cent, 
are fragments of 
chert and cherty 
limestone; 10 per 
cent, are of feld¬ 
spar (some badly de 
composed); about 
10 per cent, are 
grains of crystal¬ 
line calcite. The 
remainder are dis¬ 
torted fragments 
of carbonaceous 
shale. 

Access or y Minerals - 
Fragments of highly 
altered limonitic 
matter and carbon¬ 
aceous or coaly frag¬ 
ments. 

(b) Matrix - Mainly 
crystalline calcite 
replaced by argil¬ 
laceous matter in 
spots. 

(c) Structure and Physical Featu res - Crains are 
rounded to sub-angular, vary very much in size 
from LQ mm. down to fine particles. Feldspars 
are very small grains, quartzes and cherts are 
large. Crains are close packed. 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

Q-quartz; Ch-chert; Lis- 
limestone; F-feldspar. 















Specimen ITo. 2 


■3DM0NT0N SANDSTONE 


Megascopic Characteristics . 

Color - Light bluish grey on fresh and weathered 
surface. 

Texture - Fine grained with sharp grains of un¬ 
even size; large part of rock composed of soft 
cementing matter. Rock swells on being immersed 
in water. 


Microscopic Characteristies . 



fa) Mineral Composition- 
About 35 per cent, of 
grains are of plagio- 
clase feldspar with 
a large amount of 
badly decomposed 
feldspar. 10 - 15 
per cent, of grains 
are quartz. Very 
fine calcite grains 
and chert aggre¬ 
gates make up the 
remainder. 

Accessory Minerals - 
Magnetite is abund¬ 
ant as well as a 
little biotite and 
some limonitic 
matter, decomposi¬ 
tion product of 
magnetite or biotite. 

(b) Matrix - A mix¬ 
ture of calcite and 
bentonite with 
either prevailing 
at different spots. 
Matrix is of irreg¬ 
ular quality. 

(c ) Structure and Ph;> 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter, 

Q-quartz; F-feidspar; 
BF-decomposed feldspar. 


real Features - Grains are 


very angular and vary very much in size, but do 
not get larger than Z mm. in diameter. The per¬ 
centage of grains to cement in rock is very low. 













48 


Specimen ITo* 3. 


EDMONTON SANDSTONE. 


Megascopic Characteristics . 


Color - Light greyish to bluish grey, same on 
weathered or fresh surfaces. 

Texture - Even grained and finely laminated. 
Very fine grains, fresh surface is gritty and 
sharp. 

Microscopic Characteristics . 



f a) Mineral Co mp osi 
About 80 per cent, 
grains are of plagi 
clase feldspar, 
quartz makes up 
from 10 - 15 per 
cent. Chert and 
calcite grains 
are around 5 per 
cent. Hornblende 
and magnetite are 
fairly abundant. 
Accessory Minerals - 

Practically all of 

plagioclases con¬ 
tain orientated 
zircon crystals. 
Magnetite is very 
abundant. 

(b) Matrix - The 
matrix is practic¬ 
ally all bentonite 
mixed with fine 
feldspar particles. 

(c) Structure and 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

F-feld spar;Q-quartz. 


Physical Features - 
Grains are sub-angular 

to angular and are of even size, averaging about 
A mm. in diameter. They are closely packed 
and not much decomposed. Any decomposition 
occurring has taken place in situ. 
















Specimen Ho-. 4 


MDMONTON SAILD3TONS. 


Megascopi c Cha racteristics. 

Color - Light bluish grey to whitish. 

TexTur e - Very fine grained, grains are of even 
•size. Cement is soft and stone disintegrates 
easily. Swells upon being immersed in water. 


Microscopic Characteristic s. 



(a) Mineral Composition - 
Fine grains are mixture 
of quartz and feld¬ 
spar with quartz 
slightly more pre 
valent. About 15 
per cent, of 
are clear crystal 
line calcite, in 
some cases iron- 
stained. They 
show a greater 
index of refrac¬ 
tion as they be¬ 
come more ferru¬ 
ginous . 

Accessory Minerals - 

Orientated zircons 
in the feldspars, 
and much magnetite 
as separate grains. 

Some carbonaceous 
matter is present. 

(b) Matrix - A mix- 
clayey 

and fine 


ture of 
bentonite 
felspathic particles 
(c) Structure and 
very 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

Q-quartz; F-feldspar. 


eatures 


fine, the 
•rains are loosely 


Physical F 

largest abput .1 mm. 


held in the 


m 

bentonitic 


Crains are 
diameter. 


matrix, 













50 


Specimen No* 5. 


EDMONTON SANDSTONS• 


Megascopic Characteristics * 

Color - Whitish to bluish grey. 

Texture - Fairly even grained, grains held loose¬ 
ly in soft matrix. Percentage of grains to 
matrix is low. Has gritty sharp feel on fresh 
surface. 


Microscopic Characteristics. 




(a) Mineral Compos ition - 
About 60 per cent, of 
particles are plagio- 
clase feldspars, 30 
per cent, are quartz 
and chert grains. 

Accessory Minerals - 

Some magnetite pre¬ 
sent, also zircon 
inclusions in feld¬ 
spars; carbonace¬ 
ous matter and 
shaly fragments 
as well as hydr¬ 
ated iron in 
small irregular 
masses, A 
trace of musco¬ 
vite is also 
found. 

(b) Matrix - 
Colloidal ben¬ 
tonite mainly, 
calcitic in 
isolated spots, 
fc) Structure and 
Physical Features - 

Crains are of fairly even size, smaUand loosely 
aggregated. All grains are angular to sub- 
angular. They show no regrowth or distortion 
since deposition. Remarkably small amount of 
grains to mass of rock. 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

Q-quartz; F-feldspar; 
C-chert, 

















51 


Specimen No. 6. EDMONTON SANDSTONE. 


Megascopic Characteristics . 

Color - Dull grey color, pepper and salt type, 
shows faint greenish tint when fresh. 

Texture - Very hard and not evenly grained. 
Crystal faces and iron specks visible; is very 
compact and sharp. 


Microscopic Characteristics. 



fa) Mineral Composition - 
Plagioclase feldspar con¬ 
stitutes approximately 
70 per cent, of grains, 
quartz makes up 20 
per cent, while chert 
and limonitic iron 
make up the comple¬ 
ment . 

Accessory Minerals - 

Sircon inclusions 

occur in the feld¬ 
spars. Magnetite 
is common in the 
rock, some dark car¬ 
bonaceous matter is 
also present. 

fb) Matrix - Almost 

entirely recrystal¬ 
lized calcite, grown 
in radiating manner 
about the grains. x 50 Diameters, single 

fc) Structure and nicol, arc light, blue 


Physical features - filter, 

drains in fairly com- F-feldspar; Q-quartz. 

pact arrangement, calcite 
fills all interstitial space. 

The calcite is apparently secondary in origin. The 
average grain is sub-angular, and there is practi¬ 
cally no decomposition shown. This rock is a re¬ 
sistant member in its series. 















Specimen ITo. 7 


52 


3AGL3 SANDSTONS 
(Belly River) 


Megascopic Characteristics . 


Color - Brownish yellow varying to pale grey, 
showing yellowish iron stain specks. 

exture - Compact sandstone with soft calcitic 
cement, making it easy to disintegrate. Fairly 
even grained and angular. 


Micro scopic Characteris tics. 



(a) Mineral Composition - 
Albite and other plag- 
ioclase feldspars 
make up about 70 per 
cent, of grains, 20 
per cent, (approxi¬ 
mately) are quartz. 

Calcite in angular 
crystals and horn¬ 
blende in all stages 
of decomposition 
make up the remaind¬ 
er, some carbonace¬ 
ous matter is also 
present. 

Accessory Minerals - 
Some plagioelases 

show zircon inclu¬ 
sions. A trace of 
magnetite is visible. 

(b) Matrix - Loosely 
aggregated calcite makes 
up most of the cement¬ 
ing material, some spots 
are argillaceous. Cal¬ 
cite is in part crypto- 
crystalline. 

(c) Structure and Physical Features - Rock shows 
mainly feldspars and hornblende, was apparently 
not transported very great distance. Owes its 
compact nature to secondary crystallization of 
calcite. Crains are angular to sub-angular and 
average about .2 mm. in diameter. 


x 30 Diameters,single 
nicol, arc light, 
blue filter. 

F-feldspar; Q-quartz. 













Specimen TTo. 8 


MILK BIVKB SANDSTONE 

(Belly Biver) 


Megascopic Character!stics , 

Co lor - Greenish to light grey, turning to light 
buff on weathered surface. 

Texture - A soft stone, breaking up easily in the 
fingers, lacks cementing matter in hard form. 
Fresh surface is gritty owing to angularity. 


Microscopic Characteristics. 



(a) Mineral Composition 
Quartz grains make up 
45 per cent, of part¬ 
icles and plagioclase 
feldspars 40 per cent, 
Calcite in crystals 

is also present to 
about 10 per cent. 
Accessory Minerals - 
Biotite and horn¬ 
blende are fairly 
abund ant f Magnet- 
ite occurs as a 
trace. Iron-stain¬ 
ed siliceous aggre¬ 
gates and limonitic 
specks also occur. 

(b) Matrix - The 
rock lacks any pre¬ 
valent matrix, al¬ 


though traces of cal- 
citic cement remain, 
the remainder having 
been leached away. 

This rock is the car¬ 
rier of strong artesian 
water flows (see D. B. 
Bowling: Geo-1.-Surv.Can. , 


x30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

Q-quartz; F-feldspar; 
Ca-calcite. 


Sum.Kept.,1915,p.104). 

(c) Structure and Physical Features .- Grains are 
angular to sub-angular, loosely arranged and lack 
cohesive cement, making the rock easily eroded and 
porous. The grains average .1 mm. in diameter and 
are of fairly even size. 




















Specimen No. 9 


B3LIY RIV3B SANDSTONE 
(Myrtle Creek) 


Megascopic Characteristics. 


Color - Greyish, to light buff color, showing many 
limonitie brownish specks. 

Texture - Compact sandstone, angular grained, 
gritty and sharp on fresh surface. 


Microscopic Characteristics . 



(a) Mineral Composition - 
Approximately 65 per 
cent, of grains are 
plagioclase feldspar, 

10 per cent, are 
quartz, calcite and 
limonitie grains 
make up the remainder. 

Some chert is also 
present. 

Accessory Minerals - 

Some plagioclases 

contain zircon in¬ 
clusions; some fer¬ 
ruginous specks are 
present (possibly 
hydrated magnetite). 

(b) Matrix - All cal¬ 
cite, in some places 
showing fibrous growth 
between grains. 

(c) Structure and x 30 Diameters, single 

Physical Features - Com- nicol, arc light, blue 
pact arrangement of filter. 

grains, all interstitial Q-quartz; F-feldspar. 


space filled with cal¬ 
cite. Grains are angular and average .1 to .15 mm 
in diameter. 














Specimen No. 10 


BULLY RIVUR 3A1TDST0FU 


Megascopic Characteristics. 


Color - Light buff color, becoming more highly 
colored on weathered surface. 

Textnre - Compact sandstone, resistant to weather 
ing, of uneven grain, being gritty on fresh 
surface. 


Microscopic Characteristics. 



(a) Mineral Compos 
Quartz forms appro 
ately 60 per cent, 
grains present, 
plagioclase feld¬ 
spars, 20 per 
cent, and chert 
approximately 

15 per cent. 
Accessory Minerals 

Some muscovite, 
occasional apatite 
inclusions in feld 
spar and a small 
amount of mag¬ 
netite. 

(b) Matrix. 


umnar growth 
pure calcite 
the matrix, 
is little other 
impurity to the 
matrix. 

(c 


Col- 

of 

forms 

There 


) Structure 


and 


single 
. blue 


x 30 Diameters, 
nicol, arc light, 
filter. 

Q-quartz; F-feld spar; 
Ch-chert 


Physical Features- 
Oraihs are large, of 
uneven size and are 

close packed. More of grains in this specimen 
are sub-angular, many having rounded corners. 
Much of the finer grained material is feldspar, 
apparently in transportation, the feldspars here 


have suffered more disintegration. The grains 
range from .3 to .05 mm. in diameter. 













Specimen No. 11 


BELLY DIVER sandstone. 


Megascop ic Characteristics. 

Color - Brownish grey color, becoming light buff 
on weathered surface. 

exture - "Sven and fine grained, very compact. 

The rock is heavy, hard and resistant to weather- 
ing. 


Microscop ic Characteristies. 



(a) Mineral Composition - 
Plagioclase feldspars 
make up approximately 
65 per cent, of grains, 
quartz and chert about 
30 per cent. Biotite, 
coaly carbonaceous 
fragments and calcite 
grains make up the 
remainder. 

Accessory Minerals - 
Some small apatites 
in the feldspar, as 
well as infrequent 
inclusions of 
zircon. Magnetite 
is very sparingly 
present. 

(b) Matrix - Com¬ 
posed almost entire¬ 
ly of calcite re- 
crystallized . 

(c) Structure and 
Physical features - 
A close packed sand¬ 
stone, of even grain, 
the grains averaging 

between .2 and .1 mm. in diameter. The angular¬ 
ity of the grains is not so marked as in specimens 
from the Edmonton formation. The rock is solid 
with little interstitial space owing to calcite 
cement. 


x 30 Diameters, single 
nicol, arc light, blue 
filter. 

7-f e 1 d flmar • 0-rmart z . 


















57 

























































































































58 


Mechanical Analyses 

Owing to the impure nature of the detrial 
matter of the major portion of the Upper Cretaceous 
hydroclastics, mechanical separation of the grades 
of material present was undertaken. In all cases 
the sandstones appeared impure and made up of dif¬ 
ferent grades of sediment from sand grains to colloid¬ 
al matter. A rough division of each sample into 
three sizes of particle was made. This grading was 
done by means of an elutriation process which is des¬ 
cribed below. The use of this apparatus is Intro¬ 
duced by T. Crook, A.R.C.Sc. (Dublin) in Hatch and 
Rastall's Text Book of Petrography (43). The prin¬ 
ciple involved is the well known hydraulic flotation 
effect of moving water. Apparatus is so arranged 
that the speed of movement in different chambers, of 
a stream of running water, is regulated and measurable. 
Water rising or travelling at different speeds has 
corresponding ability to carry with it particles of 
different size and weight. It is reasoned that if 
particles of known weight subside at certain exper¬ 
imentally determined rate in still water then if the 
water is given a rate of motion equal to the rate of 
subsidence of such particles,they will be suspended 
and with slight increase of speed in the water will 






59 



Plate XI. 


Photograph of Elutriation Apparatus. 















60 


be transported by it. The apparatus is designed to 
create these conditions. (See fig. 3 and Plate XI). 

Description of Apparatus .- The apparatus consists 
essentially of three vessels, a pressure or head 
regulating reservoir and two vessels of known dia¬ 
meter, B and C, arranged in tandem, the larger above 
the smaller, all connected by means of tubing such 
that the required circulation is set up. 

A is an open vessel closed at the bottom 
by a cork through which three tubes are introduced, 
one leads to the water supply tap, another acts 
simply as an overflow to carry away excess water and 
the third is fitted with a funnel at the top. One 
tube is connected by tubing to the base of vessel B 
and constitutes the starting point of the secondary 
water circuit. The primary circuit of water is 
from the tap to vessel A which it fills to the fun¬ 
nel D level and excess water returns to sink by the 
overflow tube. This arrangement insures a perfectly 
steady head of water being supplied to the secondary 
circuit, A need be no definite size but should be 
large enough to accomodate the three tubes inserted 
and take care of slight flowage rate changes from the 
water main in use. 

B is a long slender tube open at both ends. 







61 


the lower end is drawn out conically leaving a circular 
aperture about 2 mm. in diameter. It is 30 cm. in 
length but may be longer if desired (30 cm. was long 
enough to handle the 20 gram samples used in these 
tests). It has an internal diameter of 1.4 cm. 

The constricted end is joined to the tube from the fun¬ 
nel water supply, A screw pinch clip is placed near 
this point to cut off the circulation at this point 
when necessary. The top end of B is attached by a 
short piece of tubing to the other vessel C. At 
this point also a screw pinch clip is placed which 
functions after the separation has been effected. 

The vessel C is open at both ends, these 
being drawn out conically, the lower end about 1.4 
cm. in diameter and the upper end large enough for 
a cork through which two tubes are inserted. This 
vessel is about 10 cm. long in its cylindrical portion. 
It has an internal diameter of 9.6 cm. This provides 
a cross-section area which is 47 times that of tube 
B. Through the cork at the upper end of C, two glass 
tubes are inserted, one is quite long, 70 cm. and 
open at the end. This acts as a pressure guage and 
records the head of water in effect in C. The other 
tube is bent and constricted at the end. It is fit¬ 
ted with a rubber delivery tube and the water carrying 



62 . 

the mud and fine material finds its way out from it 
into a container or into the sink as the case demands. 

Method of Operation .- The primary circuit from the 
water tap is set in motion until A is filled and the 
overflow is running steadily,then the pinch cock below 
B is opened and the secondary circuit is established. 
This is allowed to run on until any foreign matter 
has been cleared away and the system reaches a steady 
equilibrium. Then the pinch cock below G is closed 
and a small part of the water from G is withdrawn. 

The weighed sample is then introduced into C by means 
of a funnel and wash bottle, a jet of water being 
blown over and through the funnel to carry in all the 
fine material. The cork is replaced and the pinch 
cock below C is opened and the separation begins. 

The heavier grains make their way downward against 
the current into vessel B, the silt grade material 
does not move from G while the fine mud and clay or 
colloid particles move off through 0. The current 
is kept going until absolute clearness of the water 
passing off through B is ascertained. Both pinch 
cocks are now closed and the two grades of material 
remain in vessels B and C. The material passing 
through 0 is collected by running the water into 
large flasks and allowing the material to slowly 




63 


settle out, the water from above being carefully 
siphoned off. The remainder is then dried out on 
a steam bath and collected for examination or 
weighing. 

The silt in vessel C and the sand in B 
are removed into large beakers with the aid of a 
jet from a wash bottle. They are allowed to quiet¬ 
ly settle then the water is siphoned off and the 
samples dried on a steam bath. They are then care¬ 
fully weighed and the percentages of grades computed. 

Units of Measurement and Methods Used in these Tests .- 
In the apparatus above described, the diameters of the 
two vessels B and C were given as 1.4 and 9.6 cm. It 
has been found experimentally that the rate of flow 
in one is 7.0 mm., while in the C vessel it is .15 mm., 
that is when the head is so regulated that water rises 
in B at the rate of 7.0 mm. per second. These values 
are the hydraulic values of sand particles of approx¬ 
imately .01 and .10 mm. respectively. 

Thus when the current is flowing grains vary¬ 
ing in diameter down to .10 mm. will resist the upward 
current and remain in B. All smaller than .10 mm. in 
diameter are carried to the larger vessel and are sus¬ 
pended there. From C all particles having a less 
hydraulic value than .15 mm. per second, or a diameter 







64 


less than ,01 mm., are carried away through the outlet 

0 . 

A handy and accepted size classification of 
clastic material is as follows: 

Large stones and boulders - more than 10 mm. in diameter 


Gravel - ........... 10 - 1 mm. TT " 

Sand - . . . .. 1 - 0.1 mm.” TT 

Silt...0.1- .01 mm." " 

Mud (clay) -.. less than .01 mm.” " 


(Hatch & Rastall, page 343) 

Thus the apparatus as set above is satis¬ 
factory for a division of the sample into three grades, 
sand, silt and mud or clay. The method followed by 
the writer in making the analyses was as follows: 

(a) The rock was, if soft, broken carefully on 
wood to small lumps and gently disintegrated math a 
mortar and pestle. The material was passed over a 
40 mesh sieve from time to time in order that only 
the lumps of the cohering grains were handled, and 
the finer material would not be fractured or powder¬ 
ed. All of a given piece of the rock was disinte¬ 
grated and no part which would not pass through the 
sieve was rejected. The sieve apertures were large 
enough to accomodate the largest grains. This 
sieved sample is then ready for weighing. 

In the case of the harder sandstones, they 
were subjected to a soaking and freezing, then were 







65 


thawed and broken up and soaked in warm water again 
and rolled and gently crushed while wet. In this 
way very little disintegrating of the individual 
particles was effected. After the sample had been 
disintegrated wet,it was dried thoroughly on a steam 
bath. The sieving was done in this case also, to 
avoid unnecessarily handling the already separated 
grains, 

(b) The next step was the weighing of samples to 
run through the elutriator. Beakers were weighed 
carefully to thousandths of a gram. These were 
counter balanced on a beam balance and a 20 gram 
weight added to the counter balancing weights. Then 
the sand was poured into the beaker until a fine 
balance was attained. The sample weighing 20 
grams was then introduced into the vessel C of the 
elutriator which had been previously running to 
insure a clean and steady circulation. While the 
sand is being introduced the pinch cock below C is 
kept closed. When all the sample is in C the 
pinch cock is opened and the circulation is set up. 

In these experiments the sample was sub¬ 
jected to the stream for from 1 hour to 1-|- hours 
to insure that the sand and silt grades were perfect¬ 
ly washed and that no fine material remained in C. 





66 


fc) After the washing and separation the two 
pinch cocks are closed simultaneously or the one 
below C first, and the samples were taken out of 
the two vessels, being washed into large bea^kers. 

The excess water in each case was siphoned off 
and the remainder removed by evaporation over a 
steam bath, 

fd) The samples when thoroughly dry and cooled 
were weighed, having been dried in previously weighed 
beakers and the results recorded. 

The following table indicates the results 
obtained. In each case a 20 gram sample was used, 
thus to convert to percentage the number of grams 
has been multiplied by 5 and this table gives the 
percentages of the three grades of particles present 
in the sandstone in each case. 

Some of the samples were tested several 
times and the best or average values used in this 
table. 

Instrument for Gauging Houndness of drains .- When 
this investigation was begun the writer anticipated 
the need for an instrument for obtaining the re¬ 
lative roundness of the constituent grains of a 
sandstone and a means whereby to handily compare 























Graph of Cur-^e adopted tor 

ROUNDNESS GAUGING INSTRUMENT 

Being the. fa of- a regu tar,symmetrical,ellif>se 
Equation - 2* + -* I, urhvre. a^6 0 , b 20 

Scale. ~/Umt ~ ’ZS Inches- 






Values as 
plotted. 


h 

X 

o 

CO 

1 

599 

2 

59 7 

3 

59 4 

4 

5 88 

6 

573 

8 

548 

10 

5) 9 

12 

48 0 

13 

45 6 

1 + 

42-8 

15 

397 

16 

36 0 

1? 

316 

18 

26 1 

19 

18 7 

Zo 

0 

19-5 

13 4 

19 75 

9 5 


Figure 4. 







































68 



Table IV 




























69 



Plate All. Photograph of Soundness ganging instrument. 

























70. 

the ratio of rounded to angular grains present. The 
literature reviewed availed no description of such an 
instrument and the writer got in touch with Mr. C. K. 
Wentworth of Iowa State University who is carrying 
on investigation with gravels and pebbles, and re¬ 
ceived from him the suggestion for a suitable instru¬ 
ment. An instrument was devised and constructed, 
a description of which follows. Plate XII is a photo¬ 
graph of the instrument without the liberating mech¬ 
anism yet attached. A trough-like runway with an 
accurately determined curvature from precipitous 
to flat is the main feature of the instrument. The 

curvature is that of quarter of an ellipse with the 
z z 

equation — 2 ™ 4 - z 1 , where a = 60 and b = EO. 

& b 

The units for a and b are as 1 unit = .£5 inches. 

This is shown in the accompanying figure (fig. 4), 
which is an actual size section of the instrument. 

The trough is arranged with sides 1 inch high and the 
flat bottom of the trough is 3 -J- inches wide and made 
of a strip of polished copper. 

The theory controlling the use of the 
roundness gauge is simply, that grains that are 
rounded will roll further down the curve toward the 
flat portion than will angular grains, both having 
the same (0) acceleration to begin with. It is 







71 


plain that different division points for grains 
in say four classes, angular, sub-angular, rounded, 
spherical, will be necessary for various diameters 
(weights) of grains, that is grains of greater 
weight but equal roundness will roll further. Simple 
experimentation should provide a curve of these 
varying values* The sand to be tested should be 
weighed out, say 2 to 5 grams, and placed against 
the copper bottom near the top of the curve and 
then carefully and gradually liberated. Division 
points marked on the trough sides indicating the 
degree of angularity were first established. The 
grains stopping between these marks may be collected 
and weighed and the ratios computed. 

This description is given here despite 
the fact the instrument was not used by the writer 
on the above described samples. It was soon 
found by microscopic examination that the angular¬ 
ity of practically all of the grains of the speci¬ 
mens was very pronounced. Likewise the sands 
analysed were in some cases too finely grained to 
give definite results on such an instrument (see 
photo page 49). The main use for such information 
as the roundness gauge should yield will be in 
determining the mode of deposition and amount of 






72 


mechanical rounding the sand grains have been sub¬ 
jected to. It is expected that future need will 
arise for an instrument of this nature, and its 
description is therefore included in this paper. 



73 . 


CHAPTER VII. 

DISCUSSION OF RESULTS 
From a study of the samples of sandstone 
under the microscope a number of obscure features 
become apparent. The more noticeable megascopic 
features are color and weight, but these properties 
are not reliable enough to use as definite criteria 
for Upper Cretaceous beds. The mechanical tests 
yielded information as to the percentage of colloid¬ 
al and clayey matter present with reference to the 
amounts of sand and silt particles. 

Results of Megascopic Examination 
Samples from the Belly River series all have 
a tendency to buff coloration especially on the 
weathered surface, A common gradation is from 
bluish grey on a fresh surface to buff when weather¬ 
ed. The clay collected from the elutriation shows 
buff coloration in all cases. This is due to the 
amount of disseminated iron oxide present. All 
samples from the Belly River formation are more com¬ 
pact and consequently heavier than those from the 
Edmonton formation. This feature is no doubt due 
in part at least, to the fact that the Belly River 
beds have been more highly compressed by overlying 
younger strata. 








Results of Microscopic Examination 


74 # 


In Memoir 112, C.O.3., 1919, J.3.Stewart 
late of the Canadian Geological Survey, lists the 
results of his petrographic findings on 23 slides 
of rocks from the Belly River and St. Mary f s form¬ 
ations. He finds quartz to he slightly dominant in 
the samples from both series, but the ratio of quartz 
to feldspar grains varies through wide limits. It 
is noticeable also that no magnetite is recorded and 
that biotite, chlorite, muscovite, and zircon are 
recorded throughout. No bentonite is noted, most 
of the matrix being calcite. This may be explained 
by the fact that his samples were collected from 
near the mountains where percolating ground waters 
coming from the limestone mountains to the west might 
be impregnated with calcium carbonate. 

The rocks described by Stewart could not 
be expected to correspond very closely with those 
of this paper as their point of deposition was much 
nearer the source or mother terrain of the sediments 
and would be therefore, subject to very different 
conditions than those deposited far out as were the 
majority of the sands here described. The prepond¬ 
erance of quartz grains and lack of bentonite is 
possibly due to this reason, the heavy quartz having 





75. 

the tendency to be deposited first and the colloidal 
bentonite having remained suspended until quieter 
conditions prevailed. 

The specimens described in this paper are 
from widely separated localities and in all cases from 
a reasonable distance out from the shore of the body 
of water in which they were laid down. The table 
below gives in summary the mineral constituents 
noted from these sandstones. No endeavour was made 
to ascertain the exact amounts of decomposed feld¬ 
spar, limonite, calcite, magnetite, biotite, horn¬ 
blende, apatite or zircon. These constituents occur 
in minor quantities only, their noticeable presence 
or absence is sufficient for the needs of the 
present investigation. 

The Belly Biver rocks show less decompos¬ 
ition of the feldspathic material than do the 
Edmonton, likewise there is slightly more undecom¬ 
posed chert present. Both series show all degrees 
of variation in the ratio of quartz to feldspar. 

One important point of general difference however, 
is the prevailing preponderance in the Edmonton 
of feldspar grains over quartz. 

In the matter of hydrated iron as limon¬ 
ite (amorphous) and the other oxides, the Edmonton 




76 


8 S 


© 00 

0 0 0 0 

! p o 

| 

1 O 1 o o 

O 1 o o o 

a £ 


cd cd cd 

cd cd cd cd 

ft ft 


£ £ £ 

£ £ £ £ 

<tj IS3 


P P P 

P P P P 

0 0 
ft 


0 0 

r£ r£ 0 r£ 

•H I £ 


o o 

o o o o 

i ft £ 0 

i 

cd cd i i i 

£ £ l cd £ 

O 


£ £ 

B B £ B 

ft O 

PQ W 


P P 

p 

0 

• 

• • 


-p 

ft 

ft ft 

ft ft ft ££ 

ft 

ft 

ft ft 0 

ft ft Ph ft ft 

o^. 

cd 

cd cd o 

cd cd cd cd cd 

*— 1 


cd 


cd 

00 

LO LO LQ £ LO 

LO O LO LO LO 

o 


H ft rH 

<— 1 f — 1 ft ft rH 

1 

ft 


0 

0 0 0 0 

0 0 



ft ft ■— 1 1— 1 

£ ft 

I 

O O O P o 

P P | P P 

&0ft 


£ £ £ P £ 

P P P P 

05 


S & B ft a 

•H ft ft ft 



rH 

ft i—1 i—i ■—1 

8 

0 

0 

0 

£ 0 

rH 

rH ,£,£,£ ft 

ft r£ 

O -P 

ft 

P o o o o 

P O 

0 ft 

p 

P £ £ £ £ 

P £ 1 


•H 

•H b b s a 

ft B 

ft 

rH 

ft 

i —I 

P 


at 

ft ft 

£ 

0V^ 


ft ftO 
i 1 cd cd ft 
j 

r£ ' 

LQ 

LO £ lO LO 

O 

ft 

P 

LO LO LO 





0 

03 £ 

O cd 


0 


ft ft 


r£ r£ r£ ft 

r£ 

S 02 


O OOP 

» 1 1 1 o 

O 


£ I £ £ P 

£ 

O ft 


b a Sft 

B 

0 0 

ft 

o 

*H 



!—1 



£ 




cd 




ft 


o* 


m 


lo o o o o 

O O LO O LO 



tQ 00 fcO v£> 

O ft vQ 02 vO 

0 




ft 




N 




! ft 


iO O* 


£^ 

O 

ft ft O O O 

O LO O O O 

cd 

VO 

ft I ft tQ ft 

02 ft ft vO tO 

£ 


O 

— ns 


ft 


• 

rH 

ft to ft LO VO 

O” 00 o* o ft 

o 



1—1 ft 

5S5 

O 

£ 



O 

o 


© 
i—l 

ft 

cd 

p 

£ 

J8AT£ 

s 1 

. CG 

o 

B 

^Tisa 

cd 

cd 

ft 


CO 

ft 

rH 







Note *- In this table no account is taken of the matrix material in compiling 
the percentages and so the constituents noted in per cent, do not sura: to 100 











































i, 












77 


specimens show much more than those from the Belly 
River. This point might appear strange in view 
of the prevalent buff coloration of the Belly 
River sandstone. It appears that the iron in the 
lower series is thoroughly oxidized and dissemin¬ 
ated as coatings over the constituent grains where¬ 
as in the Edmonton it occurs as isolated granules 
generally. Thus the Belly River would have more 
of a tendency to be tinted than the younger sand¬ 
stones. The Edmonton samples contain a notice¬ 
ably greater amount of magnetite as small dissem¬ 
inated grains. Galcite as a matrix is the general 
order in the Belly River samples. It occurs more 
as isolated fragmentary crystals in the Edmonton 
samples. The lower rocks have a much higher per¬ 
centage of calcium carbonate than do those of the 
Edmonton. The ferro-magnesian minerals, biotite 
and hornblende, are almost entirely confined to 
the Belly River samples in which they occur in 
comparative abundance in some cases. Zircon and 
apatite occur as inclusions in the feldspars of 
both series and are not common enough to be useful 
as criteria. 




Results of Mechanical Examination 


By means of the elutriator previously 
described, all the samples were analysed, mainly 
to ascertain the relative quantities of sand grains 
and clayey matter present in them. The results 
show that the Belly River sandstones have in gen¬ 
eral larger particles (see table IV). There is 
no prevailing ratio of sand to silt to clay (ben¬ 
tonite) in either series. There is however, one 

very important difference between the two sets of 

Sand' 

samples. The Edmonton A st ones contain between 18 
and 20 per cent, of clayey matter while those of 
the Belly River average 7,8 per cent, by weight 
clayey matter. Thus the Edmonton has from 2.5 
to 3 times as much colloidal matter and clay part¬ 
icles as has the Belly River. Three analyses 
which are discordant are marked by asterisks. Ho 
doubt the anomaly of these results would disappear 
if a large number of sandstones were analysed and 
averaged. Furthermore, the samples were not col¬ 
lected with the intention of submitting them to 
this form of analysis and the possibility exists 
that samples giving better representation of the 
normal sediment ratios could be obtained from those 


localities 
































. 

















i 
























79 


Possible Genesis of Bentonite .- There has been much 
uncertainty as to the derivation of the colloidal 
bentonitic clay which is so prevalent as a matrix in 
the Edmonton sands, and as shown by the above ana¬ 
lyses, The pure bentonite has the following chem¬ 
ical analysis: 


Silica ...... 

69.46 

Iron oxide .... 

3.35 

Alumina . 

16.25 

Lime. 

2.06 

Magnesia . 

2.76 

Alkalis ..... 

1.08 

Loss on ignition . 

5.04 


(Second Annual Report on the Mineral Resources of 
Alberta, page 36), It will be found that common 
feldspars have a very similar chemical composition. 
Orthoclase has 64.6 per cent, silica and 18.4 per 
cent, alumina; other feldspars have varying ratios 
of these constituents with iron and magnesia always 
present. In the above analysis of bentonite, iron 
and magnesia appear high, but are not to be consider¬ 
ed out of place in a material being compared with 
feldspar, since iron and magnesia are always present 
in feldspar as impurities. In this material they 
probably represent a slight concentration while 
the alkalis, sodium and potassium, have been re¬ 
moved by solution. The close resemblance of ben- 









80. 

tonite to feldspar leads the writer to believe that 
decomposition of feldspar is the chief "raison 
d’etre" of bentonite. 

W.G.Fearnsides of Sheffield University, 
England, suggested that the probable source of the 
prevalent bentonite in the Edmonton formation, was 
colloidal material produced by the aid of bacterial 
and chemical decomposition of feldspathic material. 
This action has taken place mainly in the lakes 
and still water regions at or near the heads of 
the streams which constituted the eastward run¬ 
off of the western mountains. The suggestion was 
prompted by observation in 1921 of the thick coat¬ 
ing of colloidal material on the rocks of the small 
lakes in the neighborhood of Jasper, Alberta and 
along the shallow reaches of the Athabaska river 
from Jasper east. This material is very similar 
in physical appearance and state to the bentonite 
of the Edmonton formation. 

The writer contends that notwithstanding 
the plausibility and correctness of this assumption, 
it cannot be held to account for the great volume 
of bentonite present in this formation. Some far 
greater source of this material must be sought. The 
natural place to look for a source is in the beds 



81 


immediately underlying the Edmonton. These along 
the western margin are Belly River “beds, the marine 
Bearpaw shore line being further to the eastward. 
Undoubtedly the streams and erosion during Edmonton 
time which supplied the sediments of the present 
Edmonton strata had their greatest effect on the 
still unconsolidated beds of the Belly River. The 
constituents of the Belly River formation indicated 
in tables IV and V would be removed and further dis¬ 
integrated before being redeposited as Edmonton 
beds. This explanation indicates a possible 
source of bentonite, in the fact that the disinteg¬ 
ration would be most rapid on feldspar grains 
which in the Belly River, form a large portion of 
the rock. It explains also the great similarity 
existing in the two formations. • 

Another explanation for the formation of 
this material, is contemporaneous disintegration 
with bedding. In many places the Edmonton shows 
shallow water cross-bedding, the strata showing 
this feature were apparently disturbed after initial 
deposition by minor regressions and transgressions 
of the shore line. This action would tend through 
wave action to pulverize the softer constituent of 
the sands and this pulverized material would become 


. 



. 

■ 








82 


suspended only to settle in places where the water 
was deeper or had become quiet. 

In the vicinity of Drumheller, Alberta, 
colloidal bentonite forms important partings in 
coal seams. This phenomena can only be explained 
by a sudden flooding of the already deposited car¬ 
bonaceous material to any depth from 10 to 100 
feet by waters heavily laden with suspended fels- 
pathic matter. A period of quiescence, then grad¬ 
ual shallowing, would allow the deposition of such 
a bed of clay. Coaly matter would again commence 
its accumulation from where the process had been 
interrupted. This explanation would be evidence 
also in favor of explaining the nature of the coal 
accumulation in such seams. The accumulation 
would be allochthonous or due to the sinking and 
piling up of drift material in quiet lagoons. 

The bentonite can have had the first des¬ 
cribed mode of origin however. It is seen to be 
occurring in sandstones of extremely varying size 
of grain. This type of accumulation according to 
Sorby (46), is the result of deposition in compara¬ 
tively deep water with fairly rapidly moving water 
emptying into the basin. Uneven grades of detri¬ 
tus indicate that the material has settled in still 




83 


water although it has been transported in a consider- 
current. Most even textured beds have been sub¬ 
jected to the sorting action of currents while 
being deposited. It is possible also to have 
the deposition of fine colloidal material at the 
same time as the heavier particles, by suddenly 
changing the salinity of the carrier. This con¬ 
dition would exist where a fresh (turbid) water 
stream empties into a brackish or salt water lake. 
Hatch and Rastall (p, 73) explain this phenomenon 
as follows, "All running water carries in suspension 
a certain amount of clayey material in a fine state 
of subdivision which in fresh water remains sus¬ 
pended for a very long time. But when this fine¬ 
ly divided matter comes into contact with a saline 
solution a physical change in its condition is 
brought about, the fine particles coagulating to 
a kind of flocculent precipitate, which in still 
or gently moving water, rapidly falls to the 
bottom. This process occurs at or near the 
mouths of rivers where the fresh water first mixes 
with the salt sea water and this fact accounts for 
the prevalence of mud in estuaries. 

"This coagulation of muddy matter by 
salt solutions is capable of physical explanation* 






84 . 


In the first place, it is noticed that the process 
is only brought about by electrolytes; colloid 
solutions and solutions which contain no free ions 
have no effect. It is evident therefore that the 
action is concerned in some way with the electrical 
charges on the particles, and its effect is clearly 
to diminish the surface energy of the particles by 
reducing the area of the free surfaces. All colloid 
particles suspended in pure water carry electro¬ 
static charges and tend to repel one another, thus 
preserving a fine state of division. The coagul¬ 
ating effect of the electrolytes may be referred to 
a removal of the charges from these particles, thus 
allowing them to coalesce to large masses possess¬ 
ing less free surface.” 

The application of this rule would seem 
a reasonable explanation for the occurrence of 
colloid matter and heavy sand grains intermixed. 



85 


CHAPTER VIII. 

Application of Results to Field Determination of 

Sandstones 

In Chapter VII the peculiarities and 
differences in the sandstones have been discussed. 
Unfortunately only differences which are discernable 
by use of the microscope and mechanical analyses 
are obtainable. 

The buff coloration and compactness of 
samples from the Belly River are points which are 
worthy of note and have possibilities of field 
application. These two features are not at all 
diagnostic enough however, to be used alone in 
determining the age of a bed. 

While the buff tint of color is generally 
characteristic of the Belly River sands, light 
bluish grey is equally characteristic of sandstones 
from the Edmonton. It is found also that the 
grains of the sediments of the Belly River rocks 
are less angular than those of the Edmonton. The 
lack of magnetite in Belly River sediments and its 
comparative abundance in the Edmonton, is a distinc¬ 
tion that is possible in the field by panning small 
amounts of broken up material. This is a feature 





86 


however, very liable to local variation owing to 
the high specific gravity of magnetite and the 
possibility of its being separated out or concen¬ 
trated by currents during deposition. 

Although the tests carried on in prepara¬ 
tion for this paper have not been at all extensive, 
in fact have been inadequate to give data sufficient 
for the formation of broad generalizations, enough 
data has been obtained to set forth one outstand¬ 
ing point. The far greater abundance of argil¬ 
laceous and colloidal material in the younger 
Edmonton sandstones than in the Belly River sand¬ 
stones, is noteworthy. The details -of this find¬ 
ing have been described in the foregoing chapter. 

A field test of a sandstone using such data as a 
basis, would be fairly simple. A hand specimen 
could be broken up and subjected to washing. The 
washings can be examined as well as the residue and 
the relative ratios roughly determined. 

Two lesser points of distinction are the 
prevalence of hornblende and biotite in the Belly 
River rocks and their absence in the Edmonton, and 
the calcite matrix in Belly River sandstones. This 
last is not an entirely reliable test in itself, but 
taken i n conjunction with other tests would add con¬ 
firmation to a distinction. 



87 . 

In general it is remarked that the cri¬ 
teria determined in the work of this paper are not 
as conclusively distinct as was hoped for at the 
outset. Sufficient points of distinction have been 
determined, however, to indicate that with further 
investigation this form of determination of age of 
rock samples shall be proven to be sound and practic¬ 


able 















88 


CHAPTER IX. 

Summary and Conclusions 

The study of the stratigraphic sequence 
extant in the rocks of Alberta, shows that they 
present an involved problem from the view point 
of the stratigrapher, miner, and field geologist. 

A review of the literature concerning the methods 
of differentiation, criteria and distinctions 
between various beds of this sequence, has revealed 
that very little has been written on this Subject 
in the past, and that little is definitely known 
of the problem here presented. 

The findings of this investigation are 
that the Upper Cretaceous series, mainly Belly 
River and Edmonton formations, bear many resembl¬ 
ances and few differences in character. Both 
series have sandstone beds of varying thicknesses 
interbedded with shales. The composition of the 
sandstone members includes as predominant constit¬ 
uents feldspar, quartz and chert grains. Minor 
constituents yield some criteria for distinction, 
the Edmonton being rich in magnetite, the Belly 
River containing generally hornblende and biotite. 
The matrix material of the Belly River is almost 
wholly calcite, that of the Edmonton, bentonite. 














89 


The mechanical analyses showed a good mark 
of distinction in the clayey content of the sand¬ 
stones; the Edmonton rocks containing approximately 
three times the amount of clayey material as that 
contained in the Belly River. The unstable ratio 
existing betuveen the percentages of sand grain grade 
and silt is also a noticeable point. 

The methods of analysis, -- microscope and 
mechanical (hydraulic) elutriation, have proven 
adequate and satisfactory. Some chemical analyses 
could well be included in finer determinations, esp¬ 
ecially of matrix material. The use of the round¬ 
ness gauging instrument while not entirely adaptable 
to the samples described in this paper should prove 
valuable in determinations on larger grades of sed¬ 
iments or samples from other horizons and localities. 

The resalts of this investigation have 
shown that determinable criteria exist and may be 
obtained satisfactorily by means of the above methods. 
The number of samples tested have yielded sufficient 
data for a preliminary basis of differentiation, as 

has been set forth. The writer believes that by 
the collection and examination of a much greater 
number of samples broad definite points of distinction 





90 


can be made available. The importance of gaining 
some such comprehensive set of criteria for dif¬ 
ferentiating the strata of the Upper Cretaceous 
in Alberta is paramount, and much further invest¬ 
igation of this problem is urgently needed. 
































