THE SCOPE AND RELATIVE DIAGNOSTIC EFFICIENCY 
OF CERTAIN SILENT READING TESTS AT THE 
ELEMENTARY LEVEL 
by 

Norman Herbert Cuthbertson 



NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 





snd fa 6 jL 


Gtx tlBMS 
wmssmms 

aSSBMlMMlS 



TH ESI5 










UNIVERSITY OF ALL ORTA 
LILAARY 


Regulations R^g. ir-J ing T ms ;• s and ;' ass or t at ions 

I. '* scri )t c > >j dieses and c iss ... tati is Loi Master ? s 
and doctor's degrees deposited in the University, of Alberta 
Sibrary, as the Official Copy of the ^acuity of Graduate Studies, 
.. b .. c 11 >d ii 1 tb- ef©ren < .... 1 n ■ Room only. 

A second copy is on deposit in the Department under whose 
supei vision the work was done. Some artments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used onlg with due 
10; ar to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author and of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
Vhen permission has been granted, credit must appear In the 
published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the signature of each 

user. 


Please sign below: 

Date ___ Signature Ins tl tut ion 
















































THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE SCOPE AND RELATIVE DIAGNOSTIC EFFICIENCY 
OF CERTAIN SILENT READING TESTS 
AT THE ELEMENTARY LEVEL 

A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO THE 
SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF 
THE DEGREE OF 
MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

NORMAN HERBERT CUTHBERTSON 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
AUGUST, 1951 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 






https://archive.org/details/scoperelativediaOOnorm 





UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read and 
do recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for acceptance 
a thesis entitled "The Scope and Relative Diagnostic Efficiency 
of Certain Silent Reading Tests at the Elementary Level," 
submitted by Norman Herbert Cuthbertson, B.Ed., in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of 
Education. 


Professor 



Professor 




/ 


Professor 



ii 







‘ 







ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The writer wishes to express his appreciation to Dr. 

R. E. Rees of the Faculty of Education for his advice and 
guidance throughout the course of the study here reported, 
to Dr. G. M. Dunlop, Chairman, Division of Educational 
Psychology, Faculty of Education, for his assistance in 
setting up the study and for his guidance during the pre¬ 
paration of the statistics involved, and to Miss M. 

Caldwell, Dr. H. E. Smith and Mr. A. B. Ewenson for their 
participation in committee discussions. 

The co-operation of Mr. J. Kulak, Principal of Delton 
School, and his staff of teachers, who administered most of 
the tests, is gratefully acknowledged. The writer is also 
indebted to Mr. A. G. Bayly, Director of Elementary Education, 
Edmonton Public Schools, for supplying some of the test 
booklets used, and for his interest in the progress of the 
thesis. 


iii 








. : 'ic 









SYNOPSIS 


The main purpose of this study was to discover the value, as diagnostic 
instruments, of certain group silent reading tests at the elementary school 
level. The tests were administered to one hundred sixty subjects and data 
compiled for both raw scores and grade scores for the rate, vocabulary, and 
comprehension sub-tests. Non-statlstical criteria for evaluating the diag¬ 
nostic values of these tests were selected from related studies. 

The first statistical criterion for the use of the tests for diagnostic 
purposes was the degree of normalcy exhibited by the distributions of raw 
scores yielded by the tests. A second criterion was based on the transmuted 
grade scores. The mean was computed for each test and the average of these 
means was taken as a criterion score. The tests were subsequently rated 
according to their abilities to yield grade scores which approximated this 
general consensus. Finally the non-statistical criteria were applied and 
the findings of both the statistical and the non-statistical evaluations were 
summarized. 

For the purpose of diagnosing vocabulary and comprehension the untimed 
tests which were widest in scope appeared to be superior to the timed tests. 
Rate tests which provided constant checks on comprehension and which continued 
for a period of five minutes or more proved to be superior to those employing 
one minute intervals with no checks on comprehension. 

Recommendations for the use of the tests as diagnostic instruments were 
also made. 


iv 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 

INTRODUCTION . ................... i - vii 

CHAPTER 

I. THE PROBLEM 

Background of the Problem ........... 1 

Statement of the Problem. 3 

Related Studies ................ 4 

II. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

The Design of the Experiment ......... 11 

The Tests ........ . ..... 11 

The Subjects .......... . 15 

Criteria for Evaluating Diagnostic 

Sensitivity of the Tests . ...... 16 

Statistical Analysis ...... . 21 

Analysis Based on Grade Scores ........ 22 

III. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

Analysis of Data from Raw Scores ....... 24 

Summary of the Findings .. 33 

IV. RATIONAL ANALYSIS 

Analysis of Data from Grade Scores. 34 

Application of Criteria ....... . 41 

Summary of the Findings. 44 

V. CONCLUSION 

The Findings ................. 46 

Recommendations for the Use of the Tests ... 47 

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TESTS ................... 48 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. 49 


v 




















. . < t . . 


.. .... ; V 

:.ic ,.i 

... _ £•' . Id v.-. .2 

... - S. . ■. : ■" cu,.c . d 

... . ..d,: 

.: . : 

..x. i ;d\. . s/id f io ... ?]? 

.. 


: 'd '• dd ; ciid ; • • d , 

.. d ■... r ' c: . ; 

. c \ ; 

......... no • d '; inA 

-vla viAorreiTATe 

....... c i ; .: . .■, . ■ • ; ’ ", ; r 

.. . e d d ;; jseswS 

.. . . '. . .. 

....... : ■: ".d . ,d\-;d 

. • .......... :.d ... d d • C .. - '.d. :oi . • 


.. dduddx odd" xo %'umsusQ 

' L 

. 'drddd c:d: 

> .. sac ... simoti* 

...• t r ic ;'0‘:d f -dd'; 

* • • •.•. :: . :. ■;; ! :d.::x 














LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I, Scores Given by the Five Tests .......... 13 

II. Comparison of lumbers of Items In Each Test 

for the Three Basic Sub-Tests ........... 14 

III. Test of Significance of Skewness of Distributions 
of Raw Scores Made by One Hundred Sixty Subjects 
on Each of the Basic Components of the Five 
Reading Tests ................... 26 

IV. Test of Significance of Kurtosis of Distributions 
of Raw Scores Made by One Hundred Sixty Subjects 
on Each of the Basic Components of the Five 
Reading Tests ........... . . . 27 

V. Comparison of Mean Grade Score, Standard 

Deviation, and Range for Each of the Three 

Sub-Tests of the Five Tests ............ 35 

VI, Percentage of Times the Score Made by Each 

Subject on Each of the Three Basic Components 
of the Five Tests Was the Extreme High, the 
Extreme Low, or the Middle Grade Score of the 
Five 


36 










•T B\::% 




















LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Distribution of Scores for the 

Pressey Rate Test ... 28 

2. Distribution of Scores for the 

Iowa Comprehension Test ............ 28 

3. Distribution of Raw Scores for the 

Pressey Vocabulary Test ............ 30 

4. Distribution of Raw Scores for the 
Van Wagenen - Dvorak Junior Vocabulary 

Test ... . 30 


vli 







-- 



i 









CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM 

BACKGROUND OF THE PROBLEM 

The need for research on the use of standardized tests as diagnostic 
instruments became apparent to the investigator during the course of the 1950 
reading clinic at the Summer Session of the University of Alberta. This is 
further borne out by Helen Robinson^ who concluded that additional research 
was required into problems relating to reading, more particularly the develop¬ 
ment of better diagnostic instruments. A review of such publications as the 

2 3 

Journal of Educational Research , the Journal of Educational Psychology , and 

4 

the Elementary School Journal , reveals an intensified interest in reading 

among American educationalists. For example, the February, 1950, issue of 

the Journal of Educational Research was devoted entirely to articles on 

reading, but there was insufficient space for all contributions and some had 

5 

to be carried over to the March issue. In his 1949 summary Gray listed 
ninety-two scientific studies relating to reading. 

Reading tests of various kinds have long been an accepted part of a good 
elementary program of reading instruction but modern emphasis on diagnostic 
procedures has brought marked changes in the use of tests. Older reading tests, 
though sometimes titled "diagnostic”, do not provide profile charts nor do the 

^Helen Robinson, Why Children Fail in Reading , 1946, p. 233. 

^ Journal of Educational Research , 1927 to 1950. 

^ Journal of Educational Psychology , 1927 to 1950. 

4 The Elementary School Journal , 1927 to 1950. 

5 W. S Gray, "Summary of Reading Investigations", July 1, 1948 to June 30, 
1949, Journal of Educational Research , V. 53, No. 6, Feb. 1950, p.p. 401-39. 















a 








2 . 


manuals accompanying them offer suggestions for the use of the tests in 
diagnosing reading problems of pupils making unsatisfactory scores on any 
or all of their parts. On the other hand, such more recently devised tests 
as the Iowa Silent Reading Tests and the Diagnostic Examination by Van Wagenen 
and Dvorak do provide these essentials. 

Many excellent tests and procedures have been devised by such experts as 
Dr. E. A. Betts^ and W. Kottmeyer * 7 * for use in a clinical situation. In 
addition, several outstanding individual diagnostic reading tests have been 
developed. Of particular interest among the more recent of these are the 
tests devised by Gates® and Durrell 9 , Helen Robinson 1 ® has reported success 
in getting at reading problems when individual diagnostic procedures were 
followed, but the classroom teacher in Alberta seems to find a need for less 
time-consuming procedures and often has not the resources to deal separately 
with each pupil. Therefore, the use of group procedures and group tests is 
of paramount importance. 

Harris 11 states that when conducting a diagnosis of a child’s reading 
difficulties, the two most important questions to be answered are, how diffi¬ 
cult a book can this child read? and, how does the pupil read? Since the latter 
question calls for an investigation of the particular reading skills the child 
has developed, an attempt will be made to determine the extent to which these 
questions can be answered by group tests. Dolch says, "a test should test some 
specific thing which can be taught, and which should be taught in a particular 

®E. A. Betts, Foundations of Reading Instruction , Ch. XXI. 

7 W. Kottmeyer, Handbook for Remedial Reading , Gh. 6. 

®A. I. Gates, Gates Reading Diagnostic Tests , Kit. 

9 D, Durrell, Analysis of Reading Difficulties , Kit. 

10 Helen Robinson, Op. Cit Ch. VII. 

J. Harris, How to Increase Reading Ability , p.73. 










- - 


.t :n 


. . til 




* l» . 













grade or range of grades."^ The things which reading tests measure and the 
use which may he made of the obtained measures bear further investigation. 


3. 


STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 

The main purpose of this study is to discover the diagnostic value of 
certain group silent reading tests at the elementary school level. The investi¬ 
gator will attempt to determine the extent to which these tests substantiate 
or contradict one another, the reading deficiencies revealed by each test, the 
value of each to the classroom teacher as an instrument of diagnosis, and the 
place of each in a diagnostic program. 

A diagnostic test of silent reading ability is generally regarded as one 
which provides accurate information on how a subject's achievement in such 
basic abilities as rate of reading, vocabulary, and comprehension compare, and 
which also provides scores that enable a teacher to determine how each testee 
stands in a number of sub-skills in relation to his general reading level. 
Moreover, each sub-test should be of sufficient length and should possess 
enough variety to test adequately the level of achievement of each pupil in 
the particular aspect of silent reading that it purports to measure. 

Teachers are frequently faced with the problem of analysing a pupil's 
silent reading abilities on the basis of scores made on standardized tests. 

This study seeks to explore the value of such tests in acquiring knowledge 
about a pupil to the end that his development may be more effectively guided. 
Therefore, the emphasis does not center on the disabled reader, but is on the 
efficiency with which the tests provide knowledge about the reading abilities 

12 E, W. Dolch, Problems in Reading, p.2QS. 




..... 


: 




, c . ; 3 li .. . ... 


' X ...... 0 .. :• :... 


.0. 

i© von £:r.‘ 


: . .; 


fQJBOOV . * /; 


. 


::no: 


.dX.7o:Id ......: 




.. 


.. ' . .. 


- •- . : . . . C 

... ■ •: .. * 

..... .. . ... it i 


. ; ... .. s* 


. .. 


s>no no 


'U.-JO o n oo oosoooo: 


.o . ‘ o .:. X X ; X' 







4 . 


possessed by each member of the group. 

More specifically this study seeks to evaluate the tests in terms of their 
capacities in the following respects: 

(a) their ability to yield normal distributions of raw scores; 

(b) their ability to yield grade placement scores which correspond to 
the average or consensus of the tests; 

(c) their ability to report accurately a subject’s reading level in 
each of rate, vocabulary, and comprehension. 

RELATED STUDIES 

Although an increasing number of studies are being done on problems relat¬ 
ing to the diagnosis of reading difficulties, few have been attempted which 
employ group silent reading tests as instruments of diagnosis. However, a 
number of investigations have been conducted to evaluate the methods used in 
tests designed to measure various reading abilities. The first group of reviews 
summarized in this chapter deals with the problem of measuring general reading 
ability, while succeeding ones are concerned more particularly with problems 
involved in measuring rate, vocabulary, and comprehension. 

(a) General Problems . In a study entitled, ’’Problems of Measurement of 
Reading Ability", Traxler^ 3 asserts that reading is one of the most difficult 
of all abilities to measure accurately. He maintains that the problemsof meas¬ 
uring the reading ability of school children objectively by means of group tests 
are mainly due to the intricate nature of the reading process, but lists the 
following as contributing factors: (l) there is lack of agreement among special¬ 
ists in this field concerning what reading is; (2) experts disagree on what 

-^A. E. Traxler, "Problems of Measurement of Reading Ability", The School 
Review , V. 52, No. 8, Oct. 1944, p.p. 491-95. 






■ ■ 


• . . 


.... 1 


z • 


•; • : 




. 


~;:V3 ".v:c. c 'i vnzs~ 




,2 . -::cvc"r , .siaofi 








. ;' ■ : 

. \ . t i 

zr : '1 v z:L a - •... 

. : Ik: : . ;• a.'..'.- : 

zoom o see ai: .a-: 

- • ■. . . C ... ... . . . 


::., iodc 

; 


: . 






•. . . .. 


20 


■ ■ • - ■ .. : • ... : 




r r-r *\ 


V. . 

' [ ■ od d $ ■ s 

- • ' S'lG . i ' d X‘ • : 




1 






' : . O' • .. • if • '■ : ' Xs V ' ' ■ 


; -■ ■ r,ti& ‘I v..' .roa:.o r xx/c.ae! 




. 





5 . 


reading comprehension includes; (3) because many of our words have several 
meanings it is not possible to state from a single correct response that a 
pupil knows all the meanings of a word; (4) no one has yet devised an entire¬ 
ly satisfactory means of measuring rate of reading which also provides a check 
on comprehension. 

Burkart**- 4 surveyed the literature dealing with the analysis of reading 
ability and drew up a list of two hundred fourteen skills and abilities involved 
in reading. With the help of five judges she reduced the list to eighty-nine 
separate items. These items were then classified under the six general headings 
of: observation, research abilities, vocabulary abilities, oral reading abili¬ 
ties, hygienic abilities, and aesthetic abilities. These were submitted to a 
group of reading specialists with the request that they rate each ability as 
highly important, important, or unimportant. The items were then classified 
according to the preference indicated by the forty experts who replied to the 
questionnaire. The ability to be attentive while reading was listed first with 
comprehension, rate, and vocabulary, the three basic abilities selected for this 
study, following closely in the order stated. 

The two major conclusions drawn from this study were: (1) that reading is 
a complex activity made up of motor, sensory, and intellectual abilities; 

(2) that educators regard the motor and sensory aspects of reading of less 
importance than the mental or intellectual aspects. 

A study of invalidities of general reading tests was made by J. H. Shores^. 
Toward the goal of higher validity for reading tests he suggested: (1) that we 
give serious thought and experimentation toward an evaluation of the concept of 

14 K. H. Burkart, "An Analysis of Reading Abilities", Journal of Educational 
Research , V. 58, No. 6, Feb. 1945, p.p. 430-39. 

15J. H. Shores, "Some Considerations of Invalidities of General Reading 
Tests", Journal of Educational Research , V. 40, No. 6, Feb. 1947, p.p. 448-57. 












6 . 


general reading ability, for we may be trying to measure something which does 
not exist as such; (2) that both depth and breadth of comprehension be meas¬ 
ured in the same test with separate scores for each; (3) that reading rate 
and comprehensions are inseparable and should be measured with the same materials, 
and further that the time taken to answer the questions on comprehension should 
not be included in the rate measure; (4) that reading tests used in the 
intermediate grades or above should employ materials chosen from a variety of 
content areas, and if possible, that these materials be chosen from several 
authors within each content area; (5) that an attempt be made to give the 
interest factor consideration by either attempting to develop, prior to the test, 
interest in the content area of the test selections, or by consciously selecting 
materials from a variety of interests in the hope that the undesirable effects 
of the interest factor will cancel themselves; (6) that the test directions 
clarify the motivation factor by attempting to motivate along certain precon¬ 
ceived lines; (7) that the test clearly set the reader’s purpose for each 
passage prior to the reading of that passage; (8) that the assumption of a 
reasonably equal opportunity for the experience background required by the 
testing materials be clearly made and that the testing materials be selected 
with this assumption in mind. 

That comparisons and evaluations of reading tests may make valuable contri¬ 
butions to educational research, is amply illustrated by George Spaehe^, who 
made a comparison of certain oral reading tests. Using data from his file of 
case studies he evolved a number of pertinent suggestions for administering 
Durrell's Analysis of Reading Difficulty and Gray’s Oral Check Tests. He gives 

17 G. Spache, ”A Comparison of Certain Oral Reading Tests”, Journal of 
Educational Research , V. 43, No. 6, Feb. 1950, p.p. 441-52. 







, 








7 . 


practical suggestions for modifying the administration of these tests to pupils 
known to be disabled in reading or suspected of suffering a reading handicap. 

He found that Gray's tests were too advanced for use with retarded readers and 
suggested modifications for administering them. When testing handicapped 
children with Burrell's tests, Spache recommended that the beginning point 
should be one grade below the pupil's estimated grade level instead of at that 
level as directed in the manual. Finally he concluded that both tests yield 
fairly accurate estimates of a child's actual reading level when administered 
in accordance with his recommendations. 

Gates^-8 gave a battery of twenty-eight specific tests to each of thirty- 
two third grade children for the purpose of securing data to be used in improv¬ 
ing the Gates Reading Diagnostic Tests. The findings justified the conclusion 
that the data secured through the use of diagnostic tests enabled the examiner, 
with some degree of success, to size up various processes or activities or 
operations and to relate them to other component abilities and to reading 
achievement in general. For example, the diagnostic tests would seem to be 
useful for determining whether the pupil's difficulty in word recognition is 
due to deficiencies in ability to blend letter sounds or to any one of several 
other deficiencies. The range of correlations between general silent reading 
ability and specialized reading tests was from .30 up to .82. 

(b) Rate . Paul Blommers and E. F. Lindquist 19 surveyed the literature on 
the relationships between reading rate and comprehension and concluded that the 
great differences obtained by investigators resulted from the use of measuring 

18 A. I. Gates, "A Correlation Study of a Battery of Reading Diagnostic 
Tests", Journal of Educational Research , V. 40, No. 6, Feb. 1947, p.p. 436-47. 

19 P. Blommers and E. Lindquist, "Rate of Comprehension of Reading", Journal 
of Educational Psychology , V. 35, No. 8, Nov. 1944, p.p. 449-72. 


















8 

instruments not specifically designed for studying this relationship. Therefore 
they proceeded to develop a test for measuring rate of comprehension of reading, 
and employed it to study the relationship between rate of comprehension and 
power of comprehension. The unique characteristics of the test developed were: 
(1) the control of reading purpose; (2) the use of only the time spent in 
comprehending at a certain level in deriving the rate score; and (3) the tech¬ 
nique of combining a set of relative rate scores to obtain a composite rate 
score. 

The test was administered to six hundred seventy-two eleventh and twelfth 
grade pupils in four middle-sized Iowa high schools. The principal findings 
were as follows: (1) the relationship between rate of reading comprehension 
and power of reading comprehension is significant but low, the correlation 
(within-grades within-schools) being approximately .30; (2) an individual 

tends to maintain approximately the same rank in rate of successful reading in 
a given group despite differences such as are usually found in the difficulty 
and nature of the individual selections used in reading comprehension tests; 

(3) good comprehenders adjust their rate of reading by slowing down as the 
material increases in difficulty, whereas poor comprehenders apparently read 
easy and difficult materials at much the same rate; (4) significant differ¬ 
ences were found between measures of reading rate based only upon materials 
comprehended and measures of reading rate based upon materials not comprehended 
or upon a mixture of comprehended and uncomprehended materials. No relationship 
was found between rate based on uncomprehended materials and power of reading 
comprehension; (5) when the experimental reading rate test here described was 
used as a criterion, the validities of certain existing rate tests were low; 

(6) rate scores which in part measure comprehension are poor measures of read¬ 


ing rate 


OCIXB 

: l£ 







(e) Vocabulary . In 1942 Croribach 20 reviewed the literature on diagnostic 
vocabulary testing and listed the types of word knowledge usually tested for as 
definition of words, application of the term, breadth of meaning, precision of 
meaning, and the ability to use a word in discourse. Most studies avoided 
diagnostic testing for breadth and precision because of interest in estimating 
the size of a pupil's vocabulary. Too often, he says, a testee can obtain 
credit without actually knowing a word. After discussing other weaknesses of 
vocabulary tests, he concluded that there was a need for more valid tests, 
especially with respect to breadth and precision of meaning. 

(d) Comprehension . A study of the factors involved in reading comprehen¬ 
sion was conducted by Frederick B. Davis gl . According to Davis, the factors 
measured in tests of reading comprehension are, first, two general factors: 

(1) word meaning, and (2) reasoning in reading, which involves facility in 
weaving together several ideas and showing their relationships, and ability to 
draw correct inferences from the writer's statements. Second, the specific 
factors analyzed by Davis were (1) ability to determine the writer's purpose, 
intent or point of view; (2) ability to understand the writer's explicit 
statements or to get the literal meaning; (3) ability to follow the organiza¬ 
tion of a passage and to identify antecedents and references in it; (4) ability 
to select the main thought of a passage; (5) ability to determine from context 
the meaning of an unfamiliar word or to select an appropriate meaning, and 
(6) ability to determine the tone and mood implicit or explicit in a passage. 
The analysis of Davis has been challenged by L. L. Thurstone 22 who uses a 

20 L. J. Croribach, "Diagnostic Vocabulary Testing", Journal of Educational 
Research , V. 36, No. 3, Nov. 1942, p.p. 206-18. 

B. Davis, "What Do Reading Tests Really Measure", Summarized in 
Journal of Educational Research , V. 40, No. 5, Jan. 1947, p.p. 391-2. 

S^lbid. p. 392. 















10 . 


different method of factor analysis and who claims to have found one general 
factor in reading comprehension rather than the numerous factors discovered by 
Davis. The contradiction in the findings of these two investigators indicates 
the need for further experimentation and factor analysis of the components of 
reading comprehension. 







.‘i od& 


:.. •: • llc tv: v; 


• : , ■ \.v ■:> 3/:V . ./ .,.:w.. 


. 


1 : . i .... 








CHAPTER II 


EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

THE DESIGN OF THE EXPERIMENT 

In this study it is proposed to give five standardized silent reading 
tests to each of a group of two hundred subjects from grades four, five, and 
six in the Delton and Fairview Schools in Edmonton, Alberta, in an effort to 
determine the diagnostic values of each test* In this connection a statis¬ 
tical analysis of the raw scores will be made. A rational and statistical 
analysis of the transmuted grade scores for each of the rate, vocabulary, and 
comprehension sub-tests will also be completed. An evaluation of the diagnos¬ 
tic capacities of the tests will be carried out through the application of 
criteria selected from related studies. These procedures are discussed in 
more detail in the succeeding sections of this chapter. 

THE TESTS 

The five silent reading tests*- to be administered for the purpose of 
securing the data for this study are listed as follows; 

1. Diagnostic Reading Test by S. L. and L. C. Pressey, Grades 3 to 9, 
Form A, 1927. 

2. Gates Reading Survey by A. I. Gates, Grades 3 (2nd half) to 10, 

Form 1, 1942. 

3. Sangren-Woody Reading Test by P. V. Sangren and C. Woody, Grades 4 
to 8, Form A, 1928. 


*See page 44 of this study. 









12. 


4. Iowa Silent Reading Tests by H. A. Greene and V. N. Kelley, 

Grades 4 to 8, Elementary Form A (revised), 1939. 

5. Diagnostic Examination of Silent Reading Abilities by J. Van Wagenen 
and A. Dvorak, Grades 4 and 5, Intermediate, Grades 6 to 8, Junior, 

Form M, 1939. 

Kottmeyer 2 states that a diagnostic test differs from a survey test in that 
it gives separate scores for each of a number of reading abilities while a sur¬ 
vey test gives but a single total score. Each of the five tests selected for 
this study meets this criterion. However, the tests by FTessey and by Gates 
give only the three basic scores plus a total score and do not provide individ¬ 
ual profile charts. They are included in the group in order that a comparison 
of the diagnostic value of such tests may be made with that of tests which are 
wider in scope. Both the Sangren-Woody and the Iowa Silent Reading tests are 
much wider in scope than those by Bressey and Gates, but are more limited in 
depth in that the parts are shorter and specific time limits are set for each. 
These two tests, while providing a greater number of scores, can be administered 
in only 27 and 45 minutes respectively. The Diagnostic Examination by Van 
Waganen and Dvorak, on the other hand, requires about 2 hours to administer and, 
except for the rate sub-test. Imposes no specific time limits. Because of its 
length it is divided into three parts and may be administered in several sittings 
so long as ample time is provided for every testee to finish as much as he or 
she can. 

Table I 3 illustrates the scope of each test as well as the variation among 
its component parts. The tests are arranged in order with those having the 

2 W. Kottmeyer, Handbook for Remedial Reading , p. 79. 

3 See page 13 of this study. 




r ' 






13. 


fewest sub-tests first. It will also be noted that although each test gives 
scores for rate and vocabulary the term comprehension is not used to designate 
part of the Pressey or Sangren-Woody tests. On the Pressey test the score for 
paragraph meaning was used for comprehension, while on the Sangren-Woody and 
Iowa tests the total of the five bracketed parts was taken for this measure. 


Similarly the comprehension score on the Van Wagenen-Dvorak tests is a composite 
of the parts indicated by the bracket. The variety exhibited among the com¬ 
ponent parts illustrates the difficulty of preparing a test to measure compre¬ 
hension. 


TABLE I. SCORES GIVEN BY THE TESTS 


Pressey 

Gates 


Sangren- 

Woody 

Iowa 

Van Wagenen- 
Dvorak 

Rate 

Rate 

Rate 

Rate 

Rate 

Vocabulary 

Vocabulary 

Vocabulary 

Vocabulary 

Vocabulary 

Paragraph 

Meaning 

Comprehension 

1 

1 

1 

[Total 
f Meaning 

(Comprehens ion 

Comprehension 

i 

Total Score 

Total Score 

\ 

(Fact 

[ Material 

(Directed 
( Reading 

I 

Perception of 
Relations 



1 

1 

^Central 
{ Thought 

(Sentence 
( Meaning 

Range of 
Information 



1 

\ 

[Following 
f Directions 

(Paragraph 
( Comprehension 

(Central 
( Thought 



i 

^Organization 

(Alphabetizing 

(Clearly Stated 






( Details 
l 



Total Score 

Use of Index 

(Interpretation 





Median Score 

(Integration ofj 
( Dispersed 
( Ideas 






(Drawing 
( Inferences 






Reading Index 


















































14. 


Table II shows the number of items in each test for the three basic sub¬ 
tests. Time limits for rate are included in order to facilitate comparison. 

It will be noted that the Sangren-Woody and Iowa tests provide no tasks for 
the reader to perform as a check on comprehension of the sections read to give 
a rate of reading score. These two also employ one-minute intervals to time 
the rate tests. The effect of these and other differences in the composition 
of the tests will, it is hoped, become apparent once the tests have been ad¬ 
ministered and the data have been compiled. 


TABLE II. COMPARISON OF NUMBERS OF ITEMS IN EACH TEST FOR 
THE THREE BASIC SUB-TESTS. 



Rate 

Vocab. 1 

Comprehension 

No. of; 

! 

Test 

No. of 
Words 

; NO. Of S 

Tasks | 

Time 

No. of : 
Items [ 

No. of 
Paragraphs 1 

No. of | 
Tasks ] 

Other j 
i Scores! 

Pressey 

3300 

226 : 

25 min. 

100 

60 short 

60 

1 1 

I ■ 

Gates 

1800 

: 

64 

10 min. 

85 ? 

35 short i 

83 

1 

Sangren- 

Woody 

425 ! 

j 

| o 

1 min. 

I 

| 40 

44 short 

66 

[ 

6 

Iowa 

860 

: 0 ! 

: 

1 min. 
2 tests 

55 

40 long 

! 90 

7 

Van Wagenen- 
Dvorak 

1680 

- 

56 

... 

5 min. 

1 ” 1 

23 long 

100 

8 































15 . 


THE SUBJECTS 

Of the two hundred pupils selected for this study approximately one hundred 
sixty were from the Delton school. The remaining forty pupils were from the 
Fairview school which serves a more outlying area where the socio-economic 
status of the population is somewhat lower and where the reading stimulus from 
hooks at home is assumed to he correspondingly weaker. Although children of 
Anglo-Saxon descent are in the majority, both groups contain a large number of 
children of foreign extraction, particularly Ukrainian. Because the two schools 
serve contiguous districts the investigator, who is principal of Fairview school, 
was able to supervise the administration of all tests, thus assuring a high 
degree of uniformity in this regard. Since the primary purpose of this study 
is to determine the diagnostic value of certain group silent reading tests, not 
to challenge their validity nor to prepare norms for local use, considerations 
of socio-economic status, intelligence and other population variables, are not 
considered to be of major concern. Consequently it is an advantage in this type 
of study to have a group of pupils in whom difference in language backgrounds, 
socio-economic status, intelligence, and reading stimulus at home my contribute 
to the complexity of reading factors when one is attempting to determine the 
diagnostic sensitivity of reading tests. 

The tests were administered in March during the tw® weeks immediately pre- 
ceeding the Easter recess. In order to minimize the influence of fatigue the 
tests were administered in short sittings in accordance with the directions in 
the manuals. Through the use of this procedure pupils who lost a half-day of 
school missed part of one test. As a result, forty cases were lost, leaving 
one hundred sixty pupils who took all parts of all tests. Of this number, forty- 









16 . 


five were in grade four, sixty-two were in grade five, and fifty-three were in 
grade six. The division of sexes was almost even. The scores of these one 
hundred sixty subjects only were used as data for the statistical analysis. 

CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING THE DIAGNOSTIC SENSITIVITY OF THE TESTS 

The concluding part of the rational analysis will consist of an applica¬ 
tion of a number of criteria for evaluating diagnostic reading tests. The 
criteria will be taken from the related studies and from the writings of recog¬ 
nized experts in the field of reading. In order to facilitate this analysis 
the criteria will be grouped under the headings of general criteria, and 
criteria of rate, vocabulary, and comprehension. 

(a) General . That reading is a composite of skills is generally accepted, 
but the exact number and nature of these components Is a matter of controversy. 
According to Burkart T summary there are eighty-nine separate abilities and 
skills in the reading process. Obviously no one test could adequately measure 
this number of factors and it becomes necessary for the maker of a test to 
limit the scope of his tests to a few selected areas. Since the cause of dis¬ 
ability in any individual is often plural, the test which gives the widest 
possible scope and is of the greatest depth would seem to be of most value as 
a diagnostic instrument. Each of the five tests selected for this study covers 
the three basic areas of speed, comprehension, and word meaning, but consider¬ 
able variation may be observed among the additional components of the last three 
tests.5 Another criterion is proposed by Dolch who declares that "present tests 

4 K. H. Burkart, "An Analysis of Reading Abilities", Journal of Educational 
Resear ch, V. 38, No. 6, Feb. 1945, p.p. 430-39. 

5 See Table I, page 13 of this study. 







.y^Q 













17 . 


usually covers a wide range of grades, and the result is that the individual 
teacher can secure little help from the small section of such a test really 
suited to her own group of children" There are specifics in reading ability 
which cannot be tested adequately by survey tests that cover a wide range of 
grades. Therefore, the use of such tests for diagnostic purposes is limited 
by this circumstance. Finally, the tests should possess a high degree of valid¬ 
ity. That is, tests should have the capacity to discriminate among pupils with 
differing reading abilities in the various phases of reading that they purport 
to test. 

From the foregoing discussion the following general criteria are summarized: 

(a) the scope of the test should be wide; 

(b) the parts should be long enough to test adequately the areas included; 

(c) it should test some specific thing which can be taught; 

(d) the diagnostic value of a test is limited by the amount of material 
it includes that is suited to each grade level within the range of grades it 
covers; 

(e) it should possess a high degree of validity. 

(b) Rate . Blommers and Lindquist 6 7 point out the difficulty of comparing 
scores on tests where materials are not equivalent in content and are not read 
for equivalent purposes. In measuring rate of comprehension they regard the 
purpose for reading and the time required to accomplish this purpose as th e 
basic criteria for judging tests. If no tasks are set for the reader, or if 

6 E. W. Dolch, op. cit ., p. 209, 

7 P, Blommers and E. Lindquist, "Rate of Comprehension of Reading”, Journal 
of Educational Psychology , V. 35, No. 8, Nov. 1944, p.p. 449-72. 







B 


i , . c ' '~.c : ■ ■ • 


- ’ 


' 


0 fi: 


. 


(. ■ - 


S 








.ssscxss • \n r.,o , s..i3 x 


:■ V:- : 




C, . : . X 


a<yt 

< 


- . : - 


: . : 


: 


fas ' 


. : , sc c--;33.;,:X£ r.v. v :; 

C : . »; ; . ; 

Blj^vxjspB &Q£i s-TB 0'iem? ecfao^* xip ss>top$! 

: Ov : . 2 , r ■ 

cs - . \ *. Si <j v" c _ : sio r : 













18 . 


he is not required to answer questions on what has been read, it is not possible 
to prevent skipping or scanning. This contention is supported by Traxler who 
states that: 

The main difficulty is caused by the fact that it is necessary 
to check on comprehension in some way, since rapid movement of the 
eyes over the material without understanding is futile and cannot 
be called reading in the generally accepted meaning of the term. 

The need to measure comprehension as well as speed has led to the 
evolution of at least five kinds of rate tests, but in none of these 
is the combination of speed and questions entirely satisfactory. 8 

The two most common procedures are to place the questions or tasks at the 
end of short paragraphs or to insert them in a running form. In any case they 
are usually simple in order that no time be lost in thinking out answers. Plac¬ 
ing questions at the end of longer passages requires the pupil to recall what 
he has read and, therefore, tends to give a measure of memory span rather than 
of reading rate. 

The two types of timing commonly employed are one-minute intervals and 
continuous periods of from five to fifteen minutes. When one-minute intervals 
are used it is possible for the reader to force himself to read more rapidly 
than he habitually does, so the purpose of the test may be defeated. Where 
tasks are interwoven with the material to be read or are placed at the end of 
each short paragraph, the longer reading time would seem preferable because it 
more closely approximates the true life situation. Traxler^ investigated the 
relationship between the length and reliability of a test of rate of reading 
and concluded that a speed of reading test which continues for four hundred 


8 A. E. Traxler, "Problems of Measurement of Reading Ability", The School 
Review . V. 52, No. 8, Oct. 1944, p. 493. 

^A. E. Traxler, "The Relationship Between the Length and Readability of 
a Test of Rate of Reading", Journal of Educational Research , V. 32, No. 1, 
Sept. 1939, p. 2. 






. 









19 . 


seconds is much more reliable than one for only three hundred seconds or less. 

The following criteria for tests of reading rate may now be set up: 

(a) the test should be of sufficient length to provide for a continuous 
reading period of five minutes or more; 

(b) simple questions or tasks should be provided as a check on the 
pupil’s reading; 

(c) the questions or tasks should be close to the source of information 
and not at the end of the selection. 

( c) Vocabulary . Tests of vocabulary generally range in difficulty from 
simple to very difficult items, and are usually based on a reliable document 
such as Thorndike’s Word List^®. In order to prevent other factors from in¬ 
fluencing the results of the tests the items should be presented in isolation 
rather than in context, "... because children whose facility in the organiza¬ 
tions of language is limited, may become confused in reading even though they 
possess adequate vocabularies’’!!. That the recognition of words in context 
is influenced by other factors is borne out by Gates who declares that "... 
difficulty in utilizing the context is often accompanied by inability to appre¬ 
ciate properly the grouping of thought units and it is not easy to tell which 
of these is the cause of the other’’!^. 

When words are presented in isolation the time should be sufficient for 
all but the slowest to finish in order that the influence of reading rate be 
minimized. The test, then, will give a measure of the range of a pupil’s sight 
vocabulary. 

!°E. L. Thorndike, The Teachers Word Book . 

!1m. Monroe, Children Who Cannot Read , p. 109. 

! 2 A. I. Gates, The Improvement of Reading Instruction , p. 130. 























20 . 


Croribachl 1 * 3 concludes that a pupil’s knowledge of the breadth of meaning of 
a word can be measured only when it is presented several times in a test accord¬ 
ing to the number of meanings attributed to it. He also states that diagnostic 
tests should be devised which will provide knowledge of a pupil’s ability to 
make fine distinctions. A test which does not seek to measure breadth or pre¬ 
cision of meaning tends to give an estimate of the size of one’s vocabulary 
rather than to be diagnostic in character. 

From the foregoing discussion the following criteria for tests of vocabu¬ 
lary may be summarized: 

(a) the items should range in difficulty from simple to very difficult 
for the grades covered; 

(b) the items should be presented in isolation, or in a form which provides 
no clue to their meanings; 

(c) sufficient time for all to finish should be provided; 

(d) breadth and precision of meaning should be measured. 

(d) Comprehension . In setting up criteria for evaluating tests of com¬ 
prehension the investigator regards the level of comprehension as the prime 
factor. Gates defines level of comprehension as ’’the highest degree of difficulty 
or complexity in a passage which a pupil can comprehend"^ 4 . This implies that a 
test should consist of selections graded in difficulty. The second factor to be 
considered is whether the test poses a variety of tasks covering several types 
of comprehension or whether accuracy in a single type of response is measured. 
Adequate coverage of general comprehension demands that a wide range of types 

1 3 L. J. Croribach, Diagnostic Vocabulary Testing", Journal of Educational 

Research , V. 36, No. 3, Nov. 1942, p. 206-18. 

~T4a. i. Gates, op. cit., p. 405. 

















.iSO£i 










21 . 


of reading be included in a test. Finally, the length of the selection and 
the time allowed for completion of the tasks must be considered. In this 
connection Gates declared that, ”... it is advisable to eliminate the influence 
of speed of reading as much as possible" 15 . Another argument for eliminating 
the influence of speed comes from Carlson 1 ® who concludes that at the middle 
and lower levels of intelligence the slower reader tended to be the better 
reader. This tendency was accentuated when the purposes for reading were more 
exacting and as the difficulty of the material increased. A similar conclusion 
was made by Blommers and Lindquist 1 ? who asserted that good comprehenders ad¬ 
just their speed to the material and to the purpose for which it is being read. 

A summary of the criteria of comprehension follows: 

(a) the test should consist of selections of increasing difficulty; 

(b) it should test for a wide range of types of reading; 

(c) a variety of questions should be used; 

(d) the selection should be long enough to tax the abilities of the 
better readers; 

(e) sufficient time for all to finish should be provided. 

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

In his discussion on the use of the normal probability curve in mental 
measurement, Garrett 1 ® lists reading, as measured by standardized tests, among 


15 A. I. Gates, op. cit ., p. 406. 

16 T. R. Carlson, "The Relationship Between Speed and Accuracy of Comprehen¬ 
sion", Journal of Educational Research , V. 42, No. 4, Mar. 1949, p.p. 500-12. 

17 P. Blommers and E. Lindquist, "Rate of Comprehension of Reading", Journal 
of Educational Psychology , V. 35, No. 8, Nov. 1944, p. 471. 

~ -1®E. H. Garrett, S$jfcig.£ics in Psyc hology^m^Mu^tlaB, p. 3.07. 











_■ .. 


I . £ . 






22 . 


the phenomena which tend to follow the normal pattern. Because calculations 
based on raw scores rather than derived scores are generally regarded as being 
more suitable for determining the normalcy of a distribution, the actual scores 
made by the one hundred sixty subjects on ea,ch of rate, vocabulary and compre¬ 
hension for the five tests will be used in the preparation of frequency tables 
from which measures of skewness and kurtosis will be obtained. The technique 
for calculating skewness and kurtosis from percentiles will be used. The sig¬ 
nificance of the obtained measures will then be tested through the calculation 
of "t M scores and the use of corresponding tables of significance. The mean, 
standard deviation, and range of each distribution will also be calculated. 
Separate tables for the data relative to the significance of the skewness and 
kurtosis for each distribution will be presented. The statistical evaluation 
will then be made on the basis of the significance of these measures for each 
test. 


ANALYSIS BASED ON GRADE SCORES 

Each of the five tests provides for transmutation of all raw scores to 
grade scores which are expressed in decimal fractions ranging from grade 1.0 to 
grade 13.0. Frequency tables of grade scores will be constructed for rate, vo¬ 
cabulary, and comprehension for each of the five tests, thus permitting compari¬ 
son of the sub-tests. However, because these scores are transmuted, and because 
the investigator intends to use a statistical approach in evaluating the raw 
scores, computations based on grade scores will be limited to the calculation 
of means and standard deviations. The average of the means for each of the five 
sub-tests of rate, vocabulary, and comprehension will then be calculated and 
will be used as criterion scores for rating the tests. The ones which deviate 









23 . 


most from these averages will be suspect, while those which tend to cluster about 
the criterion scores will be regarded more favorably. This evaluation, coupled 
with consideration of the range of the grade scores, will constitute the analysis 
to be made from the tabular presentation of the grade scores. 


•.c. Inor V.Lr.-r : ocf lllv moM mc‘ 

, . - '. '■. .••;/.: .'. V 'V ; •:• cc SJJr.7 no\; • ; 

£•' 'rv.ii-^ 1.U.V x a&icor: ajjjs-xg ed& To ogg&s ©rift ‘. ! ;o zojif-Qvoblzw 

... - : ...;■ ; , ", ;' y . ; • ■. .. 






CHAPTER III 


STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

ANALYSIS OF DATA FROM THE RAW SCORES 

The tests listed on page eleven of this study were administered during the 
period from the 12th to the 22nd of March, 1951. The raw scores made by the 
subjects on rate, vocabulary and comprehension for the five tests were arranged 
in seventeen frequency tables. Two additional tables were needed for the Van 
Wagenen-Dvorak Test which provided separate forms for grade six vocabulary and 
comprehension. The mean, standard deviation, and range were calculated for each 
distribution. 

In order to compute the estimates of skewness and kurtosis the 10th, 25th, 

50th, 75th and 90th percentiles of each distribution were calculated by the 

formula^ P = 1 + - ) x i. Using these percentiles a measure of the skew- 

^ ’ P 

ness of each distribution was computed by applying the formula^ Sk = P9Q+P10 -pgQ 

■ 

Similarly the kurtosis was computed by applying the formula 5 Ku = Q 

^90"Flo 

It should be noted here that in a normal curve the skewness is zero, and 
according to Garrett the kurtosis is ,263 4 , Therefore, any measure which deviates 
widely from either of these values should be regarded with suspicion, but the 
difference may not be considered significant until proven so by means of the usual 
"t" test. 

The standard error of each measure of skewness for the seventeen sub-tests 


!h. E. Garrett, Statistics in Psychology and Education, p. 78, 
2 Xbid, p. 120. 













25 . 


in this study was obtained by using formula5 dfek = »5185D . Each measure of 
skewness was then divided by its standard error to give a M t" score the signifi¬ 
cance of which was determined by reference to a table of "t H f* 

Similarly the "t” score foh each measure of kurtosis was obtained by divid¬ 
ing the measure by its standard error which was obtained from the formula^ 
dku = .27779 # Th e significance of these obtained measures then tested 

vs~ 

through reference to a table of ”t"5 

The significance of the measures of skewness and kurtosis was determined 
at the .05 and the .01 levels. At the risk of being in error once in twenty 
times at the .05 level and once in one hundred times at the .01 level measures 
of skewness and kurtosis attaining or exceeding these limits must be attributed 
to factors other than accidents of sampling. 

The data relative to the skewness and kurtosis of each of the seventeen 
distributions have been compiled in tabular form and are here presented in 
Tables III * 6 * 8 and IY 9 . 


5 lbid ., p. 220. 

6 Ibid ., p. 191. 

7 lbid ., p. 222. 

8 See page 26 of this study. 

9 See page 27 of this study. 







f 








26 


TABLE III. TEST OF SIGNIFICANCE OF SKEWNESS OF DISTRIBUTIONS OF RAW 
SCORES MADE BY ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SUBJECTS ON EACH OF THE 
BASIC COMPONENTS OF THE FIVE READING TESTS. 


1-j 

-f 




I-——-| 

Tests 

3 

Mean j 

Sigma 

Range \ 

Skewness 

Level of 
j Significance! 

■ 

i Pressey 

Rate 

1 1 

33.18 ! 

I 

I 

1 

8.43 

j 

10-66 | 

4.7 

! 

i 

; Sig. at .01 j 

Vocab. 

46.3 

13.75 | 

13-83 | 

1.32 

: " ! 

1 

Comp. 

27.94 

12.52 J 

3-55 j 

-2.13 

1 1 

! ------ 

1 

I 






-■ 

Gates 

Rate 

.1 

33.86 

10.88 j 

1 

: I 

1 10-63 

2.28 

r 

Sig. at .05 

? i 

Vocab. 

39.85 

i 

10.92 | 

| 10-66 

I I 

.07 

v : 

Comp. 

49.5 

! 12.12 | 

j 

| j 

15-74 

| 

-1.87 

8 

.j 






I 

Sangren-Woody 

Rate 

i 

20.84 

I 

| 

7.32 

. 

5-41 j 

-.41 

! .i 

| 

I 

Vocab. 

J 

19.66 | 

5.79 

i 1 

2-38 j 

.32 

I _j 

i i 

Comp. 

! 

29.02 

) 11.4 

3-59 j 

2.1 

L J 

Iowa 

Rate 

; 27.38 

j 10.32 

: 

1 1 

6-59 

j 

1.24 ; 

. 

Vocab. 

20.27 

j 7.8 

5-44 

2.18 

! 1 

I 1 

Sig. at .05 

Comp. 

' 48.35 

j 17.4 

1 .. 

13-88 

6.7 

I 

Sig. at .01 

!, 



1 

1 


1 . 1 

! f 

Van Wagenen-Dvorak 

Rate 

|18.74 

1 

j 6.00 

2-41 

( 

1.00 

1 1 
§ 

Intermediate grade 4 & 5 
Vocab. 

|17.03 

| 

8.07 

2-38 

2.6 

Sig. at .05 

Comp. 

j49.06 

18,95 

8.83 

-2.35 


Junior grade 6 

Vocab. 

15.96 

5.00 

7-29 

1.08 


Comp. 

46.4 

11.16 

22-70 

1.52 































- 

. 

■ 








27 


TABLE IV. TEST OF SIGNIFICANCE OF KURTOSIS OF DISTRIBUTIONS OF RAW 
SCORES MADE BY ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SUBJECTS ON EACH OF THE 
BASIC COMPONENTS OF THE FIVE READING TESTS. 


Tests 

Mean 

Sigma 

Range 

Kurtosis 

Level of 
Significance 

Pressey 






Rate 

33.18 

8.43 

10-66 

.27 

------ : 

Voeab . 

46.3 

1 13.75 

13-83 

.35 

] Sig. at .01 j 

Corap. 

27.94 

IS. 52 

3-55 

.27 

I 

Gates 




: 

I i 

Rate 

33.86 

10.88 

1 

j 10--63 

.27 

| - ; 

< ------ 

? i 

] 

Voeab . 

39.85 

10.92 j 

j 10—66 j 

.28 

*.. I 

j 

Comp. 

. . .... 

49.5 

j 12.12 j 

15*?-74 : 

.23 

| 

I------. > 

I 

..I 

i 

j Sangren-Woody 


1 

1 

| 

1 

[ 

i 

Rate 

20.84 | 

7.32 

5—41 

.27 

! - { 

| 

Voeab . 

J j 

! 1 

119.66 ; 

! j 

| 

| 5.79 | 

2—38 j 

.27 1 

| 

j j 

I 

Comp. 

29.02 

^ 11.4 j 

: 3--59 j 

.29 

\ __ _ 1 

1 


L S 


! s 

. - 1 





' --] 


Iowa 


| 1 

1 

| 

! 1 

I 

' 1 

Rate 

^27.38 j 

1 

10.32 

6 — 59 j 

.25 j 

i s 

; I 

Voeab. 

: 

'20.27 j 

| 

I 

7.8 1 

f i 

5-44 J 

.27 

i 

i 

| 

1 

Comp. 

48.35 - 

' j 

17.4 j 

. 

13—88 j 

.28 j 

“ TO ” “ 30 


■ 

| 


f 



Van Wagenen-Dvorak 




I 

• 

Rate 

18.74 | 

i 

6.00 j 

J 

2—41 j 

.26 J 

i 

Intermediate grades 4 & 5 

1 



| 

i 


Voeab . 

17.03 | 

8.07 : 

2—38 

.29 § 

------ 

Comp. 

49.06 

18.95 | 

8 — 83 

.31 j 

Sig. at ,05 | 

Junior grade 6 


| 


1 

i 


Voeab . 

15.96 | 

5.00 j 

7—29 

.36 

Sig. at .01 J 

Comp. 

46.4 l 

11.16 | 

22—70 

.22 | 

1 

. 


I 






































t 


>> 


- 





: - - 




• ,'C; 


:io v x r I 


. -r ; : 


L 










. : 

















28 


In Table III^O the measures of skewness that have a minus sign indi¬ 


cate distributions which are skewed to the left. The distributions which 


yielded a positive measure of skewness are skewed to the right as indicated in 


Figures 1 and 2. Five of the sub-tests yielded significant degrees of positive 


skewness, but only the Pressey Rate sub-test and the Iowa Comprehension sub¬ 


test were found to be positively skewed at the .01 level. The distributions 


for these two sub-tests are presented graphically in Figures 1 and 2. 



36 

33 

30 

27 

24 


WO^OOOltOO^COW^OO^COW^O 

HHHWojntoio^^inioir)^(oc- 


Fig. 1. Distribution of scores for the 
Pressey Rate sub-test. 


39 

36 


33, 

30 

27. 

24 

21 / 



tOCOtOODrtCOtOOOtOCOtOCOtOCOtOOOtO 

rlrlWWtOW^^IfiintOtOM^COCOO) 


Fig. 2. Distribution of scores for the 
Iowa Comprehension sub-test. 


10 


'See page 26 of this study. 






















c \ . ' r ;7 I 

: ; • . . \ - . : ■ : . I £ ; : 

. C ; j v . . : . .*; ,V . 

■ .. . , 3 

-• . - ... ,C -V. "j l v ^ '> v. .v ...j . 

3;. . ./. .. . c ; > . : d '. . .. ..3 . d 

.. _. '..3 ;N c, . 33 3- 



* • * *• tf * 

. • . : 


. 




. 


. 














> Cl 05 


- - v : .... 'd v :. $ .j, . S 

• > • q. ■ n : .. 'V.:. ; . C :j Y1 








29 . 


Skewness indicates that for some reason the children taking a test score 
too high or too low. Kurtosis suggests that the scores do not cluster normally 
about the mean. If too many of the children score at the centre of the distribu¬ 
tion the curve will be peaked or leptokurtic. If too few score near the centre 
it will be flattened or platykurtic. In any case, extremes of either skewness 
or kurtosis denote a departure of the local scores from the norms. This suggests 
that there has been an error in normalization or that one’s sample is poor. 
However, when the majority of the sub-tests in a group such as are Included in 
this study yield normal distributions the sample may be regarded as fairly repre¬ 
sentative. Consequently, to the degree that significant deviations occur, the 
tests tend to lose one’s confidence. 

Table IVH reveals that only four of the sub-tests produced leptokurtic 
distributions, but none of these was sufficiently peaked to be considered as 
significant. Of the thirteen sub-tests revealing platykurtic tendencies only 
three were found to have yielded distributions significantly platykurtic at the 
.05 level. Two of these, the Pressey Vocabulary and the Van Wagenen-Dvorak 
Junior Vocabulary sub-tests yielded distributions sufficiently platykurtic to be 
regarded as significant at the .01 level. None of the Gates, Sangren-Woody or 
Iowa sub-tests exhibited a significant degree of kurtosis. The distributions 
for the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Intermediate Comprehension and Junior Vocabulary sub- 
tests were found to be significantly platykurtic at the .05 and the .01 levels 
respectively. 

The Pressey Vocabulary sub-test was the only test taken by the entire group 
of subjects to yield a significantly platykurtic distribution at the .01 level. 
The distribution for this sub-test is presented graphically in Figure 3^. 


13-See page 27 of this study. 
12see page 30 of this study. 



< - -• ; 





30 . 



OOtOCOtOCOtOOOtOOOfOCOfOOOtOCOfOOOtO 

HHWWK)tO^^WlOiO(OM>COOOO> 


Fig. 3. Distribution of raw scores for the 
Pressey Vocabulary sub-test. 



tOiOE>a*rHfOiQl>.OSrHtOiOE^CT!rHfO 

rlHHHHWNWWlMtOtO 


Fig. 4. Distribution of raw scores for the 
Van Wagenen-Dvorak Junior Vocabu¬ 
lary sub-test. 


The Van Wagenen-Dvorak Junior Vocabulary sub-test which was taken by the 
fifty-two grade six subjects was the only other sub-test significantly platy- 
kurtic at the .01 level. Despite the fact that a much smaller number of scores 
is included a graph of this distribution is also presented here. 






















. :. v -.. /• • -. - ■" v'v ’ ‘ - - 

... ■ • - ■- : • - ■ . . 






■ 






- 


■ - ' . - : 

. . ■ ' ' . :.jl 


. . : 


: \z :■ r'■ . U: cijjyxv . v:'-—; 




..■ .-'i [ 0» ■: :.;r cte :: 1 j 


T ipt 









31 . 


The following is a summarization of the pertinent facts revealed by Tables 
III and IV: 

1. None of the seventeen distributions showed a significant degree of 
negative skewness. 

2. The five sub-tests that yielded distributions which showed a signifi¬ 
cant degree of positive skewness were the Pressey Rate, the Gates Rate, the Iowa 
Vocabulary, the Iowa Comprehension, and the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Intermediate 
Vocabulary sub-test. 

3. None of the distributions proved to be significantly leptokurtic. 

4. The three sub-tests which yielded significantly platykurtic distribu¬ 
tions were the Pressey Vocabulary, the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Intermediate Compre¬ 
hension, and the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Junior Vocabulary sub-test. 

5. All the tests except the Sangren-Woody Test yielded at least one 
significantly deviant distribution. 

6. None of the sub-tests yielded a distribution that showed a significant 
degree of both skewness and kurtosis. 

The tests may now be ranked according to their ability to yield normal 
distributions of raw scores: 

The Sangren-Woody Test ranks first because It yielded no significantly devi¬ 
ant distributions. However, when the raw scores for this test were transmuted 
to grade scores a basic weakness was discovered which will be discussed in a 

later chapter. 

The Gates Test which ranks second produced two normal distributions and one 
that showed a significant degree of positive skewness at the .05 level. 

Three of the five Van Wagenen-Dvorak sub-tests yielded distributions which 




jC &£•■-/ 1 




iJL 0 C- v CX‘ X .X .t 


X . : ): 


, 



. rJ *H- 




32 . 


deviated significantly from what might normally be expected. Two of these, the 
Intermediate Vocabulary and Comprehension sub-tests, showed significant degrees 
of skewness and platykurtosis respectively at the .05 level. The Junior Vocabu¬ 
lary Test yielded a distribution which showed a significant degree of platykur¬ 
tosis at the .01 level. The Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests rank third in the normalcy 
of the distribution of raw scores since two of the five distributions yielded no 
significantly deviant distributions and only one was found to be deviant at the 
.01 level. 

The Iowa Test ranks fourth in this evaluation. It yielded distributions 
for vocabulary and comprehension that showed significant degrees of positive 
skewness at the .05 and ,01 levels respectively. Of the three distributions 
obtained from its sub-tests only the one for rate was normal. 

Because two of the three distributions yielded by the Pressey Test were sig¬ 
nificantly deviant at the .01 level, it ranks last. The distribution for rate 
proved to be positively skewed, while that for the vocabulary yielded a signifi¬ 
cant degree of platykurtosis. 

These conclusions assume large proportions in a study of this type which 
seeks to explore the diagnostic values of a group of silent reading tests, because 
one vital quality of a diagnostic test is its power to report accurately the 
reading level of each testee in the various types of reading activity for which 
it provides scores. It seems reasonable to assume that the grade scores would 
tend to he less accurate from tests which yielded significantly deviant distribu¬ 
tions of raw scores than from those that yielded normal distributions. Therefore, 
the sub-tests in this study which yielded significantly deviant distributions 
should be regarded with suspicion, and too much reliance should not be placed on 
the results they yield. 




. :,i. . _ ' v :j>p .... .! \ 





33 . 


During the rational analysis in Chapter V the criteria listed in Chapter II 
of this study will he applied to the tests in an effort to search out any struc¬ 
tural weaknesses which might have contributed to the production of deviant dis¬ 
tributions. An estimate of the diagnostic values of the tests will then be made. 

SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS 

The following is a summary of the findings of this chapter: 

1. Too much reliance should not be placed on the individual scores yielded 
by the sub-tests which yielded significantly deviant distributions. 

2. When the tests were ranked according to their ability to yield normal 
distributions the order of preference was* 

(a) The Sangren-Woody Reading Test, 

(b) The Gates Survey Test, 

(c) The Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests, 

(d) The Iowa Test, 

(e) The Pressey Test. 











CHAPTER IV 


RATIONAL ANALYSIS 

ANALYSIS OF DATA FROM GRADE SCORES 

Each of the five tests included in this study makes provision for the 
transmutation of raw scores to grade scores. Therefore, the grade scores made 
by each of the one hundred sixty subjects in rate, vocabulary and comprehension 
were recorded. In preparing the frequency distributions for the Van Wagenen- 
Dvorak Intermediate and Junior Tests the grade scores for the two vocabulary and 
for the two comprehension tests were combined. As a result there were fifteen 
distributions of grade scores. 

As in the case of the raw scores the mean, standard deviation, and range of 
each distribution was computed, but no tests of normalcy were made. Instead, 
the averages of the mean grade scores for rate, vocabulary and comprehension 
were taken as criterion scores. In addition the mean grade score yielded by 
each test was recorded in order that it might be compared with the general con¬ 
census. This was done on the assumption that when a variety of tests, designed 
to measure the same entity, and expressing the results in the same terms, are 
averaged as to results, marked deviations from the concensus or average may be 
viewed with suspicion as departing from the general tendency of the group. In 
Table V^ the criterion scores for rate, vocabulary and comprehension are reported 
to be 6.26, 6.03 and 5.97 respectively, and the general concensus or average is 
6.09. Similarly, averages were found for the columns of standard deviations and 
ranges. 


Isee page 35 of this study. 













TABLE V. COMPARISON OF MEAN GRADE SCORE, STANDARD DEVIATION, AND 
RANGE FOR EACH OF THREE PARTS OF THE FIVE TESTS. 


Tests 

f ... 

Mean 

j Sigma 

Range 

- Pressey 


2.04 


Rate 

5.56 

2—11 j 

Vocabulary 

6.00 

1.86 

2—10 

Comprehension 

6.40 

\ 1.98 

1 

i 

2—10 j 

| 

Average 

I 

5.99 

I 

1 1 

Gates 

I 


1 

Rate 

6.07 

f 2.20 

2—12 1 

Vocabulary 

6.51 

S 1.40 

3—9 

Comprehension 

5.88 

{ 

\ 1.45 

3—9 

Average 

6.15 

£ 

1 .. 

I 

j 

Sangren-Woody 


I 

| | 

! 

Rate 

7.02 

S 2.86 

2-13 j 

Vocabulary 

6.71 

I 1.78 

2—11 

Comprehension 

6.41 

| 1.72 

2—11 | 

I | 

Average 

6.71 

i 

5 I 

I ova 


I | 

! j 

Rate 

6.76 

3.56 

1—13 

Vocabulary 

5.44 

1.70 

1—12 | 

Comprehension 

5.88 

1.89 

2—10 j 

Average 

6.03 


i | 

] 

Van Wagenen-Dvorak 


1 i 

I I 


Rate 

5.88 

( 2.06 

2—12 | 

Vocabulary 

5.17 

f 1.76 

2—10 j 

Comprehension 

4.90 

\ 1.12 

i i 

2—9 

Average 

5.28 

: \ 

J 

Averages - Criterion Scores 



j 

Rate 

6.26 

2.54 j 

1.8-12.1 | 

Vocabulary 

6.03 

1.69 | 

2.1-10.1 

Comprehension 

5.97 

j 1.64 1 

I s 

1 J 

2.3-9.9 

Average 

6.09 

1 1.96 | 

J_ L 

2.1-10.7 






























.. L 























36. 


In Table VI the actual number of times that the grade score made by each 
of the subjects on the three basic sub-tests appeared as the extreme high, the 
middle or the extreme low grade score is presented as a percentage of the one 
hundred sixty cases. 


TABLE VI. PERCENTAGE OF TIMES THE SCORE MADE BY EACH SUBJECT ON EACH 
OF RATE, VOCABULARY, AID COMPREHENSION WAS THE EXTREME 
HIGH, THE EXTREME LOW, OR THE MIDDLE GRADE SCORE. 


; 

TEST 

t 

\ -HIGH 

1 

1 LOW 

i 

MIDDLE 

Rate 

Pressey 

10 

13 

35 

Gates 

15 

16 

28 j 

Sangren-Woody 

34 

16 

14 

Iowa 

30 

33 

8 

Van Wagenen-Dvorak I. & J. 

13 

22 

25 

Vocabulary 

Pressey 

9 

9 

i f 

1 

30 

Gates 

33 

3 

21 

Sangren-Woody 

50 

8 

13 1 

Iowa 

4 

28 

23 

I 

. 

Van Wagenen-Dvorak I. & J, 

5 

52 

15 

j 

Comprehension 

Pressey 

1 

40 

14 

13 

Gates 

12 

8 

31 

Sangren-Woody 

36 

4 

20 

Iowa 

; 

12 

18 

29 

Van Wagenen-Dvorak I. & J. 

3 

57 

J 

ii 

J 






















. • . : . :: c ... ; : I: ' / s 




'V 


cl 


. . 9.1 i; : 








v 


t. 




.1 


x xi g 


• . 


:»I v;rje fXl 

c.. C X CT9-L- 








. 

6 S’, 




■ 


: . 


'::: :f " £ 

■ ■ 










- -• 

SI 


.. x . I. - 

VX a GOXl 

S': ox 

I 

. X ' n - - V 













37. 


Examination of Table V^ reveals that the mean grade score of the three 
basic parts of all the tests was 6.09 while the actual grade level of all 
subjects was only 5.70. Of the five tests, the Sangren-Woody gave the highest 
average grade score and the Van Wagenen-Dvorak gave the lowest. Similarly 
the first column of Table VI 2 3 reveals that it was the Sangren-Woody sub-tests 
which most consistently yielded the extreme high grade scores. From the 
second column it will be noted that the Van Wagenen-Dvorak sub-tests most 
frequently yielded the lowest grade scores. The last column reveals that it 
was the Gates sub-tests which most consistently yielded the middle grade 
scores. The average grade scores of the Pressey, Gates, and Iowa Tests all 
clustered closely about the central tendency. However, a separate considera¬ 
tion of the data for each of rate, vocabulary, and comprehension reveals some 
additional important deviations. 

All the tests except the Pressey Diagnostic yielded higher mean grade 
scores for rate than for vocabulary or comprehension. This order was reversed 
by the Pressey Test which yielded its highest mean grade score for comprehen¬ 
sion and the lowest for rate. A careful examination of the completed test 
booklets revealed that the subjects made very few errors in marking the answers 
to the questions which are interwoven with the sentences in the sub-test for 
rate. It would appear that the subjects tended to slow down in order to get 
the answers right. This does not detract from the diagnostic value of the 
Pressey Rate sub-test, for it provides very definite clues as to the reading 
habits and skills of the testees. However, the fact that the Pressey Rate sub- 


2 See page 35 of this study. 

^See page 36 of this study. 





. ' : 


■; 


■ 























38. 


test yielded a significantly abnormal distribution of raw scores, as illustrated 
in Figure 1, does detract from its value as a diagnostic instrument. 

The mean grade score for the vocabulary part of the Pressey Test, as re¬ 
ported in Table III, is only .03 of a grade above the general concensus; 
therefore, it would appear that the results yielded by this sub-test might be 
regarded as being fairly accurate. However, it will be remembered that the 
vocabulary sub-test yielded one of the two distributions which were sufficiently 
platykurtic at the .01 level. Finally, the Pressey Comprehension sub-test which 
calls for only one type of response, yielded the highest mean grade score of any 
of the comprehension sub-tests. This combination of adverse factors tends to 
lessen the value of the pressey Test as an instrument of diagnosis. 

The range of mean grade scores yielded by the fifteen sub-tests was from a 
low of 4.9 for the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Comprehension sub-test to a high of 7.02 
for the Sangren-Woody Rate sub-test. The Sangren-Woody Test is a timed test, 
that is, specific time limits ranging in length from one to eight minutes are 
imposed for each part of the test with a total of twenty-seven minutes being 
allowed for the completion of all the parts. The main criticism of the use of 
the timed tests for diagnostic purposes stems from the fact that the imposition 
of time limits does not permit each testee to attempt all the items in each 
part of the test. Indeed, in this study many pupils were found to have com¬ 
pleted a large portion of the items included in many of the sub-tests without 
making any errors. It would seem, therefore, that timed tests of vocabulary 
or comprehension should not be used for diagnostic purposes with subjects known 
to be handicapped by slow reading speed. Another criticism stems from the fact 
that the Sangren-Woody Reading Test yielded the highest mean grade score of any 
of the tests and rated the subjects on the average .7 of a grade above the 





V: . .. 









39. 


general concensus. Therefore, despite the fact that this test yielded no mark¬ 
edly deviant distributions of raw scores, its use as a diagnostic instrument 
seems limited. 

The Iowa Test is also a timed test. Therefore, its diagnostic value is 
conditioned by the limitations already mentioned for tests which have specific 
time limits. The Iowa Rate sub-test yielded a very high mean grade score. 

Like the Sangren-Woody sub-test for rate it employs one-minute intervals as a 
timing device and provides no checks on comprehension. In addition, it yielded 
the widest range of grade scores of any of the fifteen sub-tests. The Compre¬ 
hension sub-test, on the other hand, yielded a mean grade score which closely 
approximates the criterion score, but the distribution of raw scores for this 
sub-test was found to show a significant degree of positive skewness at the .01 
level. Therefore, because this sub-test tends to yield scores that bunch 
closely below the mean and spread out too much above it, as illustrated In 
Figure 2 4 , the results it yields must not be regarded as being definitive. 

These considerations place limitations on the use of the Iowa Tests for both 
grading and diagnostic purposes. 

The Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests, which impose no time limits except for rate, 
yielded the lowest mean grade score of any of the five tests. That part of the 
test devoted to comprehension contains ten pages of material consisting of 
twenty-three long paragraphs and one hundred questions, and requires about an 
hour's working time to complete. Moreover, it was designed to be machine scored 
so all answers are recorded on an answer blank which is separate from the test 
booklet. Such a test must certainly appear a little overwhelming to the slow 
reader or to the immature child. However, it does permit each testee to work 


4 See page 28 of this study. 













9i:d 


‘CK'.o; 


©AO 











40. 


at his habitual rate and at least attempt all parts. In addition it provides 
twenty tasks for each of five types of comprehension and yields separate scores 
for each of these parts as well as a total score. Therefore, despite the facts 
that three of the distributions proved to be significantly deviant from the 
normal tendency and that the tests yielded comparatively low grade scores, 
the investigator regards them as being more useful as diagnostic instruments 
than the shorter timed tests. 

The Gates Survey Test yielded mean grade scores which most nearly coincided 
with the general concensus and as a result appears to be the most satisfactory 
instrument. However, the diagnostic value of the comprehension sub-test is 
limited because its scope is narrow. Although it employs a device that requires 
the reader to think about the sentences he has read, and provides material of 
increasing difficulty, it measures the subject’s ability in only one important 
aspect of comprehension. Nevertheless, the Gates Survey Test appears to ha an 
excellent one for the purpose of determining in which of the three areas of 
rate, vocabulary, or comprehension a pupil’s strength and weaknesses lie. Once 
this fact has been determined, other more diagnostic tests might be used to 
identify the particular abilities or skills within each area in which the pupil 
is retarded. 

Consideration of the standard deviations of the distributions of grade 
scores reveals that those for rate are much larger than the ones for vocabulary 
and comprehension. The distributions of grade scores for the five rate tests, 
therefore, may not be accepted as entirely normal because they tend to be more 
dispersed than the others. The Iowa Rate sub-test with a standard deviation of 
3.56 and the Sangren-Woody sub-test with 2.86 deviated most from the general 
concensus of 1.96, Another important tendency revealed by the data on grade 


d . 


. 




; ■ ; ■ • ' , 


' Xv 


V • - ; .- • ' * ; 

rd 

U : ■ V 
c-t/xvJ XariX 

. 


aon ox or: on 


ndnA. 

OO C ■'< -oo:: 






. Vr jo, ■ ... oo.o 

j • 

"i 


T.O. ! 


on 


on . i r 


, o 


O . O : 


O; X : 9^3 ■ 

; ■ ; 

X-oxoori oXso.liXiiO an Ac 
r: : op& ;r.r: I -srPI 

oo: CO ':.. A O X CiXliXd'OOOfill 


s, o ... :o con .." U 
.c y 05 id' d;noo a jleovso s on 

XOV- :1 C‘X 0. O COO A 



41. 


scores is that the standard deviations for vocabulary and comprehension cluster 
more closely about their central tendencies than do those for rate. 

Significant patterns may also be observed among the measures included in 
Table V. Although the tests all yielded wide ranges of grade scores for rate, 
only three, Pressey, Sangren-Woody, and Iowa produced correspondingly wide 
ranges for vocabulary and comprehension. While these three yielded uniformly 
wide ranges in grade scores, the Gates and Van Wagenen-Dvorak tests tended to 
exhibit a larger degree of variation among the ranges for their sub-tests. The 
narrowest range of grade scores, 3 to 9, was yielded by both the vocabulary and 
comprehension parts of the Gates Test. 

APPLICATION OF CRITERIA 

Before a concluding statement of the findings of this study can be made, 
consideration must be given to an application of the criteria listed in Chapter 
II in an effort to discover any further structural strengths or weaknesses 
which might influence an estimate of the diagnostic value of each of the five 
tests. 

Throughout this thesis reference has been made to the influence of the 
scope of a test on its diagnostic efficiency. A diagnostic test of reading 
ability is generally regarded as one which not only provides information relat¬ 
ing to how a student's achievement in such a basic ability as comprehension 
compares with his achievement in rate or vocabulary, but also provides scores 
which enable a teacher to determine how each testee stands in a number of sub- 
skills in relation to his average score for comprehension, rate, or vocabulary. 
This lack of scope in the comprehension sub-test is an important weakness of 
the Pressey and Gates Tests so far as their respective diagnostic capacities 


: ' '■ ' ' 

■ . X - . X . X . : h . ■ . : . 

c'a’. ■■■ i : d \x .0 :.o ...i'. 0\i "/or. .iirtsxdxXf 3 xss3.i. 

. .■ ■ ' . . ■ . • •£ Ji - s 




FJl 




. 




. 




io 7 . n: 















\ J-v:;; 


; v ■ t t. 


3 '“ 




,£ 






. . 


r . - - : l XX y^ :: ~ 

.. i ' . ' , lU • : 

. X : ... . I : . : 


.:....: .'. . : . ll ' -I . 

. . i ' 

£ X X X £ 

j ._ ’ v X - .' < ‘ 



. v , X d 

. .: ■. S i. : ■ 

.: -■ cXx,‘x 1 c’'<:si, 

c 

• 

. 3 ‘ : 

:c ' : • . d 


v i ? x 

>- 

, 

.D. r Jof -:3 '.3 X...'T 

: . ■ • ' 


0 "I : -3 d £ . 


: 


. . ..... . 

. .. X 

- - - ' d ' 

X 

o . : 

X; ' O'. J. 

: : . . . .. 

x . . . 

X . i ■: . 

X . 

. 

: . ■ . . x 










42 

are concerned. The Sangren-Woody, Iowa, and Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests each pro¬ 
vide a number of sub-tests under comprehension as indicated by the bracketed 
parts in Table I 5 . However, the sub-tests in both the Iowa and Sangren-Woody 
Tests appear too short and, because specific time limits are imposed, too 
limited to test adequately the areas Included. 

The Iowa and Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests each contain two sub-tests in addi¬ 
tion to the ones included under Comprehension. The Iowa Test provides for the 
measurement of a pupil’s skill in alphabetizing and in using an index. From 
the results of the testing program it seems apparent that these skills can be 
taught, for, in some cases, whole classes scored much lower on these items 
than on the other parts of the test, and in one case nearly all the members of 
a class scored higher. 

Of the two additional sub-tests contained in the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests 
the one entitled, "Perception of Relations” appears to be a good test of a 
pupil’s ability to think while he is reading and to perceive relationships. 
Although the sub-test designated, "Range of General Information” has applica¬ 
tion for diagnostic purposes it occasionally calls for knowledge of facts quite 
foreign to Canadian children. 

Only three of the five sub-tests, those in the Pressey, Gates, and Van 
Wagenen-Dvorak Tests, provide for a reading time of five minutes or more, but 
one of these, the Pressey Rate sub-test, yielded a significantly skewed distrib¬ 
ution at the .01 level and a low mean grade score. The Iowa and Sangren-Woody 
Rate sub-tests which yielded very high mean grade scores and correspondingly 
large standard deviations, employ one-minute intervals as timing devices and 
provide no checks on comprehension. Therefore, it would appear that the Gates 


5see page 13 of this study. 



ox 


-- 0 *_• 

X . 












43. 


and Van Wagenen-Dvorak Rate sub-tests were the most satisfactory for the purpose 
of this study. However, it should be noted here that the diagnostic value of 
any one of these five rate tests is limited because an examiner can evaluate 
a subject's achievement in rate only in terms of his achievement in the other 
parts of the test. Cronbach concluded that a test of vocabulary should seek to 
measure the depth and breadth of meaning which a pupil attaches to a word as 
well as the range of his vocabulary 6 . None of the five tests provides for such 
an evaluation. Each contains a sub-test for vocabulary with the words presented 
in a manner which provides no clues to their meaning and in the order of in¬ 
creasing difficulty. Only one test, that by Van Wagenen and Dvorak, contains 
an additional sub-test in which words are presented in context, thus enabling 
the examiner to compare a subject's achievement in at least two aspects of 
vocabulary development * 

From the foregoing discussion it appears that the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests 
are of the most value as diagnostic instruments. However, the investigator 
found that the use of separate answer blanks lessened the value of these tests 
for the purpose of individual diagnosis. In cases where retardation is evident 
the teacher often wishes to study the actual responses made by the subject but 
when answer blanks are employed this cannot readily be done. Moreover, the 
answers to the one hundred tasks which constitute the five sub-tests of the 
Van Wagenen-Dvorak Comprehension Test are so intermingled as to make individual 
examination of a pupil's responses in one part of the test extremely difficult. 
This criticism does not apply to the other four tests all of which provide for 
the answers to be marked directly in the test booklets. 


6 See page 20 of this study. 



©■ 



: .. I 

: 9 aX X.... c cv 




■ 


., 


■ 


• ' . 




; 






5 , . 








■js::oXX h 


: 



"0-. 


r.;'d 




oov 


.. L 


. * 


. 


/ .. . . 




-. • : - . . •• . • 




- - 




, 




;■ : ; 


■jTxi ■ x . . . . ... tV 



. 


i : i : - 

9'i.o J :oT toXonoX&% r ;j^:.X> nsV 


. . > sc : 


; 


'. . ... 

' : l '.. 


$ sti h&il’x&ftz sd <>$ 









44. 


SUMMARY OF THE FINDINGS 

1. The Sangren-Woody Reading Test yielded the mean grade score which 
deviated most from the central tendency. 

2. The sub-tests for rate in both the Sangren-Woody and Iowa Tests 
yielded the mean grade scores which deviated most from the average. 

3. Timed tests of vocabulary and comprehension such as the Iowa and 
Sangren-Woody sub-tests should not be used for diagnostic purposes with pupils 
known to have slow reading speed. 

4. The analysis of the results of the Pressey Test revealed among other 
things a positively skewed distribution of scores for rate, a platykurtic 
distribution for vocabulary, and a very high mean grade score for comprehen¬ 
sion. This combination of adverse factors tends to make it of little value as 
an instrument of diagnosis. 

5. Despite the fact that the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Comprehension sub-tests 
yielded a low mean grade score they were regarded as superior to the other 
comprehension sub-tests for the purpose of diagnosis. 

6. The Gates Survey Test is useful for the purpose of identifying the 
general area in which a pupil's strengths or weaknesses lie. 

7. The distributions for rate generally yielded the largest standard 
deviations and consequently the widest ranges of grade scores. 

8. The narrowest range of grade scores, 3 to 9, was yielded by both the 
Gates Vocabulary and Comprehension sub-tests. 

9. The tests which were widest in scope seemed to be of the most value 
as diagnostic instruments. 

10. From the results yielded by the sub-tests for alphabetizing and use of 
an index in the Iowa Test it appears that these two skills can be taught within 


. 


V ' - . . • ’ 







45. 


the range of grades covered by this study. 

11. The Gates and Van Wagenen-Dvorak Rate sub-tests proved to be the 
most satisfactory instruments for measuring rate of reading. 

12. Only the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests provide for comparison of a sub¬ 
ject's achievement in more than one type of vocabulary exercise. 

13. The use of separate answer blanks for the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Compre¬ 
hension sub-tests makes the task of examining the responses made by each 
subject most difficult. 


cl: jZZ-r-S'-’OO r t ~ .. : " :: V 


c : 


if,-S £. 


- 


. ■ '' 

*> ' - . . . . / 

. . : ■. 

. X . - . . . - .. - . . 

; ; d .... .. /.' 


* . • ....' n \ ; . , & - . . 

^n.cr.-a^e:: 'zo* "o 

7 . 

: :... . . . . .. \ ■ : . 

■ ■ . . .' . . ■ . erf] . ’ 

: 7., ,7'.;:7 f ;■ . d'~ 7/r: 



6 : . 










CHAPTER VI 


CONCLUSION 

THE FINDINGS 

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic capacities of 
certain group silent reading tests at the elementary school level. A summary 
of the more important findings follows: 

1. The tests which were widest in scope appeared to be the most valid 
diagnostic instruments. 

2. Those for which there were no specific time limits imposed for the 
vocabulary and comprehension sub-tests appeared to be better tests for diag¬ 
nostic purposes than those for which specific time limits were imposed. 

3. Tests such as the Gates Survey which are limited in scope but which 
possess a high degree of validity proved to be useful for identifying the 
areas in which a subject's strengths and weaknesses lie. 

4. The use of a period of five minutes or more for timing tests of read¬ 
ing rate proved to be more satisfactory than the use of one-minute intervals. 

5. Rate of reading tests such as those included in this study are useful 
chiefly for the purpose of comparing a subject's level of achievement in rate 
with his achievement in other phases of general reading ability. 

6. Too much reliance should not be placed on the individual scores 
yielded by any one sub-test. 

7. The value of these tests in diagnosing pupil difficulties in vocabu¬ 
lary is limited because they do not seek to measure breadth or precision of 


meaning. 




rv :yy ; yy.yy 

- v 

.v..-• ... ... 

. •. .. y y .. : : y • : ; .'... ; . . . - i x.r-r V: joy, 

. -... . : . , y? d ■ : . \;:h yyo. dor , ~: :. y e 

: •. JJo'r y ,yy ov. y y. oiom "lo 

y . . . : . : . 

. , ; r ...'. :. '.d ... ?■ 

$ _ . . 

. . , ... . ... ■ • . : ; Jjj ■ 

. ... ■. _ J d . y : _ . i . y •;• ;y:..d asc j-.r. 

cld\ _■ - ox . ' . . ■ • 

-yd yyy-yiyyr-yjy ...l yyi._ . ...• j \.d. r >z,'/o'.:u -x'it ijy>v to eQt&ob rigtrf b aasaaoq 

... .‘.j, .. ... ■.l•; > ■ ' of. :.-v. r /..; o :. r oj: : : : d; .i 

£ . . d . us; . . ... 

d .. y y.y . .. . ■... d , d: .'.d o.. c. .. y dyyo.j;. .0:0: jo.'. 

. . . ■ : .... . . 1 

.... ■ : - . £ BXCil 

. y .o,:; ,. ze&B&i -isdSx : tfnsmsvsi^ba sM tit tv 

- 

: , y yy ... ; . o o cr :: i .: :..y .. : o.. do:: oof .' 

d-d; . ’ . ' y .’. 

; ' ./ d ,'y; y • . y. ; ' y.. o . d . , y ...; • o>. : .. o yd.' :<„■ y.y. 

c ... . . ,.. : . . . . y 







47. 


8. The use of separate answer blanks makes the task of examining the 
actual responses made by each subject most difficult. 

The findings seem to justify the conclusion that the diagnostic value of 
the reading tests included in this study lies chiefly in their ability to pro¬ 
vide information about the level of the subject’s achievement in rate, vocabu¬ 
lary and comprehension. 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE USE OF THE TESTS 

The following recommendations apply only to the use of the five tests 
included in this study for diagnostic purposes: 

1. The investigator recommends that the Gates Survey Tests be used to 
identify the area in which a subject is most retarded. 

2. If a test of rate only is desired the Gates or the Van Wagenen-Dvorak 
sub-tests for rate are recommended. 

3. The vocabulary tests in Part II of the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests may 
be used to compare a subject’s ability to recognize words in isolation with 
his ability to recognize words in context. 

4. Part III of the Van Wagenen-Dvorak Tests is recommended for use in 
diagnosing a subject’s ability in each of several types of comprehension. 

5. Timed tests such as the Sangren-Woody and Iowa Tests are not recommend¬ 
ed for use as diagnostic instruments with pupils known to be, or suspected of 
being handicapped by a slow reading speed. 




.. L'-J c;...,;; T^vcri.o 'io six; 


d 


; • - y 


s XL' 


3 


. . . . . ' 


•: r;ACT. 


-• ""C v. 'OCi.i.' ii ;*.■X J\ r .MU r i'J ; 




•v:i: ....' 


... . .. . ;? .. ■ 






ccvG-rronc-?'X: iv 


: . . . .. , . * ■ . tx 

. . _• • ,: ■/ ; ... •' • ' 

. ' . ■ 

lov.l r..': . v ssXnaocs'i ctf vd\i c 1 itoer^vz & art^raioo ocr .fcsrciif scf 

, . : . . •. .• c: Is g .: .. • - ...LX 

. V: Xc . : ... .. , X. v: ..-He .. . 2 ; *0 XXX ' 

j ;i ... .. . .X; '. .XX i .r_ 2 J:X 

;. . , .. ; > 


t . . .. . ■ : J; .' I 

. . . X . . . .. •• . 

















48. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TESTS 


1. Pressey, L. C. and S. L. Diagnostic Reading Test , Grades 3 to 9, Form A, 

1927. Bloomington, Public School Publishing Co. 

2. Gates, A. I. Gates Reading Survey , Grades 3 (second half) to 10, Form 1, 

1942. New York,Bureau of Publications, Teachers’ College, Columbia 
University. 

3. Sangren, P. V., and Woody, C. Sangren-Woody Reading Test , Grades 4 to 8, 

Form A, 1928. Yonkers-on-Hudson, World Book Company. 

4. Greene, H. A., and Kelly, V. H. Iowa Silent Reading Tests , Grades 4 to 8, 

Form AM (revised), 1939. Yonkers-on-Hudson, World Book Company. 

5. Van Wagenen, J., and Dvorak, A. Diagnostic Examination of Silent Reading 

Abilities , Grades 4 and 5 Intermediate, Grades 6 to 8 Junior, Form M, 
1939. Minneapolis, Educational Test Bureau. 










: 


4 A z?:X/i .. c ^ v : : , T .. ba^ . ? .J ,\:o^c3‘xl 

. .0 '.:v...':J'.cr;./i . .. ... \ ^ .. -* 

. . £ .. . d " 

: - . . 

. • ... : 

, . /. . , : :I 

. * . 

• . 

; 

■ . 

. .. ; 






. . 

.: . „ T, . r ; ' :: Y 
. 

: . . 










49. 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Adams, F., Gray, L. and Reese, D. Teaching Children to Read. New York, 

The Ronald Press, 1949. 525 p. 

2. Blommers, P. and Lindquist, E. "Rate of Comprehension of Reading", Journal 

of Educational Psychology, Baltimore, Warwick and York, Vol. 35, 
Nov. 1944. p.p. 449-72. 

3. Betts, E. A. Foundations of Reading Instruction, New York, American Book 

Co., 1946. 757 p. 

4. Bond, Guy L. and Handlin, Bertha. Adapting Instruction in Reading to 

Individual Differences, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 
1948. 82 p. 

5. , and Wagner, Eva. Teaching the Child to Read . New York, The 

MacMillan Co., Revised 1950. 467 p. 

6. Burkart, H. K. "An Analysis of Reading Abilities", Journal of Educational 

Research. Madison, Bembar Publications, Vol. 38, Feb. 1945. p.p. 
430-39. 

7. Buros, 0. K. Mental Measurements Yearbook (Third Edition), New Brunswick, 

Rutgers Ikiiversity Press, 1949. 1047 p. 

8. Carlson, T, R. "The Relationship Between Speed and Accuracy of Comprehen¬ 

sion", Journal of Educational Research . Madison, Bembar Publica¬ 
tions, Vol. 42, Mar. 1949. p.p. 500-12. 

9. Cole, Luella. The Improvement of Reading, . New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 

Inc., 1938. 338 p. 

10. Cronbach, L, J. "Diagnostic Vocabulary Testing"- Journal of Educational 

Research . Madison, Bembar Publications, Vol. 36, Nov. 1942. 

p.p. 206-18. 

11. Dolch, E. W. Problems in Reading. Champaign, The Garrard Press, 1948. 

373 p, 

12. Burrell, B. B. Improvement of Basic Reading Abilities . Yonkers-on-Hudson, 

World Book Co., 1940. 407 p. 

13. Fernald, Grace M. Remedial Techniques in Basic School Subjects . New York, 

McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., 1943. 349 p. 

14. Gates, A. I. The Improvement of Reading. New York, The MacMillan Co., 

1937. 668 p. 













































- ' 


- 









• - 




' 
























50 


15. Gates, A. I. and Cason, E. B. "An Evaluation of Tests for Diagnosis of 

Ability to Read Phrases or Thought Units", The Elementary School 
Journal. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, Vol. 40, No. 6,' 

Sept. 1945. p.p. 23-33. 

16. _"A Correlation Study of a Battery of Reading Diagnostic Tests", 

Journal of Educational Research. Madison, Dembar Publications, 

Vol. 40, Feb. 1947. p.p. 436-47. 

17. Garrett, H. E. Statistics in Psychology and Education . Toronto, Longmans, 

Green and Co., 1947. 487 p. 

18. Gray, W. S. On Their Own in Reading. New York, Scott Foresman and Co., 

1948. 267 p. 

19. . "Annual Summary of Reading Investigations”, Journal of Educational 
Research . Madison, Dembar Publications, 1939 to 1951. 

20. ■ Harris, A. J. How to Increase Reading Ability. Toronto, Longmans, Green 

and Co., 1940. 403 p. 

21. Kottmeyer, W, Handbook for Remedial Reading. St. Louis, Webster Publish¬ 

ing Co., 1947. 177 p. 

22. Monroe, M. Children Who Cannot Read. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 

1932, 205 p, 

23. McKee, P. The Teaching of Reading in the Elementary School . Boston, 

Houghton Mifflin Co., 1948. 622 p. 

24. National Elementary Principal, Newer Practices in Reading in the Elementary 

School. 17th Yearbook, 1938. 

25. National Society for the Study of Education. Reading in the Elementary 

School, 48th Yeatbook, Part II, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 

1949, 395 p. 

26. Robinson, Helen M. Why Pupils Fail in Reading . Chicago, University of 

Chicago Press, 1946. 240 p, 

27. Russell, D, H. Children Learn to Read . Boston, Ginn and Co., 1949. 403 p. 

28. Schonell, Fred J. Backwardness in the Basie School Subjects . Toronto, 

Clark Irwim Co. Ltd., 1942. 566 p. 

29. Shores, J. H. "Some Considerations of Invalidities of General Reading Tests", 

Journal of Educational Research. Madison, Dembar Publications, 

Vol. 40, Feb. 1947. p.p. 448-57. 















































: 




>'• -I ,, •/ 







- ri 






C : ... . 


. * . .. : 

IS - i Sx . . 



;.'v :c . ;-"-D a K r " . . • • 

... .“ ' 




















51. 


30. Spache, G. "A Comparison of Certain Oral Reading Tests", Journal of 

Educational Research. Madison, Dembar Publications, Vol 43, No. 6, 
Feb. 1950. p.p. 441-52. 

31. Thorndike, E. L. The Teacher * s Word Book . New York, Teachers’ College, 

Columbia University, 1921. 134 p. 

32. Traxler, A. E. "Problems of Measurement of Reading Ability", The School 

Review. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, Vol. 52, No. 8, 

Oct. 1944, p.p. 492-5. 

33. « "The Relationship Between the Length and Readability of a Test 
of Rate of Reading", Journal of Educational Research . Madison, 
Dembar Publications, Vol. 32, No. 1, Sept. 1938. p.p. 1-2. 









'• ci . ' ' \ ‘ . “ ■ ■ ■■ ; »« . ‘ .. 

. r . - . : 1 .. T .. . . : 

•77 v r T 'v; t; . 

c . . . . . 

• . ... . >[: ...» » : -":ov '. L : . 0 

L c ., V ; •... ... . . I! . C . . 

T7 . . - i • : 

. - . ... . .. " 

” c • > :v erftf ZteS.tS -.V” . 

. . . ; . ' • • ■ ' ' “• - v.. . 

. • , ' \. . To” .7 ? ■ 





















