
rvererence 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


development o: the elcod supply 


BEYC HEART 


TT>T TTK 











































































































For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


MBI&WIMIS 

























UNIVERSITY OF A.LLYRTA 
LILRARY 


Regulations Roger A in ■;„ J]R 10 sag an cl ' is s or t at i o ns 

Typescript copies of theses and dissertations for Raster’s 

u ■,oi A. - r ; v •. . -o ■ j. v in tlr Unive: sity of Alberta 

ary, as the Official Copy of the Faculty of G-raduat Studies, 
lay b ;on ulted in the 3 i rence Rea In; Room only. 

A second copy is on repos it in the Department under who s e 
si . 2 \ Lsion the work was done. Some . irtments are willing to 
loan their copy to libraries, through the interlibrary loan 
service of the University of Alberta Library. 

These theses and dissertations are to be used only with due 
ir to priority rights of the author. written permission of 
the author ana of the Department must be obtained through the 
University of Alberta Library when extended passages are used. 
Alien permission has been granted, credit must appear in the 
published work. 

This thesis or dissertation has been used in accordance 
with the above regulations by the persons listed below. The 
borrowing library is obligated to secure the , si mature of each 

user. 






















































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/shnitka1952 








1 



ffrontpiece, 

Sinusoi&o - capillary connection: X 150. 
Right ventricle, 21 mm. pig embryo. 







THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BLOOD SUPPLY TO 
THE PIG EMBRYO HEART 


by 

THEODOR KHYAM SHNITKA 

Research Fellow of the College of 
Physician’s and Surgeons of Alberta 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF MASTER OF SCIENCE 

FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


Department of Anatomy 
Edmonton, Alberta 
April ,1952 






1 


University of Alberta 


Faculty of Arts and Science 
Department of Anatomy 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled ,f The 
Development of the Blood Supply to the Pig Embryo 
Heart”, submitted by Theodor Khyam Shnitka, B.Sc., 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Science* 


PROFESSOR 











IV 


ABSTRACT. 


THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE PIG EMBRYO HEART. 


By using quantitative methods and refinements in 
injection technique, it was possible to profitably restudy 
the development of the blood supply to the pig embryo heart. 
Irrigation of the embryo heart is first accomplished by an 
ebb and flow circulation in the intertrabecular (sinusoidal) 
spaces. The ventricular sinusoidal spaces develop after 3.5 
mm. (C-R), extend to the epicardium by 8 mm., and increase 
in both number and complexity until the £5 mm. stage. Re¬ 
gressive changes then occur, which proceed more rapidly in 
the left ventricle and at the base of the heart, than in the 
right ventricle and at the apex. In 170 mm. specimens, ven¬ 
tricular sinusoids are for the most part reduced to lumen¬ 
less strands of endothelium. Atrial sinusoids are slow to 
develop and continue their growth throughout fetal life. 

In pig embryos of 7 mm., endothelial buds from the 
sinus venosus invade the epicardial mesenchyme of the atrio¬ 
ventricular groove. Coronary veins of adult life emerge 
from the capillary network subsequently formed. Coronary 
arteries are the second factor to complicate the sinusoidal 
blood supply. They commence as endothelial buds, (the left 
at 10 mm., the right at 11 mm.) in the portion of truncus 
arteriosus destined to form the definitive aorta. The cor¬ 
onary capillary bed spreads along the major cardiac grooves. 





. c 


} < 







V 


and from its network the coronary arteries are hewn. All 
the named branches can be identified in 20 mm. specimens. 
Changes in sinusoid and capillary density are considered 
quantitatively. Coronary artery predominance and vari¬ 
ations in vascular pattern are discussed. 

The first anastomatic channels to develop are the 
luminal (Thebesian) vessels, which appear in 19 mm. pig 
embryos, as simple sinusoido-capillary connections. 

Luminal channels largely disappear from the left ventricle 
with the early obliteration of sinusoids, but they con¬ 
tinue to be numerous in the right ventricle, where the 
sinusoids tend to persist. The tissues that provide con¬ 
tinuity between the heart and the rest of the body contain 
vessels that communicate with the coronary arteries. Yasa 
vasorum of the aorta and pulmonary artery commence at the 
40 ram. stage, as a single layer of capillaries in the 
adventitia. Other precursors of the adult extracardiac 
anastomoses appear in the walls of the superior vena cava 
and hemiazygos vein, but not until 70 mm. (C-R). Inter- 
venous anastomoses are first observed at 20 mm., though 
variable in location, they are numerous in fetal hearts, 
and often reach a diameter of 100 microns. In embryo and 
fetal hearts, coronary arteries and coronary arteries and 
veins, are connected through capillary networks only. 
Interarterial and arteriovenous channels of larger calibre 


are absent 









5 





VI 


In late fetal life, valves develop in cardiac veins. 
These are considered in relation to current attempts at 
retrograde perfusion of the coronary vascular tree. Other 
peculiarities of the embryonic cardiac-coronary system, of 
little significance in themselves, but of some clinical 
importance should they occur in human embryos and persist 
into adult life, are intramural coronary arteries and high 
coronary arteries. The histochemical technique for alka¬ 
line phosphatase and glycogen when applied to the pig 
embryo heart, aid in the elucidation of functional changes 
associated with the development of the cardiac-coronary 
system. Findings are discussed. 












.. 


' 


t 


■J 
















Vll 


ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was undertaken at the suggestion and 
under the direction of Dr. R. F. Shaner, to whom the 
author wishes to express his deepest thanks. It is 
a pleasure to acknowledge his stimulating construct¬ 
ive criticisms and words of encouragement. 

Many difficulties were discussed with Dr. H. E. 
Rawlinson, and it is in this connection that his 
assistance is gratefully acknowledged; as is the 
assistance of Dr. J. Tuba in the interpretation of 
histochemical results. Professor W. R. Salt and 
Dr. J. S. Thompson offered helpful suggestions and 
these were much appreciated. 

The author would like to thank Mr. A. G. Fairall 
for his advice concerning the various histological 
techniques employed, and Mr. R. Adair for his co¬ 
operation in numerous ways. Thanks are extended to 
Mr. R. Sutherland, who collected some of the material 
and assisted with the injection of embryo hearts in 
Series D. 

The author is also deeply indebted to the College 
of Physicians and Surgeons of Alberta, whose Fellow¬ 
ship made this work possible. 

Many thanks are due to the Swift Canadian Company 
and to Canada Packers Ltd, for materials and facilit¬ 
ies freely granted. 




■ 


. - . : ' ' • 

.. ..... • , 

■ ' • . , . . : 

,<! ' • ‘ ■ 


. 




















Vlll 


Explanatory Note. 


Figures relevant to the text have been grouped 
together in atlas form at the end of each section. 

They are adequately labeled and the legends are suf¬ 
ficiently elaborate to permit their study independently 
of the text. The photomicrographs shown are the prod¬ 
uct of repeated selection. Some serve to illustrate 
several points, and this increases their practical 
utility far beyond their actual number. As a result of 
this procedure, exact chronology of the textual figure 
references has been sacrificed. 









































■ 


' * • 
















. t • - w • 





















IX 


Table of Contents. 

Frontpiece ... i 

Title page.♦... ii 

Examiner’s certificate.*. iii 

Abstract..... iv 

Acknowledgement.....vii 

Explanatory note..... viii 

Table of contents . ix 

List of illustrations ............ .xii 

Introduction, 

The blood supply to the mammalian heart .... 1 

Myocardial capillaries ...... .... 3 

The cardiac venous return.. 4 

Collateral circulation and coronary anastomoses .. 5 

Extracardiac anastomoses. ....... . ... 6 

Intracardiac anastomoses... 7 

Functional significance of the anastomotic 

channels ...... . ...11 

Comparative anatomy of the coronary circulation ..13 
Development of the cardiac blood supply *..16 

Methods and Materials .... 29 

Quantitative procedures. 

Vascularity of the pig embryo heart .. 40 

Measurement of capillary loops 44 




























X 


Vascularization of aorta and pulmonary artery 44 

Section A. 

Development of the cardiac blood supply in the 
pig embryo. 

Observations, 

Sinusoids .. 48 

Coronary veins ...... . 55 

Coronary arteries *. 58 

Discussion. 

Sinusoids .. 66 

Coronary arteries .. 69 

Section B. 

Development of anastomotic channels in the pig 
embryo heart. 

Observations. 

Luminal channels .. 107 

Extracardiac anastomoses • 111 

Intervascular anastomoses... 114 

Discussion .••.•••...• . 115 

Section C. 

Origin and development of cardiac venous valves 147 

Discussion .. 151 

Intramural coronary arteries. 154 

Discussion... 159 

Congenitally high-placed coronary ostia ....... 161 


















0 








XI 


Section D. 

Histochemical studies . 192 

Localization of alkaline phosphatase in 

the pig embryo heart . 192 

Methods and materials.... 194 

Results. 196 

Discussion... 202 

Localization of glycogen in the pig embryo 

heart • •<><,•••••».•. .. 207 

Methods and materials .. 208 

Results «... . 209 

Discussion 210 

Summary and Conclusions .. 223 

Bibliography .. 225 


Appendix 

Tables I to VII... 244 to 251 

Graphs I to XIII . 252 to 273 

Data (sheets 1 to 6) ... 274 to 279 





















Xll 


List of Illustrations. 


Figs. 1 to 6 .... 21 

Fig. 7 ..... 

Figs. 8 to 10. 45 

Figs. 11 to 34. 74 

Figs. 35 to 58. 119 

Figs. 59 to 73 .. 163 

Figs. 74 to 82. 213 


Pages 
to 28. 

39. 

to 47. 

to 106. 

to 146. 

to 191. 

to 222. 


Figs 


83 to 88 


Pocket, back cover 













INTRODUCTION 





1 


INTRODUCTION. 


The Blood Supply to the Mammalian Heart. 

The mammalian heart is supplied by two large arteries 
which arise from the sinuses of the two anterior cusps of the 
aortic valve and in relation to the cusps are called respect¬ 
ively, the right and left coronary artery. In the following 
discussion of the anatomy of the coronary vessels, compar¬ 
atively little space will be devoted to the main coronary 
arteries and veins because detailed descriptions of them are 
to be found in the various textbooks of anatomy as well as in 
the excellent monograph by Gross (1921). The finer divisions 
of the coronary vessels and the various collateral channels 
will serve as the chief subject matter for this portion of the 
review. 


The right coronary artery appears between the roots of 
the pulmonary artery and aorta and curving to the right in the 
atrio-ventricular groove runs toward the apex in the posterior 
interventricular sulcus. The part of the vessel in the atrio¬ 
ventricular groove is referred to as the right circumflex, 
artery, and that portion in the interventricular sulcus, as the 
posterior descending branch. The left coronary artery is hid¬ 
den at its origin by the pulmonary artery. Its short trunk 
divides into a descending ramus which runs down the anterior 
interventricular groove toward the apex, while the circumflex 















' 




_ 





















2 


branch is more horizontal and runs in the coronary sulcus 
to be distributed to the posterior portion of the heart. 
The subdivisions of the main coronary rami descend super¬ 
ficially in the general direction of the apex and give off 
myocardial branches which course directly into the ven¬ 
tricular muscle. Gross dissection, injection, and studies 
of the distribution of myocardial scars in the dog and 
human heart strongly suggest that each ventricular muscle 
bundle has an individual blood supply, although numerous 
communications exist between the different muscle layers 
(Robb and Robb, 1939; Lowe, 1941; Wartman and Souders, 
1950). The blood supply to special areas in the human 
heart has received considerable attention. The sino- 
auricular node is supplied by the right coronary artery 
in 60 to 75 per cent of hearts and by the left coronary 
in the remainder. The atrioventricular node is supplied 
by a special vessel, the ramus septi fibrosi, which arises 
from the right coronary artery in 90 per cent of hearts. 
The bundle branches receive their blood supply from both 
the left and right coronary vessels (Gross, 1921; Wearn, 
1936). The blood supply to the auricles is less constant 
in pattern than that of the ventricles. It consists of 
small branches passing directly upward from the circumflex 
and right coronary arteries. 













It 


I 






It 













c 

















t 












It 


. 











■ 














3 


Myocardial Capillaries. 

Ultimately, the capillaries and their contents repre¬ 
sent the determining factor in the nutrition of the heart 
muscle. The complete injection of the coronary capillary 
bed is technically quite difficult. However, Wearn (1928-a) 
working with isolated, revived human hearts, succeeded in 
injecting most of the capillary bed with oxygenated Locke's 
solution containing Berlin blue. Thousands of counts of 
capillaries and muscle fibres showed some variation accord¬ 
ing to age. In the hearts of newly born infants with 
average fibre diameters of 6,4 microns, there is only one 
capillary for each six of the small muscle fibres. The 
capillary;fibre ratio of 1:6 at birth changes to a ratio of 
1:1 by adolescence and remains so throughout life in all 
hearts. During the interval from birth to maturity, the 
capillaries increase in number so as to maintain the same 
concentration in the growing heart as at birth, despite the 
increase in size of each muscle fibre (Text Fig. 1), On 
the other hand, when hypertrophy occurs as a result of heart 
disease and failure, the capillary: fibre ratio remains con¬ 
stant, but the capillary concentration falls in proportion 
to the increase in fibre diameter and heart weight (Roberts, 
Wearn and Bofen, 1941). In the normal heart, capillary 
counts are considerably higher in the ventricles than in the 
auricles and the neuromuscular bundle (Johnstone, et al., 
1922; Wearn 1928). Actual counts reveal about 500 to 600 





c 






0 










4 


capillaries per 1000 neuromuscular fibres, or approximately 
one capillary for each two fibres (Text Fig, 2). 

The Cardiac Venous Return, 

Venous blood of the heart is returned to the right 
atrium by the coronary sinus and its tributaries, by the 
accessory veins and Thebesian vessels. The coronary sinus 
occupies the atrio-ventricular groove on the left posterior 
side of the heart, opening into the right atrium between the 
ostium of the inferior vena cava and the right atrio-ventri¬ 
cular valve. The cardiac veins mostly accompany the arteries 
in the sulci and tend to be superficial to them. Opening 
into the sinus, beginning on the anterior surface, are the 
great cardiac vein, which originates at the apex and ascends 
in the interventricular sulcus, a left marginal vein at the 
left side, and a middle cardiac vein in the posterior longi¬ 
tudinal sulcus. The small cardiac vein lies between right 
atrium and ventricle. The vein of Marshall, the remnant of 
the left Cuverian duct, descends obliquely over the back of 
the left atrium and opens near the left extremity of the 
sinus (Quiring, 1949). Besides this drainage system into 
the right atrium, two or three small anterior cardiac veins 
ascend along the right ventricle and empty directly into the 
right atrium (Gregg, et al., 1943), while the venae cordis 
minimae or Thebesian veins open into both atria as well as 
into the ventricles (Spalteholz, 1934-35). 





0 


c 









t ♦ - * 









5 


Collateral Circulation and Coronary Anastomoses. 

The myocardium is provided with a vasculature more 
complex them that in most parts of the body, and like the 
kidney, liver and spleen, has an arrangement peculiar to 
itself. While present day knowledge of the anatomy of the 
larger trunks and branches of the coronary arteries is 
fairly complete, that of the finer divisions, with their 
numerous complex interlocking channels, is still incomplete, 
and in many instances controversial* The collateral channels 
represented schematically in Text Figure 3, are classified 
below on an anatomical basis* 

Anastomotic Channels of the Heart. 

1* Extracardiac. 

(a) through vasa vasorum of the great vessels* 

(b) through pericardial adhesions* 

2* Intracardiac. 

(a) Intervaseular connections. 

Interarterial. 

Intervenous. 

Arteriovenous. 

(b) Luminal connections. 

Arterio-luminal. 

Veno-luminal. 

Capillary-luminal. 










c 


c 








0 


0 









6 


Extracardiac Anastomoses, 

Extracardiac anastomoses connect branches of the 
coronary arteries and other branches of the aorta. These 
are usually minute channels lying in the pericardial 
reflections about the aorta, pulmonary artery and veins 
and venae cavae. The extent of the extracardiac anasto¬ 
moses of the coronary arteries, was studied by Hudson, 
Moritz and ^earn (1932). These investigators found exten¬ 
sive anastomoses of auricular branches of the coronary 
arteries and of the branches to the pericardial fat with 
the pericardiophrenic branches of the internal mammary 
arteries, and the anterior mediastinal, pericardial, bron¬ 
chial, superior and inferior phrenic, intercostal and 
esophageal branches of the aorta. Through these various 
branches, India ink which was injected into the coronary 
arteries found its way into the vasa vasorum and vessels 
of the tunica adventitia of the aorta as far as the dia¬ 
phragm, and of the pulmonary arteries as far as the lungs. 

A rich network of injected vessels also appeared in the 
mediastinum, over the entire surface of the parietal peri¬ 
cardium, over the diaphragm and in the walls of the trachea 
and esophagus. It was possible not only to demonstrate the 
passage of injection mass from the coronary arteries into 
the vessels of surrounding structures, but also to show 
vessels in the heart injected through the thoracic branches 
of the aorta. These extracardiac branches of the coronary 
arteries, while small in calibre individually, are numerous 






. 




c 



t 


t 


< 


< 



I, 



t 


c 










7 


and, whan taken together, make up an anastomotic channel of 
considerable diameter. 

Intracardiac Anastomoses. 

In the normal adult heart anastomoses between the 
coronary arteries and / or their branches are easily demon¬ 
strated by the injection of watery solutions of India ink 
or Prussian blue. However, the use of such low viscosity 
substances does not indicate the probable size of the 
communications either in death or life. By the injection 
of graduated glass spheres and radioactive red cells into 
the coronary arteries of normal human hearts, Prinzmetal, 
et al. (1947) have shown that the largest intercoronary 
artery communications range from 70 to 180 microns (approx¬ 
imately the diameter of arterioles), and some of these can 
be seen visually. The chief zones of intercoronary anasto¬ 
moses, as described by Schlesinger (1938) and illustrated 
in Text Figure 4 are: 

(a) The anterior surface of the right ventricle to the 
right of and parallel to the anterior interventricular 
groove; 

(b) the region of the posterior interventricular groove; 

(c) the interventricular septum* 

Blumgart and his colleagues (1940), employing the method of 
radio-opaque injection and dissection, concluded that while 
anastomoses larger than 40 microns in diameter are not found 
in normal hearts, arteriosclerotic narrowing or occlusion 





< 







1 


< \ ■ ■ 1 




t 





8 


causes development of intercoronary anastomoses from 40 to 
200 microns in diameter. Foilowing coronary artery narrow¬ 
ing or occlusion, a compensatory collateral circulation 
develops in proportion to the degree and duration of the 
arterial stricture and in relation to the areas so involved. 
Relative cardiac anoxia appears to be a basic stimulus for 
the development of these interarterial connections (Zoll, 
et al. 1951). Intervenous anastomoses are of large size 
and of frequent occurrence. They are readily recognised 
with the naked eye (Batson and Bellet, 1930-31)„ Arterio¬ 
venous anastomoses are known to be present elsewhere in the 
body and have been seen by Nussbaum (1912) in the heart. 

He suggested that this system, which lies in the epicardium, 
serves to transmit blood from the arteries to veins during 
systole, when the capillaries are compressed. Prinzmetal 
(1947) has presented evidence for the normal existence of 
myocardial arteriovenous anastomoses with a diameter of 
from 70 to 170 microns. 

The discovery of luminal connections of coronary 
vessels has been credited to Vieussens (1706), but the first 
full description was by Thebesius in 1708. As shown in Text 
Figure 5 and the accompanying legend, since that time many 
investigators have studied the anastomotic connections and 
physiology of these vessels. Wearn (1928-b) perfused the 
coronary arteries with India ink and noted that as much as 
90 per cent of the ink might escape directly into the card- 





c 








J 


* V - 















9 


iac chambers through openings in the walls* Microscopic 
examination revealed that scarcely any of the capillaries 
contained India ink* a thick celloidin mixture, too 
viscous to penetrate capillaries, was also injected into 
the coronary arteries and passed through the openings in 
the cardiac walls into the auricles and ventricles* These 
observations suggested the existence of direct channels, 
certainly larger than capillaries, between the arteries and 
cardiac chambers. The presence of such channels was con¬ 
firmed by constructing celloidin casts of them, using an 
injection and corrosion technique (Wearn, et al., 1933). 
Finally by means of wax reconstructions from serial 
sections of such vessels, Wearn and his associates (1933) 
have clearly demonstrated two types of channels in human 
hearts, which they term arterio-luminal and arterio- 
sinusoidal respectively* The arterio luminal vessels (Text 
Fig. 6), are coronary branches from 0*2 to 1 mm* in dia¬ 
meter, which keep their arterial structure as they branch 
from the parent vessel, but lose it rapidly as they approach 
the lumen of the heart* Occassional branches which are given 
off arborize into capillaries. The arterio-sinusoidal vessels 
are branches of a coronary artery which arborize into vessels 
of irregular lumina with diameters varying from 50 to 250 
microns* The myocardial sinusoids, whose walls consist of a 
single layer of endothelium, run a meandering course, anasto¬ 
mose very freely with one another, and at their distal ends 






t 



t 


c 


t 








10 


open into the heart chambers, through endocardial foramina 
lying deeply within intertrabecular spaces* Veno-luminal 
vessels also occur in the heart and these communicate on 
the one hand with the cavities of both ventricles, on the 
other with the coronary sinus and other large coronary 
veins, and hence with the capillary bed of the ventricular 
muscle. Confusion has been caused in the past by calling 
all of the openings of collateral channels in the heart 
walls, Thebesian veins. This term, if used should be 
applied only to the vana-luminal vessels. The ostia of the 
veno-luminal vessels are observed as small depressions or 
crypts, and occur in the endocardium of both auricles and 
ventricles, but more especially in the right heart. The 
relations of these channels have been studied by Grant 
and Yiko (1929) in the sheep heart. Their studies demon¬ 
strated three types of vessels: 

(1) those arborizing to end in a capillary network; 

(2) channels uniting neighboring foramina and showing all 
variations from fine anastomoses between neighboring 
trees to tortuous intertrabecular spaces, and 

(3) vessels uniting foramina with coronary veins and show¬ 
ing all variations from fine anastomoses between 
Thebesian tree and coronary vein to direct communi¬ 
cation of the coronary vein with ventricle. 












t 









<• 







1 






11 


Functional Significance of the Anastomotic Channels, 

The importance of cardiac anastomoses lies in their 
potential capacity as a collateral source of blood for 
areas of heart muscle deprived of an adquate blood supply 
by the narrowing or occlusion of a coronary artery. Dis¬ 
agreement as to whether or not the coronary arteries are 
end arteries is due chiefly to differences in definition 
of the term. Experimental and pathologic observations 
have demonstrated that they are not end arteries, anatom¬ 
ically, since there are abundant intercoronary anastomoses. 

In the normal heart, these anastomoses carry a small but 
significant blood flow, while in the presence of coronary 
narrowing and occlusion they increase considerably in si 2 e 
and are capable of maintaining a substantial circulation. 
Nevertheless, confirmatory evidence of abundant anasto¬ 
moses does not negate the essential fact that coronary 
occlusion is usually followed by myocardial infarction, i.e., 
that the available collateral vessels are Inadequate to main¬ 
tain myocardial viability. This is the basis for the state¬ 
ment that the coronary arteries are physiologic but not 
anatomic end arteries. The earliest experimental evidence in 
favor of serviceable luminal communications was put forward 
by Pratt (1898), who showed that the heart of a cat, perfused 
solely by warm oxygenated blood through the ventricular 
cavities, could be made to beat and that the blood which 
issued from an incised surface vein had a dark venous hue. 









. 









12 


Stella 11931) however, was unable to record any flow from 
the peripheral ends of coronary vessels when all were 
temporarily ligated centrally, which strongly indicated 
that a flow through Thebesian communications must be very 
insignificant in normal hearts. At seeming variance with 
such conclusions were the observations of Bohning, jochim 
and Katz (1933) that particulate matter injected into the 
ventricular cavities under conditions in which access 
through coronary branches is precluded, nevertheless is 
found in ventricular capillaries on post-mortem histo¬ 
logical examination. Eckstein, Roberts, Gregg and Wearn 
(1941), by injecting India ink or Berlin blue into the 
isolated right ventricle of the normally beating heart, 
conducted experiments designed to study the direction of 
blood flow in the luminal channels which communicate with 
the right ventricle. There was no gross or microscopic 
injection of the myocardium when right ventricular 
systolic pressure was below left ventricular systolic 
pressure. When the right ventricular systolic and 
diastolic pressures were m^de to exceed the left ventric¬ 
ular systolic and diastolic pressures respectively, gross 
and microscopic injection of myocardial capillaries, 
venules and sinusoids in both ventricles and septum 
occurred. It is therefore conceivable that in patholo¬ 
gical states such as pulmonary stenosis, left ventricular 
failure, mitral stenosis or coronary artery stenosis, 
where the right ventricular pressure exceeds that in the 




. 









J 


t 


rs 







t 







t 


t 



c 


' 




II 







13 


left ventricle and coronary arteries, the myocardium may 
be nourished from the right ventricle through the luminal 
vessels. The magnitude of flow through the luminal channels 
is not known, but in rare hearts where both main coronary 
arteries are completely occluded by chronic pathological 
processes, the luminal vessels may acquire a major role in 
nourishing the heart (Leary and Wearn, 1930; Cabot and 
Mallory, 1930). Although the occlusion had apparently been 
complete for many months, the history of these patients 
revealed that they had been able to perform considerable 
work up to the time of death. Recent workers (Zoll, et al, 
1951), while stressing the importance of intercoronary 
anastomoses, have considered the luminal vessels to be of 
minor significance. They argue that blood from the right 
ventricular cavity would be of little service in nourishing 
the myocardium, since it is of low oxygen content, and more¬ 
over is under relatively low hydrostatic pressure. 

Comparative Anatomy of the Coronary Circulation. 

Information concerning the comparative anatomy of the 

vertebrate heart has often been used as evidence in support 

»» 

of the "biogenetic law”, expressed by Hackel in the terse 
dictum, ontogeny repeats phylogeny. During the development 
of the mammalian heart, however, phylogenetic stages tend to 
telescope, so as to meet the functional requirements of the 
embryo. As a result, primitive features may co-exist with 








c 


t 
















o 


( 


t 







14 


more advanced structures* The view that the coronary system 
is homologous throughout the vertebrate series has been put 
forward by Grant and Regnier (1926) and strongly supported 
by Foxon (1950). The alternative interpretation, which 
regards the coronary arteries of mammals as vasa vasorum 
(Q,uiring, 1949) has been discounted by Foxon. 

The most primitive type of vascular supply to the 
heart is seen in the lamprey. It is in this group 
(Cyclostomata) alone that coronary vessels are wanting, 
the heart being nourished entirely by the blood passing 
through the intertrabecular spaces, which extend to the 
epicardium (Grant and Regnier, 1926). These intertra¬ 
becular spaces are adequate for the nutrition of such an 
undifferentiated heart. This basic sinusoidal system is 
most important, for it is seen in all higher animals 
including fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. How¬ 
ever, in the remaining vertebrates, a completely spongy 
myocardium is found only during development, the coronary 
vessels appearing once the cortical condensation of ven¬ 
tricular muscle has begun. As the scale of animal life is 
ascended, the coronary vessels become more developed and 
the intertrabecular spaces less so. The nutrient arteries 
of the fish heart arise indirectly from the ventral ends of 
several efferent branchial vessels, through the hypobranch- 
ial arteries of one or both sides, and pass to the heart 
along the truncus arteriosus and bulbus cordis. Although 




/ 




l 







C 


t 





i 





; 





♦ ' 





15 


in internal structure amphibian and reptilian hearts show 
an advance over that of the fish, yet they remain in great 
part avascular. The coronary vessels still have a remote 
branchial origin and on reaching the heart, supply only the 
cortical condensation of myocardium, particularly of the 
bulbus. Detailed descriptions reveal a considerable 
variation in the number and distribution of coronary 
arteries not only in different species, but in different 
specimens of the same species (Grant and Regnier, 1926; 
Foxon 1950). In birds and mammals, with the development of 
a compact myocardium, the main blood supply is by way of 
the right and left coronary arteries, which arise from the 
base of the aorta. Grant and Regnier regarded the coronary 
arteries as extracardiac vessels which have extended to the 
heart along all convenient attachments in response to the 
needs of the developing myocardium. The elimination of the 
gills and the establishment of the lungs, allows a gradual 
shifting of the origin of the coronary arteries from the 
epibranchial vessels to the very base of the aorta (Grant 
and Regnier, 1926; Foxon, 1950). Grant and Regnier have 
also described a caudal group of arteries which reach the 
heart by way of cardiac ligaments. These vessels are 
present in Amphibia and Reptilia, but are absent in most 
fishes and are entirely absent in birds and mammals. 

Foxon regards the cardiac ligaments and the blood vessels 
which they carry as later developments, in all probability 






c 

















<• . It 








16 


indicative of a specialized condition. Moreover, this 
caudal group of vessels does not appear in mammalian 
embryos. 


The coronary veins, like the coronary arteries, 
are in the first instance extracardiac vessels, passing 
to the nearest trunks along all convenient attachments. 

As the phylogenetic series is ascended the veins show a 
tendency to open directly into the sinus venosus. As 
already stated, with the exception of marsipobranchii 
and Amphibia, all adult vertebrate hearts are supplied 
with a well-developed coronary system, and in them too, 
the primitive spongy ventricular muscle is altered, in 
increasing degree as the evolutionary scale is ascended, 
to a dense and compact myocardium. The coronary and 
intertrabecular systems communicate to some extent in 
the eel, ray and in fishes (Grant and Kegnier, 1926). 
Although our knowledge concerning these communications 
is scanty they undoubtedly correspond to the collateral 
luminal circulation of the mammalian heart. 

Development of the Cardiac Blood Supply. 

There have been remarkably few embryologic studies 
of the human coronary circulation. Watkins (1947), in a 
description of the cardiac-coronary system of an 18 mm. 
human embryo, noted the presence of a well-developed 





t 


c 


€ 


c 


t 




t 


t 


c 



« v 


I 








17 


system of arteries and veins, and remarked on the main 
variations from the mature system. Most of our knowledge 
of the development of the cardiac-coronary vessels in 
Mammalia has been derived from investigations conducted 
on rabbit and pig embryos. Wheeldon (1916) studied in 
detail the heart of the 20 mm. pig embryo, and observed 
a well established system of arteries, veins and capil¬ 
laries. Grant (1926) described the origin of both 
arteries and veins in the rabbit, and in the same paper 
discussed the embryonal heart sinusoids as well as the 
probable nature of the peculiar epithelial buds observ¬ 
able in some of the younger hearts. This work, which was 
conducted on serial sections of uninjected rabbit embryos, 
represents the first attempt to describe age extensions of 
the coronary arteries and veins in a mammalian embryo. 

The irrigation of the myocardium is first accomplished by 
the sinusoidal circulation. An ebb and flow circulation of 
blood takes place in the complicated system of communicating 
intertrabecular spaces, which extend from the ventricular 
chambers to the epicardium. Next the veins grow out and 
arborize. The earliest rudiments of these are seen in 
rabbit embryos of about 7 mm. total length, as endothelial, 
outgrowths from the left horn of the sinus venosus. Lastly 
the coronary arteries appear as endothelial thickenings of 
the truneus arteriosus in embryos of 10 to 11 mm., greatest 
length. These buds grow out along the major cardiac sulci, 
















18 


and give rise to the coronary arteries of the adult. 

Bennett (1936) conducted a detailed study of the develop¬ 
ment of the blood supply to the pig embryo heart, and his 
findings by and large confirm those of Grant (1926). 

Bennett*s work was largely based on an analysis of thick 
serial sections of material injected with India ink by 
way of the umbilical vessels. Because of this refinement 
in technique, he was able to describe the age extensions 
of the coronary vessels as well as the concurrent regress¬ 
ive changes in sinusoids, with a good deal of precision. 

In the pig embryo heart, vascular elements make their 
appearance as follows: 

(a) Sinusoidal spaces commence in the ventricle at 3.5 mm. 

(b) In 7 mm. embryos (G-R length) the veins first sprout 
from many parts of the descending pocket of the sinus 
venosus. 

(c) The primordia of the coronary arteries spring from the 
truncus arteriosis, the left at 10 mm., the right at 
11 mm. (G-R length). 

The paper by Goldsmith and Butler (1937), which appeared 
only a few months after Bennett 1 s, also described the coron¬ 
ary circulation in the pig embryo. Age extensions of the 
named branches of the coronary tree were thoroughly invest¬ 
igated and well illustrated. Goldsmith and Butler studied 
smaller embryos exclusively as serial sections, medium-sized 
embryos in both serial sections and injected material, and 







! 


C 


c 






19 


the larger embryos only as injected specimens. The in¬ 
jection mass was introduced into the embryo either 
through the walls of the apex of the heart or through the 
umbilical artery, the latter method giving slightly more 
desirable results. Concerning the fate of the inter- 
trabecular spaces, two views have been expressed. Grant 
(1926) believed that the intertrabecular spaces are con¬ 
verted to capillaries by growth of muscular trabeculae 
and become incorporated to form part of the adult coronary 
circulation. Bennett (1936), on the other hand, concluded 
that the sinusoids become reduced to vestigial strands of 
endothelium without a lumen, and are replaced by the coron¬ 
ary vessels. Information concerning the development of the 
collateral circulatory channels of the heart is scanty. 

Grant (1926) considered the sinusoido-capillary channels 
(the precursors of the adult Thebesian vessels) to be 
numerous, but his material was not suited for their study. 
Bennett (1936) found two to six such communications in any 
one well-injected embryo heart, but again their detailed 
study was hampered by technical difficulties. Bennett 
briefly described the development of the extracardiae anasto¬ 
moses but made no mention of intervascular collateral channels. 

A survey of the literature has revealed the existence 
of a considerable body of information relating to the ana¬ 
tomy of adult coronary vessels and associated collateral 



t 




c 




c 


t 




V 





c 










20 


channels. However, our knowledge of the embryonic counter¬ 
parts of these vessels is either inadequate or lacking 
entirely. The present investigation was undertaken in an 
attempt to bridge a few of the gaps in this field of embry¬ 
ology. The aims are set forth below: 

(1) to restudy the development of the blood supply to the 
pig embryo heart, using refinements in injection 
technique. 

(2) to describe progressive vascular changes occuring in 
the embryo heart, quantitatively wherever possible. 

(3) to consider the development of the various collateral 
circulatory channels of the heart. 

(4) to note other embryologic peculiarities of the cardiac- 
coronary system, and consider them in the light of 
their clinical significance, should they occur in human 
embryos and persist into adult life. 

(5) to apply histochemical tests to the embryo heart in an 
attempt to elucidate functional changes associated with 
the transformation and growth of the blood supply. 




c 







: 























FIG “ I. 

CHANGES IN THE FIBER : CAPILLARY RATIO DURING 

GROWTH OF HUMAN HEARTS. 

(A) - FROM HEART OF NEWBORN CHILD. 

(b) ” FROM A NORMAL ADULT HEART. 

(FROM- ROBERTS, WEARN AND BOTEN ■■ 

AMER. HEART J„ 2U 617, 1941) 









22 


r 





ouva Aavnidvo : aaau 



THE EXTENT OF THE CAPILLARY BED OF THE ADULT HUMAN HEART. 
( DATA FROM — WEARN J. EXP. MED., 47 - 273, 1928.) 













































r 


FIG.-3. 





1 • EXTRACARDIAC ANASTOMOSES. 

2 • VENAE PARVAE CORDIS. 

3 • CORONARY VEINS ENDING IN CORONARY SINUS. 

4 ' INTERCORONARY ARTERIAL ANASTOMOSES. 

5 ' COLLATERAL LUMINAL VESSELS. 

6 • INTERARTERIAL ANASTOMOSES THROUGH CAPILLARIES. 

7 • INTERVENOUS ANASTOMOSES. 


( AFTER — ROBERTS , 1950). 






















r 


L 




FIG 4 

R A = RIGHT AURICLE 
LA = LEFT AURICLE 
LAM = LEFT AURICLE 
L V A = LEFT VENTRICLE 
R V C = RIGHT VENTRICLE 
ARTERIOSUS. 


R V = RIGHT VENTRICLE 
L V = LEFT VENTRICLE 
LOOKING INTO MITRAL VALVE 
AT BASE OF AORTA. 

IN REGION OF CONUS 


HORIZONTAL LINES REPRESENT THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE 
RIGHT CORONARY ARTERY, VERTICAL LINES THE LEFT 
CORONARY ARTERY, AND THE CHECKED AREAS WHERE 
THE BRANCHES OF EACH ARTERY OVERLAP 


COMPOSITE PICTURE DERIVED FROM A 

OF ADULT HUMAN HEARTS. 


LARGE NUMBER 


(FROM:- THE ANATOMY OF THE CORONARY VESSELS'— WEARf 
IN- DISEASES OF THE CORONARY ARTERIES AND CARDIAI 
FAIN - R.L. LEVY, MACMILLAN, 1936.) 










25 


Legend - Text Figure 5. 


From - Batson and Bellet: Amer. Heart J., 6: £06, 1930-31. 

Diagram is based upon the embryological origin and adult 
distribution of vessels, and the terminology employed is 
compatible with these points of view and with the termin¬ 
ology generally employed in the vascular system. In dev¬ 
elopment, the endocardial sinusoidal system develops first; 
the epicardial venous vessels develop next; and, finally, 
the epicardial arterial vessels develop and join the other 
two, forming a common capillary bed. The endocardial or 
epicardial origin of the vessels, as well as their various 
modes of interconnection, are indicated in the diagram. 
Sinusoidal Ostia are present in all four chambers of the 
heart. Intervenous Anastomoses have long been common know¬ 
ledge. They are obvious with the naked eye. Sinusoido- 
venous Anastomoses have been recognized by Thebesius (1708), 
Yerheyen (1712), Laneisius (1740 posthumous), von Haller 
(1786), Abernathy (1798), Bochdelak (1868), von Danger 
(1880), Pratt (1898), Nussbaum (1912), Kretz (1927), Wearn 
(1928), and Grant and Yiko (1929). Sinusoido-Arterial 
Anastomoses were described by Abernathy (1798) and by 
Wearn (1928). Arteriovenous Anastomoses were described and 
figured by Nussbaum (1912). Interarterial Anastomoses are 
reported by Thebesius (1708), von Haller (1786), Morgagni 
(1761), Senac (1749), Caldani and Caldani (1810), Krause 















t 








26 


(1879), Jamin and Merkel (1907), Spalteholz (1907 and 
1924) and by Gross (1921). Slnusoidooapillary Connections 
are recognized by Vieussens (1706), Thebesius (1708), 
Winslow (1776), Verheyen (1712), Lancisius (1740), 

Bochdelak (1868), Henle (1880), Hyrtl (1884), Langer (1880), 
Gross (1921), and Grant and Viko (1929). 











27 



FIG 5 - Diagram of the myocardial circulation- 

(FROM - BATSON AND BELLET: AMER. HEART J., 6: 206, 1930- 31.) 





















28 





2 CAPILLARY-LUMINAL ANASTOMOSIS 

3 VENO-LUMINAL ANASTOMOSIS 

FIG- 6.™ COLLATERAL LUMINAL 
CIRCULATION OF THE 
RIGHT VENTRICLE. 

(FROM:-' DYNAMICS AND CIRCULATION OF HEART MUSCLE' 

-JT ROBERTS, 

IN: -" PATHOLOGIC PHYSIOLOGY" - WA- SODEMAN - 1950 ) 

a 








METHODS AND MATERIALS 



29 


METHODS AND MATERIALS. 


Pig embryos, which are readily obtainable in a 
condition suitable for injection, throughout the year, 
were chosen for study. The investigations of Bennett 
(1936) and of Goldsmith and Butler (1937), conducted on 
closely graded series of pig embryos, served as a useful 
background for, and indicated the starting point of, the 
present work. In order to fulfill the aims, already set 
forth, a number of procedures were employed: 

(a) For the study of younger embryos, ranging from 3,5 to 

12 mm, C-R length, use was made of the excellent serial 

sections of uninjected pig embryos in the Alberta Embryo- 
logical Collection (stained with haematoxylin and eosin, 
sind cut at 10 u) • These were satisfactory for the demon¬ 
stration of early developmental stages of sinusoids, coron¬ 
ary veins and arteries, but proved inadequate for the study 
of the more intricate vascular arrangements occurring in 
embryos of over 12 mm. Eighty class sets of serial sections, 
cut at 12 u, and representing pig embryos of from 10 to 12 
mm. C-R, were also examined. These furnished information 
concerning the origin of the coronary arteries. 

(b) Injection methods. 

Descriptions of age extensions of the coronary vessels 
based on injected material studied grossly, and / or in 







fc 




30 


serial sections are necessarily arbitrary and depend on 
the degree of penetration of the injection mass into the 
vascular tree. The completeness of vascular injection in 
the pig embryo heart was found to be dependent on six 
variable factors: 

(1) Properties of the injection mass. 

The two materials most frequently used for vascular 
injection of embryos are diluted India ink and an 
aqueous suspension of Berlin blue. These low viscos¬ 
ity injection masses are unaffected by the reagents 
employed in histological technique and do not diffuse 
from vascular channels. Soluble blue yields the best 
results, since it flows more readily, adheres more 
closely to vascular endothelium, and is more trans¬ 
parent when cleared, than India ink. 

(2) Injection pressure. 

The injection pressure at the nozzle of the cannula 
must be sufficient to produce the desired degree of 
vascular filling, but insufficient to cause capillary 
rupture and extravasation. 

(3) Duration of application of the necessary and sufficient 
injection pressure. 

Complete injection is only possible if the injection 
pressure is maintained for a time sufficiently long, to 


: 


f 




j 
















31 


insure the introduction of a volume of injection mass 
exceeding the capacity of the vascular tree. 

(4) Physiological condition of the embryo heart. 

Beating hearts are the most readily injected as the 
rhythmical muscular contractions aid in the uniform 
distribution of injection material. Hearts arrested 
in diastole may also be completely injected. However, 
with the onset of rigor, complete injection becomes 
increasingly more difficult if not impossible. 

(5) Intravascular clotting of blood. 

Firm clots form in the vascular channels of the embryo 
heart within two hours after death. These act as 
"emboli" and prevent the free circulation of injection 
fluid through the coronary tree. 

(6) Route of injection. 

As a general rule, the more direct the route of inject¬ 
ion, the more likely is complete injection. In attempt¬ 
ing to inject the cardiac-coronary system of the embryo 
by way of umbilical vessels, the entire vascular bed of 
the embryo must also be filled. Pressure is dissipated 
as the injection material passes through peripheral 
vascular channels. The method does not permit the con¬ 
trolled injection of selected components of the cardiac- 
coronary system. Moreover, a critical study of the 




























33 


luminal vessels is impossible, for injection material 
may enter the coronary vessels by way of the coronary 
ostia, coronary sinus, or ventricular cavity and 
luminal channels. If the embryo heart is excised and 
injected by way of the ascending aorta, progress and 
completeness of injection may be judged by visual 
inspection. However, selective filling of the coron¬ 
ary vessels is still impossible. Direct injection of 
coronary arteries through their orifices is the method 
of choice. The percentage of successful injections is 
high and there is no doubt as to the route followed by 
the injection mass. Furthermore, it enables one to 
selectively inject a single coronary artery and / or 
its larger branches. 

With these factors in mind, a closely graded series 
of pig embryos, ranging from 11.5 to 210 mm. C-R length, 
were obtained under conditions optimal for complete inject¬ 
ion. The injection apparatus was of simple design. It 
consisted of a graded series of glass cannulae (internal 
tip diameter, 0.2 to 3 mm.), which could be connected 
singly to a syringe by a length of rubber tubing. A 
aqueous solution of Tieman's soluble blue (soluble Berlin 
blue, Coleman and Bell) served as the injection mass. By 
application of negative pressure, injection material was 






c 


c 



e 


( 








■t 




i 







33 


drawn into the appropriate cannula to the level indicated 
in Text Figure 7. The remainder of the system was filled 
with air. The compressibility of the air combined with 
the elasticity of the rubber tubing made possible the 
application of a relatively non-fluctuating positive pres¬ 
sure during injection. 

Injection procedures were performed on the killing 
floor of the Swift Canadian Company, Limited, Edmonton. 
Operative conditions were not the best, but the abundance 
of material compensated for any inconveniences. Fifteen to 
thirty minutes after killing, the sows were opened, the 
uterus cut at the cervix and handed to the experimener. 

This lapse of time and the drainage of blood from the sow 
had a material effect upon the procural of suitable living 
material. Embryos ranging from 11.5 to 21 mm., C-B length, 
were injected by the method illustrated in Text Figure 7. 
Thus a living embryo, after removal from the uterus, was 
placed on a support so as to lie with head extended and 
mandible depressed. A glass cannula of suitable calibre, 
filled with injection mass, was then pushed through the 
tongue and mesodermal structures of the neck so as to pierce 
and enter the ascending aorta. As the dye-filled cannula 
and blood-filled vessels were clearly visible through the 
transparent body wall, it was possible to direct the tip of 
















4 







34 


the cannula to the precise level of the coronary orifices. 
Application of a positive pressure sufficient to ensure 
filling of the coronary vessels and chambers of the beating 
heart, with coloring material, completed the injection pro¬ 
cedure* Following withdrawal of the cannula, the whole 
embryo was fixed in 10$ formalin* 

In the case of larger embryos and fetuses, the heart 
was exposed, and removed along with attached great vessels* 
A cannula, again of suitable size, introduced through the 
cut end of the ascending aorta, was maneuvered so as to fit 
snugly into the right coronary orifice. Following the suc¬ 
cessful injection of this vessel and all its branches, the 
procedure was repeated on the left coronary artery. In¬ 
jection of a heart arrested in diastole often initiated 
several weak contractions and these aided the even distri¬ 
bution of injection material* In some specimens, a back- 
flow of injection material also filled the left ventricle* 

A complete and even arterial injection was assumed when the 
myocardium appeared dark blue to the unaided eye, and indi¬ 
vidual arterioles could not be seen (see Fig* 56). Hearts 
showing evidence of incomplete injection were discarded. 

The remainder were stained in toto in Grenadier's borax- 
carmine for 1 to 5 days, the length of immersion depending 
on the size of the specimen. The hearts were then differ- 




: 









35 


entiated in 70$ acid alcohol, dehydrated, embedded in soft 
o 

paraffin (M.P. 49 C.) and serially sectioned at 40 microns. 
In the completed sections, injected blood vessels appeared 
blue, nuclei red and sarcoplasm, pink. The 130 hearts, 
which were prepared as described above, constituted Series 
A. The descriptive and quantitative information pertain¬ 
ing to sinusoids, coronary arteries, veins and capillaries, 
anastomotic channels, and mural vessels, was for the most 
part compiled during the study of this material. The 
development of any portion of the cardiac circulatory 
system is variable in its time relationships* For this 
reason as many as thirteen specimens of a single size have 
been included in the series, and almost every embryo size 
is represented by at least two specimens. The descript¬ 
ions of various vessels are often composite in nature and 
are not specific for any single specimen. At this point 
it may be noted that all injected embryos were measured 
while fresh. Post-fixation measurements, if required, may 
be obtained from data furnished by Patten and Philpott 
(1921). The Greenough type binocular microscope used in 
the study of all preparations gave a stereoscopic image 
combined with a very wide field. At a magnification of 100 
diameters, the dye-filled vascular channels could be 
followed for long distances through various planes in the 
thick sections, and their anastomoses and relationships 



e 





< 


i 


C 




<: 














36 


accurately determined. Extravasations could be readily 
recognized and they were of infrequent occurrence. 

Series B, consisting of eleven specimens (42 to 90 
mm., C-R length), contains hearts injected through one 
coronary orifice only. Treatment, in all other respects 
was identical with that in Series A. From material in 
Series B, useful information was gained concerning inter- 
vascular anastomoses, luminal vessels and mural coronaries. 

Series C, consisting of 18 specimens, represents 
embryos ranging in size from 25 to 220 mm. (C-R length). 

Its preparation followed the detailed examination of hearts 
from Series A and B, and represented an attempt to supply 
material which would be more ideally suited for the study 
of sinusoids and luminal channels* In each case the heart 
was exposed by careful dissection and removed with the 
proximal portions of the great vessels still attached. A 
glass cannula, filled with injection material, was intro¬ 
duced into the ascending aorta and pushed past the semi¬ 
lunar valves so as to enter the cavity of the left ven¬ 
tricle. With the application of positive pressure the left 
ventricle, left atrium, and communicating sinusoids and 
luminal vessels were filled with dye. Following the intro¬ 
duction of the cannula into the pulmonary artery, the right 
ventricle and atrium were similarly filled. The resulting 
material was fixed in 10^ formalin, dehydrated, embedded in 














t 


- 


t 







' 


<: 






r>«• 



37 


celloidin and sectioned at 100 microns. A counterstain was 
not applied. All slices were simply cleared and mounted, 
though not serially. These sections proved particularly 
suitable for the purpose intended. Capillaries, for the 
most part, were uninjected, and consequently they did not 
further complicate the already intricate pattern presented 
by twisting and communicating sinusoids. 

The 56 hearts comprising Series D were taken from 
embryos whose C-R lengths ranged from 16 to 220 mm. 

Injection conditions were so arranged as to prevent capil¬ 
lary filling, but to permit study of age extensions of 
named branches of the coronary vascular tree. For arterial 
injection of the smallest embryos in the series, a 3$ 
aqueous solution of Tieman f s soluble blue was employed 
under very low positive pressure. The cannula was intro¬ 
duced into the coronary ostia only after the onset of rigor. 
For venous injection, the cannula was pushed through the 
wall of the right auricle, the tip being directed into the 
coronary sinus. Larger embryos were similarly injected, but 
the viscosity of the injection mass was increased by the 
addition of gelatin. Following fixation in 10 % formalin, 
the material was cleared by the Spalteholz method and 
examined in toto. Areas of special interest, which were 
to be photographed, were dissected free, and the resulting 
fragments were flattened by compression between glass slides. 








t 


c 








i. : / t 


T 


0 r,r 


' 

e 







38 


For arterial injection of the 30 remaining and larger 
embryos of the series, a more viscous injection mass, 
consisting of very thin celloidin colored with dissolved 
Sudan Black B (o.5 per cent), was employed* This mass 
would immediately harden upon contact with moisture 
present in the fresh tissue. Although the finest 
arteriolar branches could be filled, the capillary bed 
was never penetrated. Uncleared, formalin-fixed speci¬ 
mens were examined in toto. 

When deemed necessary, adult pig material was 
prepared in a similar manner as described above, for 
comparison with the embryos. In approximately 80 adult 
pig hearts, endocardial foramina of Thebesian veins were 
sought after and found in the anterior wall of the right 
ventricle. In a number of these specimens, veno-luminal 
channels ramifying in the anterior wall of the right ven¬ 
tricle were injected by way of their endocardial foramina. 














‘10 



t 



1 








' 


' 


: :>u 


V 







39 




3% SOLUTION, 
TIEMAN'S SOLUBLE BLUE - 

PASTEUR PIPETTE PUSHED 
THROUGH TONGUE AND 
MESODERM OF NECK, TO 
PIERCE AND ENTER 
ASCENDING AORTA. 

15 MM- PIG EMBRYO, ifl 
HEAD EXTENDED, 

MANDIBLE DE- ^ 

PRESSED. 


TONGUE 





- OF RUBBER TUBING 
(1/16 WALL, i/8’ BORE) 
CAROTID ARTERY 
DESCENDING AORTA 
DUCTUS ARTERIOSUS 


ARROW IN 
AORTIC OUTLET 
INTERVENTRICULAR 
SEPTUM 
INTERTRABECULAR 
(SINUSOIDAL) SPACE 
LIVER 


FIG. 7 - INJECTION METHOD. 












40 


Quantitative Procedures. 


Vascularity of the Pig; Embryo Heart 

The method developed by Chalkley (1943-44) for the 
quantitative morphologic analysis of tissues, makes it 
possible to express developmental changes in the vascu¬ 
larity of the pig embryo heart in a numerical fashion. In 
this method, a random distribution of points is repeatedly 
presented to the tissue studied. The total number of points 
lying in each of the various tissue components is summed up. 
The ratios of these sums approach the ratios of the volume 
fractions occupied by the respective tissue components. In 
applying the method, the fundamental requirement is to 
obtain a random distribution of points within the tissue 
under observation. 

Five droplets of India ink, ranging in size from 0.138 
to 0.198 mm. were spattered on the central portion of a No. 1 
coverslip, and allowed to dry. The coverslip was cut to size 
and positioned on the diaphragm of a 10 X ocular. A micro¬ 
scope, fitted with this ocular, showed a fixed pattern of 
points in the focal plane of the image. In practice, the 
object was brought into focus, and the position of the points 
noted, i.e. whether they fell on sinusoids, capillaries or 
muscle, and these observations were recorded. The object, 
which was then thrown completely out of focus, was moved 
slightly under the 44 X (high dry) objective. It was then 








. . 




.. .... t 








41 


brought back into focus at varying vertical levels and the 
position of the points again noted and recorded* This 
process was repeated until 100 fields (500 points) had been 
recorded for the area under consideration* In each case a 
fairly systematic pattern in all three dimensions was fol¬ 
lowed, and a sufficient portion of tissue measured to give 
an adequate sample* In early hearts, the microscopic 
fields, chosen at random within a small area, of necessity 
overlapped. However, point-for-point repetition (unless 
deliberate) was almost impossible* A "hit” was defined as 
the contact of the image of the point's centre with the 
clearly observed image of the tissue component. The "hits" 
on each element were summed and the percent volumes cal¬ 
culated. For instance, the percentage of "hits” falling on 
capillaries, was taken as the measure of the capillary den¬ 
sity in the tissue examined. Text Figure 8 serves to empha¬ 
size that the accuracy of the method is unaffected by the 
shape or orientation of individual vascular components in 
the section. The method has been thoroughly tested and can 
be relied upon to give results reproducible within 5 percent 
(Chalkley, 1943-44; Algire and Ghalkley, 1945-46). Further¬ 
more, as seen during the course of the present work, the tech¬ 
nique, when repeatedly applied to the same section, yields 
results showing close agreement (Table 1). 


■ 


c 


t 














- 


• x-± “ 



c 







42 


Figure 10, photographed through a microscope equip¬ 
ped with the special eyepiece already described, shows a 
fixed pattern of points in the focal plane of the image* 
Four points labelled A, B, C and D as well as a pointer, p, 
are visible. Point A represents a "hit" on muscle, as the 
underlying injected sinusoid is hazy in appearance and lies 
in a different focal plane. Point B is also a "hit" on 
muscle. At first glance, the position of C is somewhat 
difficult to interpret. Note however, that the point t s 
centre is in contact with the sharply defined image of a 
capillary, and by definition therefore, is a capillary 
"hit". Similarly, point B would be recorded as a "hit" on 
the terminal recess of a sinusoid* The photographic repro¬ 
duction lacks the contrast of actual preparations, for in 
these, the black dots lie against a background of blue and 
red tissue components. The tip of the pointer has been 
placed so as to indicate the position of an injected 
sinusoid. It was often convenient to move the slide and 
focus in such a way that the pointer would coincide with 
some object. The point pattern however, was read without 
regard to the position of the pointer. 

For purposes of convenience, Chalkley r s method was 
applied to arbitrarily chosen standard sections. Standard 
cross-section A, represented in Text Figure 9, was situated 
midway between the orifice of the right coronary artery and 



< 


c- « 



t 



i 




i 










41 


the apex or the heart. It was chosen because it included 
representative areas of right and left ventricles, and 
interventricular septum, and of lesser importance, because 
it could be readily located between two well-defined land¬ 
marks. Considering the ventricles only, this standard 
section was situated midway between the initial zone of 
greatest vascularity, the base of the heart, and the final 
zone of least vascularity, the apex. Vascular changes 
occurring in representative areas of Standard Section A 
were assumed to reflect the mean of similar changes taking 
place in corresponding portions of the heart. Regions 
adjacent to interventricular sulci contained large vascu¬ 
lar trunks as well as a profusion of smaller vessels and 
were therefore excluded from measurement. Standard Section 
B, similarly illustrated in Text Figure 9, was chosen to 
represent the atria* It was taken midway between the 
vertical extremes of the right auricular appendage. The 
level of Standard Section B, when compared with other points 
of reference in the heart, was found to be quite variable in 
different specimens. This however, did not limit its use¬ 
fulness in reflecting the progressive vascular changes 
associated with the ingrowth of capillaries. Atrial measure¬ 
ments were of necessity confined to larger hearts. In smaller 
hearts, the very thin, avascular, auricular wall would only 
partially fill a high power field. Furthermore, the poorly 
developed intertrabecular spaces could hardly be termed 








\ 






t 







44 


sinusoids. Measurements were therefore omitted, lest they 
he erroneously interpreted by the reader. 

Measurement of Capillary Loops. 

Six hearts selected from Series A furnished material 
for the quantitative study of age changes in coronary capil¬ 
lary loops. With the aid of a camera lucida, the scale of 
a stage micrometer was traced on a piece of paper, placed at 
desk level. When sections were substituted for the stage 
micrometer, the rulings of the paper scale, appeared in the 
focal plane of the image. The capillary vessels supplying 
the interventricular septum were examined and measured. In 
each heart, 200 complete capillary loops were selected at 
random, the dimensions for major and minor axes recorded and 
subsequently subjected to statistical analysis. 

Vascularization of Aorta and Pulmonary Artery. 

A quantitative study was made of the vascularization 
of aorta and pulmonary artery. For this purpose, 31 hearts 
from Series A, representing embryos ranging from 35 to 210 
mm., were used. A standard cross-section was arbitrarily 
taken at the level of the upper limit of the pulmonary valve 
cusps. With the aid of a microprojector, standard sections 
were drawn at magnifications of 50 or 100 diameters. Vascu¬ 
larized areas were carefully represented. A 2 mm. grid was 
placed over each drawing, the vascularized area determined, 
and the per cent vascularization of the vessel under con¬ 
sideration calculated and recorded. 





{ 











t 



t ' 



< * 



0 


t 










Field A- 

VERTICAL 

ORIENTATION 



Field SB- 
horizontal 

ORIENTATION. 


FIG. 



DIAGRAM to illustrate that the accuracy of 
Chalkley's method is unaffected by the orienta¬ 
tion OF VASCULAR • COMPONENTS IN THE SECTION. 


















FI G. 9 — STANDARD SECTIONS, 



CHALKLEY'S METHOD FOR THE QUANTITATIVE 
MORPHOLOGIC ANALYSIS OF TISSUE COMPONENTS. 


A 








47 



Fig. 10. 

Chalkley's Method for Quantitative Morphologic Analysis 

of Tissues. 


Pig embryo, 38 mm. - injected through coronary arteries. 
Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

"Vascular channels appear black, muscle white. 

Transverse 40 section through left ventricle. X 770. 
The four points, A,B,C and D, shown above, are fully 
discussed in the text. 













SECTION A. 











48 


Section A. 


Development of the Cardiac Blood Supply in the Pig Embryo. 

Observations, 


Sinusoids 

The primitive embryo heart is a simple tubular struc¬ 
ture nourished entirely by blood passing through its lumen. 

In pig embryos of 3.5 mm., muscle trabeculae appear as 
irregular thickenings and ridges in the ventricular wall. 
Intervening intertrabecular spaces or sinusoids penetrate 
the inner third of the ventricle (Fig. 11). Endocardial 
endothelium is everywhere closely applied to the muscle. In 
5 mm. pig embryos, throughout both ventricles, but especially 
in the left, sinusoids occupy about half the thickness of the 
ventricular wall, and trabeculae are numerous and complicated. 
Cells forming muscle trabeculae show many mitotic figures. 

In contrast, only a few dividing endothelial cells are pres¬ 
ent, and these are evenly distributed among their fellows. 
Endothelial nuclei are slightly more crowded at the crests of 
muscular ridges than in the troughs between ridges. These 
findings suggest that initially sinusoids are formed as a 
result of passive distention of endothelium over growing 
ridges of muscle. At this stage the interventricular septum 
is composed entirely of compact muscle. Atrial walls are 






















c. 






i 


- • 


4 











49 


perfectly smooth and relatively thin (Fig. 12 j. By 8 mm*, 
a few sinusoids penetrate to the epicardium and lie with 
their blind recesses intercalated between epicardium and 
superficial muscle cells. Trabeculation on the surface 
of the interventricular septum occurs only after the 10 
mm. stage (Fig. 13). Trabeculae also form in the prim¬ 
itive atrium, but they remain as simple ridges of muscle 
and do not give rise to an extensive system of branching 
sinusoids such as characterize the ventricles (Fig. 26). 

In 19 mm. embryos, the heart shows a very extensive 
plexus of sinusoids nourishing the entire ventricular 
musculature with the exception of the thin cortical layer 
and a zone of compact muscle about the bulbus (Fig. 24). 
Numerous free communications exist through the interven¬ 
tricular septum between sinusoids of the right and left 
ventricles. The terminal recesses of sinusoids have the 
appearance of blind capillary outgrowths. The septal com¬ 
munications and terminal recesses of this stage appear to 
be formed by the active outward growth of sinusoidal endo¬ 
thelium. Specimens from 20 to 25 mm. reveal a definite 
sinusoidal pattern (Figs. 14, 15 and 83). Primary divis¬ 
ions of sinusoids progress radially from the central 
cavity of the left ventricle* They are 50 to 250 microns 
in vertical diameter and their cavities, which are 
elliptical near the ventricular lumen, become progressively 



>v.: 





o 



.. r > 



0 


o- 



« 






50 


more slit-like peripherally. In a single 100 u section 
(Series C), 4 to 12 primary sinusoids communicate with 
the left ventricle. On this basis it may be estimated 
that 100 to 150 ostia of primary sinusoids occur in the 
left ventricle of the 25 mm. pig embryo heart. The 
primary intertrabecular spaces lie between muscular 
elements of the basket layer, and after coursing 
radially for 15 to 40 microns, bifurcate to give origin 
to the secondary intertrabecular spaces of the sponge 
layer of the embryo heart. Secondary, tertiary and 
quaternary bifurcations also occur in the sponge layer. 
Superimposed on this basic sinusoidal pattern are 
connections (more numerous peripherally) which join 
various branches of the same order as well as those of 
preceding orders (Fig. 14). The endocardium of opposing 
sinusoidal surfaces is often in contact, so that the 
lumen is reduced to a narrow cleft, visible solely by 
virtue of clinging dye particles. As the sinusoids are 
no more than interstices of the sponge layer, in thick 
transverse sections they exhihit an inclination from the 
perpendicular which corresponds to the dextral spiral 
twist of the musculature (Fig. 83). Sinusoids of the 
ridge layer branch from those of the sponge layer and 
penetrate radially for some 20 to 30 microns to end in 
numerous blind, branching, club-shaped recesses. The 
terminal recesses alone bear a superficial resemblance 






o 


S 







D 


■J t . - ' < 














51 


to capillaries. Sinusoidal recesses are farther removed 
from the epicardium in those regions where the compact 
muscle of the cortical layer is extensively invaded by 
capillaries. The sinusoidal spaces of the interven¬ 
tricular septum form a three dimensional network of slit¬ 
like spaces, with numerous free communications between 
right and left ventricles (Fig. 14). The sinusoids of 
the interventricular septum resemble those of the sponge 
layers of the right and left ventricles with which they 
are continuous. Again their major and minor axes are 
determined by the spiral direction of the muscle fibres. 
Sinusoidal elements corresponding to those of the ridge 
and cortical layers are absent. In the 25 mm. pig 
embryo, the sinusoidal pattern of the right ventricle 
is quite similar to that of the left. The sinusoids of 
the right ventricle however, are more numerous and show 
a more primitive form. On this basis the two ventricles 
may be distinguished at a glance (Fig. 14). The ridge 
layer is poorly developed in the right ventricle. 

Terminal recesses exhibit a coarse saw-toothed rather than 
a stag-horn arrangement. The thin atrial walls are 
buttressed by muscular ridges which incompletely divide 
these chambers into a number of compartments. The latter 
are wide, shallow spaces and can scarcely be called sinu¬ 
soids, (Fig. 26). 




i 



. 0 


; 




t 








52 


The sinusoids undergo a successive reduction in 
size and number involving progressively first the terminal 
recesses and subsequently the secondary and primary sinu¬ 
soids themselves. The process commences in the 20 ram. 
embryo. Alterations in the appearance of the sinusoidal 
tree are quite striking by the 30 mm. stage. The funda¬ 
mental change is a progressive thickening and elongation 
of muscle trabeculae. As a result, terminal recesses are 
farther apart in the 30 mm. embryo than in younger stages 
and are relatively and absolutely shorter and less tenuous. 
The sinusoidal, endothelium is compressed to a lumenless 
strand. Secondary sinusoids show a reduced number of 
cross-connections and together with the primary sinusoids, 
are more widely separated than formerly. The reduction of 
the terminal sinusoids progresses much more rapidly in the 
left ventricle and at the base of the heart than in the 
right ventricle. With the further growth of trabeculae, 
sinusoids of the ridge and sponge layers are compressed 
and obliterated. The sinusoids undergo true regression and 
are never reduced to capillary channels or incorporated 
into the growing capillary bed. In hearts from 55 mm. pigs, 
the sinusoids are still abundant in the right ventricle; 
although terminal recesses have disappeared, primary and 
secondary sinusoids are relatively intact but more widely 
separated. Profound changes have occurred in the left 
ventricle, however, for the sponge and ridge layers have 


< 


0 _• - • 


‘J. 


0 -:. V.0 






i 


■ 




. 














53 


been almost entirely converted to compact muscle* Primary 
sinusoids are long and tenuous. Secondary divisions 
appear as short slit-like stubs with square-cut ends. In 
the 55 ram. pig embryo, a few patent sinusoidal communica¬ 
tions exist through the interventricular septum. Individ¬ 
ual sinusoids show all the various stages of obliteration 
as one proceeds peripherally from the ventricle. The 
patent segment communicating with the ventricle, runs for 
a short distance as a slit-like channel, and then termi¬ 
nates abruptly in a square-cut end which delimits the line 
of fusion of compressed endothelium (Figs* 57, 85, 86 and 
87). In thin sections stained with Mallory's phospho- 
tungstic acid haematoxylin, the course of the obliterated 
channel is quite evident. It consists of a chain of flat¬ 
tened endothelial cells and surrounding layers of thickened 
subendocardial connective tissue. By 80 ram., the number of 
sinusoids is further reduced, although in the right ven¬ 
tricle, where many secondary branches still remain, the 
picture corresponds to the left ventricle at the 40 mm* 
stage* The interventricular septum, forms a solid barrier 
between the two ventricular chambers* In hearts from 140 
mm. pigs, the majority of remaining sinusoids are in the 
right ventricle. These attenuated channels are confined 
to areas near the ventricular lumen and correspond to the 
larger primary and secondary sinusoids of previous stages. 
By the 180 ram. stage, regression of ventricular sinusoids 








54 


is virtually complete* There remain only a few short, 
slit-like extensions of the ventricular lumen between 
muscle trabeculae. Solid strands, representing oblit¬ 
erated channels, are numerous. Corresponding stages in 
the obliterative process, as seen in right and left ven¬ 
tricles, are represented in Text Figure 16. True sinu¬ 
soids form in the atria after the 80 mm. stage and con¬ 
tinue to grow progressively throughout fetal life. By 
220 mm., the sinusoidal tree contains primary and second¬ 
ary divisions as well as penetrating, branch-like terminal 
recesses. The complexity of the system, however, is 
limited by the thinness of the atrial wall (Fig. 40), 

The relation of percent volume of sinusoids in the 
right ventricle, to C-R length of pig embryo, is shown in 
Graph V. Sinusoidal per cent volume falls sharply from 20 
to 60 mm., and more slowly thereafter, tending to approach 
zero late in fetal life. Similar data for the left ven¬ 
tricle are represented in Graph VI. The fall in sinusoidal 
per cent volume between the 20 and 40 mm. stages is even 
more precipitous than in the preceding graph. Elements from 
both ventricles contribute to the formation of the interven¬ 
tricular septum. Contrary to expectations, however, in this 
structure sinusoidal density decreases at a rate similar to 
that for the left ventricle (Graph VII). Although sinusoids 
increase in complexity late in fetal life, with increasing 





c 



? * 






55 


age the percent volume of atrial wall so occupied dimin¬ 
ishes progressively. The curve of best-fit is a straight 
line (Graph VIII)* In Graph XIV, the ratio of ventricular 
sinusoidal densities is plotted against C-R length. At 
the extremes of prenatal life (20 mm. and 190 mm.), sinu¬ 
soidal densities in right and left ventricles are quite 
similar; consequently their ratio approaches unity. The 
curve indicates that sinusoids of the left ventricle 
undergo their main quantitative regression as the embryo 
grows from 30 to 100 mm., and from the right ventricle 
from 100 to 160 mm. The various curves discussed, repre¬ 
sent changes in sinusoidal percent volume and are depend¬ 
ent on rates of heart growth as well as sinusoidal regres¬ 
sion. For this reason, quantitative results do not always 
coincide with morphological findings. 

Coronary Veins. 

Coronary veins first appear in 7 mm. pig embryos as 
endothelial outgrowths from the descending pocket of the 
sinus venosus (Fig. 17). These precursors of the middle 
cardiac vein penetrate the loose connective tissue of the 
atrio-ventricular groove and extend toward the posterior 
interventricular sulcus. In the 10 mm. embryo branches 
sprouting from the sinus venosus course to the right to 
form the commencement of the small cardiac vein. To the 
left, the great cardiac vein is also seen. A number of 














56 


smaller outgrowths branch radially from the descending 
pocket of the sinus venosus and penetrate the connective 
tissue of the atrio-ventricular groove so as to lie on 
the posterior surface of the left ventricle. The great 
and small cardiac veins extend along the left and right 
atrio-ventricular grooves, while the middle cardiac vein 
passes towards the apex of the heart in the posterior 
interventricular sulcus. In these situations the veins 
spread as capillary networks from which the main trunks 
emerge. Vessels are confined to the developing epi- 
cardial connective tissue and do not enter the myocardium. 
The primordial veins end blindly and are therefore 
difficult to inject. Only an ebb and flow circulation can 
take place in the veins during this period of their inde¬ 
pendent existence. By the 20 mm, stage all named branches 
are recognizable. The coronary sinus receives four large 
veins. They are from left to right the hemiazygos vein, 
and the great, middle and small cardiac veins. The hemi¬ 
azygos vein runs on the posterior surface of the left 
atrium and receives small tributaries from the atrial wall. 
The great cardiac vein extends around the left margin of 
the heart and over the base of the left ventricle to the 
anterior interventricular sulcus. The middle cardiac 
vein extends about half of the way to the apex of the heart 
in the posterior interventricular sulcus. The small cardiac 
vein coursing around the right margin of the heart drains 












■ t 


' 




* - 




0 









the base of the right ventricle and the right atrium. 
Capillary branches of the venous plexus ramify over 
the base of the heart and extend to the bulbus and 
atria where they communicate with the coronary capil¬ 
lary network (Fig. 25). Fig. 19 portrays the coronary 
sinus and cardiac veins of a 25 mm. pig embryo. The 
advance of this age is one of general growth and 
accentuation of previous features. A number of small 
veins from the left ventricle drain directly into the 
coronary sinus. One of these is destined to form the 
inferior cardiac vein of the left ventricle. At this 
stage the diameter of the small cardiac vein exceeds 
that of the great and middle cardiac veins. Often 
the middle cardiac vein is represented by two main 
channels (Fig. 18). A description of later stages is 
unnecessary with exception of the hemiazygos vein. 

This vessel persists throughout fetal life, and as 
previously mentioned enters the coronary sinus after 
draining the posterior surface of the left atrium. 

It is homologous to the oblique vein of Marshall 
occurring in man. 


0 .: 




*). :: 0 












58 


Coronary Arteries. 

The coronary arteries make their appearance after 
the veins are well established* They arise as angio- 
blastic buds from the endothelium of the aorta even before 
partitioning of the truncus is complete (Fig* 20). The 
coronary anlagen develop in relation to the larger (lateral) 
pair of distal conus cushions (1 and 3)* Their sites are 
shifted toward the junctions of these swellings with the 
swelling for the future noncoronary aortic cusp (cusp 4). 

In 10 mm* embryos, the left coronary artery, represented by 
a solid sprout of endothelial cells, enters the bulbus and 
pursues a subepicardial course towards the atrioventricular 
groove. The right coronary artery behaves similarly but 
does not form until 11 mm. In 11.5 mm. specimens, the left 
coronary artery, which is more advanced in development than 
the right, contains a patent lumen and gives off several 
capillary branches (Fig. 21). By the 16 mm. stage the right 
coronary artery courses in the atrioventricular groove and 
extends about one-half the distance towards the right margin 
of the heart. The left coronary artery bifurcates almost at 
once into anterior descending and circumflex branches. These 
capillary twigs enter the anterior interventricular groove 
and the left atrioventricular groove, respectively (Fig. 72). 
Between the 10 and 16 mm. stages the partitioned truncus 
undergoes a clockwise rotational change of some 90 degrees, 
and in so doing, brings the semilunar valve cusps and coron- 




t 




c 











59 


aries into their final adult positions, (Fig. 20 and Text 
Fig. 23). This rotation is possibly caused by the torque 
set up in the heart tube when the ventricular loop is 
formed (Shaner, 1951). 

Between the 14 mm. and 20 mm. stages, the coronary 
capillaries ramify over the base of the heart and form a 
subepicardial plexus which gradually unites with that 
previously formed by the great and small cardiac veins 
(Fig. 25). The primordial vascular system of the heart as 
seen in the pig embryo of 16 mm. consists morphologically 
of a sprouting meshwork rather than a set of definite 
supply and drainage channels. It is to be considered as a 
bed of proliferating endothelium rather than a circulatory 
apparatus. This spreading of the endothelial plexus is 
more active in some directions than in others. In general 
it tends to spread along the major cardiac sulci and then 
extends laterally over the ventricular walls as a single 
capillary layer (Figs. 24, 35, 36 and 37). All vessels 
arise by endothelial budding from pre-existing endothe¬ 
lium. Therefore on the posterior surface of the heart, 
plexus formation is somewhat slower because of the late 
arrival of coronary capillaries in this region. In spread¬ 
ing inward, coronary capillaries exhibit a characteristic 
growing edge consisting of terminal loops and twigs which 
can be seen as an advancing line marking off the non- 



TQy vC 




t 




c 


; 





D 






9 




60 


vascularized area. As one approaches the apex, the extent 
of penetration of muscle becomes less and less. Thus in 
20 mm. embryos, penetrating capillaries are negligible in 
the apical third of the heart. Sinusoids however are 
present in enormous intricacy and at this period constitute 
the major blood supply to the ventricular muscle. Capillary 
loops already described interdigitate intimately with term¬ 
inal recesses of the sinusoidal tree. In regions where 
capillaries are absent, terminal recesses of sinusoids 
approach the epicardium more closely. Communications 
between the two systems are considered in Section B. 

Coronary arteries are hewn from the capillary net¬ 
work by hydrodynamic factors incident to blood flow. 

Various stages in the process are illustrated in Figs. 27, 

28 and 29. All named arterial branches can be identified 
in 20 mm. specimens (Fig. 30). The vessels arise by endo¬ 
thelial coalescence and therefore in their distal portions 
have an irregular fenestrated appearance. As depicted in 
Fig. 30, even at the 20 mm. stage, the coronary arteries 
of the pig are similar in distribution to those of the 
right coronary predominant pattern in man. The left coron¬ 
ary artery as such is a short common trunk arising from the 
left aortic sinus. This trunk soon divides into a large 
anterior descending branch and a slightly smaller circumflex 
branch. The anterior descending branch reaches three-fourths 







t: 




0 


■ ) 










61 


of the way down the anterior interventricular sulcus and 
along its course, gives off several septal branches. The 
circumflex branch continues around the left margin of the 
heart and on the posterior surface extends almost to the 
root of the great cardiac vein. The right coronary artery 
extends around the right margin of the heart, over the top 
of the right ventricle to the posterior interventricular 
sulcus, where it turns downward as the posterior interven¬ 
tricular artery, to extend about half the distance to the 
apex. Right and left marginal branches are well defined. 
The intercardial artery, described by Goldsmith and Butler 
(1937), arises by budding at the point where the right 
coronary turns downward to continue as the posterior inter¬ 
ventricular artery. With increase in age, the advance of 
the cardiac-coronary system is largely one of extension. 

Not only do the arteries become larger, but they extend 
farther along their lines of growth. In view- of the 
excellent descriptions by Bennett (1936) and Goldsmith and 
Butler (1937), a detailed account of age extensions hardly 
seems necessary here. Suffice it to say, that the anterior 
descending and posterior interventricular branches reach 
the apex by 40 mm. The intercardial artery extends into 
the heart and gives off branches downward into the inter¬ 
ventricular septum and upward into the interatrial septum, 
finally ending as a capillary network on the posterior wall 
of the basal part of the aorta. Lateral branches ramifying 






v-;: c 








62 


on the surface, and penetrating septal branches become more 
numerous. All surface branches have two types of terminals: 
(a) those which remain superficial and eventually become 
tenuous; (b) those which pass deeply as robust channels into 
the cardiac musculature. The surface pattern for the 80 mm 0 
embryo is depicted in Text Figure 32. Note that a leash of 
vessels arise near the origin of the right coronary artery 
and supply the anterior surface of the right ventricle. 
Lateral branches from the anterior descending artery are 
largely confined to the left ventricle while those from the 
posterior interventricular artery run to the right ventricle. 

Penetration of coronary capillaries into the ven¬ 
tricular muscle proceeds rapidly and is virtually complete 
by 35 mm. This penetration keeps pace with sinusoidal 
regression and is therefore much more marked in the left 
ventricle than in the right. Sinusoidal spaces penetrate 
between vascularized trabeculae, consequently the two 
systems interdigitate intimately. In its earliest stages 
the proliferating capillary meshwork shows considerable 
irregularity in the form and size of its constituent 
channels (Fig. 33). Between 30 and 50 mm., superficial 
loops of the mesh gradually take on adult characteristics. 

The deeper plexus, however, is composed of vessels which 
show greater variations in calibre than do the superficial 
set. Some appear to be of approximately the same diameter 



It 







. 



T £ i 0 






63 


as the vessels of the superficial plexus, while others are 
from four to six times as broad as those in the upper net. 
This plexus, like the superficial one, shows angular dila¬ 
tations where vessels meet. The vessels outline oval or 
polygonal areas. In 210 mm. specimens, the capillaries 
everywhere are of smaller calibre than those found in the 
earlier stages. Elongated rectangular meshes, connected 
by means of cross and tangential anastomoses, are closely 
applied to, and parallel the direction of, the muscle fibres 
(Fig. 34). These changes in capillary form were studied 
quantitatively. Results are summarized in Table III and 
plotted in Graphs XVT and XVII. During fetal life, the 
major axis of the capillary loop increases in size and 
variability while the minor axis declines slightly in both. 
Quantitative results expressing capillary densities in ven¬ 
tricular portions of the heart are plotted in Graphs I, II, 
and III. In the right ventricle the capillary density 
increases rapidly between 30 and 90 mm., reaches a maximum 
by 140 mm. and remains constant thereafter. The curve for 
the left ventricle is similar but rises much more steeply 
between the 20 and 40 mm. stages. This corresponds to the 
period of rapid regression of sinusoids from the left ven¬ 
tricle. The interventricular septum contains elements from 
both ventricles and consequently shows a curve intermediate 
between the two previous extremes. Yalues for the anterior 






-• V 



It 









■ 








t t 







64 


papillary muscle of the adult pig heart are offered for 
comparison (Table II). Sinusoido; capillary ratios for 
right ventricle, left ventricle, and interventricular 
septum are plotted in Graphs IX, X and XI. The three 
curves are quite similar, showing that a definite bal¬ 
ance exists, between the rate of vascularization and 
sinusoidal regression. The ratio of capillary den¬ 
sities in right as to left ventricles is plotted in 
Graph XIII. The curve emphasizes the fact that early 
in prenatal life and even till the 50 ram. stage the 
vascularity of the left ventricle exceeds that of the 
right. Sources of error in the method, influencing 
the accuracy of data are incomplete injection, over¬ 
distension of vascular channels with injection mass, 
and shrinkage incidence to histologic procedures. 

Data pertaining to the growth of the pig embryo heart 
are presented in Table IT and plotted in Graph X?. 

For purposes of argument let us assume that throughout 
prenatal life the specific gravity of myocardium remains 
constant. The weight of heart muscle will then bear a 
linear relation to volume. If between two given stages 
of development of the embryo, the heart volume doubles, 
and the percent volume of capillaries remains constant, 
then the capillary volume has also doubled. If the 
percent volume of capillaries has increased x times, 








c 









t 




t 


c 






65 


and the volume (weight) increased y times, then the capil¬ 
lary density has shown an absolute increase of xy times. 

With this in mind, by comparing Graph XT with Graphs I, II 
and III, the tremendous growth in coronary capillaries 
during fetal life may be better appreciated. 

The blood supply to the auricles is less constant in 
pattern than that to the ventricles. It is in large part 
made up of small branches passing directly upward from the 
right and left circumflex coronary arteries (Fig. 29). In 
pig embryos of 20 mm. a few capillaries enter the auric¬ 
ular appendages and course midway between epicardium and 
endocardium. It is not until the 75 mm. stage that most of 
the atrial wall is penetrated. All. trabeculae show blood 
vessels by 100 mm. but the vascularization is never as great 
as in the ventricles (Graph IT). Although morphologically, 
atrial sinusoids increase in complexity during fetal life, 
with increase in capillary density their percent volume 
falls (Graphs Till and XII). The valves in the embryo heart 
are devoid of blood vessels. In stages over 100 ram., loose 
connective tissue is elaborated in the epicardium. By 210 
mm. the thickened epicardium is seen to contain a few capil¬ 
lary vessels. Nerve trunks of the epicardial plexus receive 

capillaries from adjacent myocardial and epicardial networks 
(Fig. 62). 






];• 




; ,; ■ I 




:i 










66 


Discussion. 


Sinusoids. 

Irrigation of the embryo heart is first accomplished 
by an ebb and flow circulation in the intertrabecular 
(sinusoidal) spaces. The major factor in the formation of 
sinusoidal spaces is considered to be the growth of muscle 
trabeculae. These develop in consequence to the thickening 
of the heart wall in response to the increased demand for 
cardiac output. The terminal recesses of sinusoids in all 
probability are produced by an endothelial extension into 
the myocardium. Shaner (1928) reported the development of 
the ventricular musculature of pig embryos of from 5 to 20 
mm. The ventricular wall differentiates into an outer 
surface layer, a layer of muscle ridges, a sponge, and a 
basket layer* The ridge layer forms after 12 mm. along the 
junction of the older cortical and sponge layers, and some¬ 
what at the expense of the former. Present findings suggest 
that the ridge layer is hewn from the cortical layer by 
penetrating terminal sinusoidal recesses. The outer layer 
receives a sinistral spiral twist very early; the inner 
layer of each ventricle takes on a dextral spiral with the 
appearance of the dextral spiral septum in the truncus 
arteriosus. The sinusoidal spaces bear the same relation¬ 
ship to muscle trabeculae as a cast does to a mold. Con¬ 
sequently sinusoids always exhibit an inclination from the 








. 


t '• 


t - 




0 






67 


perpendicular corresponding to the spiral twist of adjacent 
musculature,, Another point of interest is that free sinu¬ 
soidal communications exist through the interventricular 
septum at least till the 55 mm, stage* The usual statement 
is that with the closure of the interventricular foramen at 
the 20 mm. stage, partitioning of the ventricles is complete. 

Concerning the fate of sinusoids, two views have been 
expressed. Grant (1926), from a study of uninjected rabbit 
embryos, concluded that the intertrabecular spaces of the 
ventricle are for the most part reduced to capillaries in 
the condensation of the myocardium and, after incorporation 
with the arteries and veins, persist to form an integral 
part of the adult coronary circulation. On the other hand, 
Bennett (1936) believed that the sinusoids become reduced 
to vestigial strands of endothelium without a lumen, and 
are replaced by the coronary vessels entirely. Present 
findings strongly support Bennett*s view. Indeed in 
suitably prepared sections, one can trace through various 
stages, a progressive obliteration of the sinusoids. In 
all probability the sinusoidal system in the pig is merely 
a vestige of a once important source of nourishment to the 
heart. It may be thought of as the end stage of a phylo¬ 
genetic process which has lost most of its usefulness and 
which has been replaced by a much more complex and superior 
coronary system. Grant (1926), Bennett (1936), and 













t 


? 


’ c 









c 










68 


Goldsmith, and Butler (1936) suggested that growing trabec¬ 
ulae exert sufficient mechanical pressure to cause the 
obliteration of sinusoids. This plausible view is con¬ 
sistent with present morphological findings. Sinusoids 
disappear more rapidly from the left ventricle than from 
the right because of the rapid thickening of trabeculae 
in the left ventricle in response to early functional 
demands. To press the argument one step further, presum¬ 
ably sinusoids which persist, do so to allow for complete 
freedom of movement of adjacent trabeculae. Burchell 
(1939) reported the persistence of sinusoids in an other¬ 
wise perfectly formed dog heart. These occurred in regions 
usually occupied by compact myocardium. Structures resem¬ 
bling the primitive myocardial sinusoids have been observed 
in anomalous hearts of certain infants. Grant (1926) des¬ 
cribed the heart of a 14 month old infant in which many 
sinusoids communicated with a single ventricle and with the 
coronary arteries and veins* They were also present in a 
case of congenital aortic atresia. (Bellet and Gouley, 
1932). The frequency with which sinusoids are present in 
hearts wherein a coronary artery arises from a pulmonary 
artery would lead one to consider myocardial ischemia as a 
factor in their persistence (Soloff, 1942; Proescher and 
Baumann, 1944; Gouley 1950). 








D 0 


0 O 












69 


Coronary Arteries* 

The development of coronary arteries, veins and 
capillaries in the pig embryo has been well described by 
several authors (Bennett, 1926; Goldsmith and Butler, 1936), 
and the present study is in agreement with their findings* 
The trigger mechanism which initiates the formation of the 
coronary arteries is unknown* The angioblastic buds 
destined to form the coronary arteries usually appear just 
as the aortico-pulmonary septum approaches the distal conus 
cushions and on this basis, Shaner (1951) has suggested 
that the coronary arteries are "determined" by the septum* 
Among the rare congenital defects of the heart is persist¬ 
ence of the primitive common arterial trunk (truncus 
arteriosus communis persistens)* Humphreys (1932) reported 
one case and reviewed four other cases in which the persist¬ 
ent common arterial trunk was provided with four semilunar 
cusps* In three of the hearts, two coronary arteries arose 
from the sinuses of opposite cusps (1 and 3), and both 
coronary ostia were shifted toward one of the interpolated 
cusps (cusp 4)* These hearts fulfilled the essential 
theoretical criteria for the identification of the common 
arterial trunk* At first glance the evidence seemed 
sufficiently strong to refute Shaner^ hypothesis* However, 
a closer examination of the case reports revealed that each 
of the hearts described contained at least a rudimentary 
aortico-pulmonary septum* In congenital aortic atresia a 








>0 


oO 


0 


3» O 


:; r> 


o 




v 




) 





70 


normal origin and course of the coronary arteries is the 
usual finding and was observed in fifteen of the twenty 
cases reviewed by Monie and DePape (1950). The most 
frequent major artery anomaly is one in which the left 
coronary artery arises from the pulmonary artery and 
supplies the left ventricle with venous blood. This 
abnormality usually leads to death in infancy and gives 
rise to a rather characteristic clinical syndrome. 

Infants with the condition develop normally until about 
the age of 5 months when they begin to experience attacks 
of cyanosis, dyspnea and angina pectoris (Soloff, 1942). 
Irrigation of portions of the myocardium with venous 
blood under low pressure is apparently inadequate to main¬ 
tain functional integrity. At autopsy the left ventricle 
is always markedly hypertrophied and the myocardium is 
fibrotie, necrotic and frequently contains foci of calcifi¬ 
cation (Soloff, 1942). In adults this anomaly is occasion¬ 
ally found unexpectedly at autopsy (G-ouley, 1950; Crank, 
Sinclair and Rigdon, 1951). The possibility of the origin 
of the coronary arteries from the pulmonary artery is due 
to the fact that the primitive endothelial, buds which are 
to form the coronary arteries develop before the truncus 
is divided by the spiral septum, into the aorta and pulmon¬ 
ary artery. A displacement of either the endothelial sprouts 
or the spiral septum may enclose one or both coronary vessels 
within the pulmonary artery (Soloff, 1942). 




t 


< 


0 


). 0 


— i 1 - -j ■ 


c 


i) 







71 


The general pattern of distribution of the coronary 
arteries and their branches is far from constant in man. 
Since the terminations of the right and left coronary 
arteries are of necessity contiguous, a balance always 
exists between them. When one is larger than the other, 
it is referred to as the predominant coronary artery* On 
this basis, Schlesinger (1940), in a study of 225 male and 
female human hearts, has described three types of anatomic 
pattern. The right coronary preponderant type is present 
in 48 per cent of all hearts. In these the right coronary 
artery is larger than the left, extending well beyond the 
posterior crux and supplying the posterior aspect of the 
left ventricle. In 34 per cent of cases the coronaries 
are relatively equal in size, with the posterior descend¬ 
ing branch arising from the right coronary artery.. In the 
remaining group (18 per cent) the left coronary artery is 
larger, and extends beyond the posterior crux to give off 
the posterior descending branch which supplies the post¬ 
erior wall of the right ventricle. These hearts suffer 
the most from the effects of coronary arteriosclerosis. 
Besides the frequent individual variations in the coronary 
arteries and their branches, there are also species differ¬ 
ences. In the Rhesus monkey three-fourths of the hearts 
are left coronary artery predominant (Abramson and Eisenberg, 
1935) while in the cat, the right coronary predominates in 


0 











t 




x. 




■ ) 


\ 






72 


65$ of cases (Abramson, Crawford and Roberts, 1933). The 
coronary arterial pattern of the pig’s heart is quite con¬ 
stant and compares with the right coronary predominant 
heart in man (Blumgart, Zoll, Preedberg and Gilligan, 1950). 
Present findings indicate, that the majority of fetal hearts 
are of the right coronary predominant type* In the remain¬ 
ing few, the coronaries are relatively equal in size. The 
greatest variability in coronary distribution occurs on the 
posterior surface and at the apex of the heart, or in other 
words, in those areas which are vascularized last. Hered¬ 
itary or environmental factors retarding the development of 
the right coronary artery or hastening that of the left, 
permit the latter to sweep around the left border of the 
heart, across the top of the left ventricle, and down the 
unoccupied posterior interventricular sulcus, so establish¬ 
ing left coronary supremacy. When the right coronary 
reaches the area, a contiguous balance is established 
between terminal branches of the two arteries. The ultimate 
pattern is probably established before the fifth week of 
prenatal life and is certainly recognizable by the 35 mm. 
stage. 

A few remarks concerning the vascularity of other 
structures in the embryo heart seem in order at this point. 
Bremer and Weatherford (1944), in their textbook of histol¬ 
ogy, state that the heart valves have an abundant circu- 



c 


r • q 


— 






< 



t ' 














c 


. :) 












. ' - 



c 







c 





73 


lation in embryos, but gradually lose it in adult life. 

The reverse is actually true. From their inception as 
endocardial cushions till late in fetal life (210 mm,), 
valve cusps in pig hearts remain avascular. In adult 
pig hearts, Kerr and Mettier (1925) have demonstrated a 
rich anastomosis of vessels at the line of closure of 
atrio-ventricular leaflets. The vascularity of the 
tricuspid valve is as great as that of the mitral. The 
chordae tendineae are vascularized and connect the 
vessels by the leaflets with the plexus in the papillary 
muscles. The ingrowth of vessels into valves, just des¬ 
cribed, obviously must occur in post-natal life. As 
observed by Bennett (1936), and confirmed in the present 
study, the comparatively late vascularization of the atria 
is consistent with Fearn r s (1928-a) observation that in 
the adult these chambers are less vascular than the ven¬ 
tricles. The same can be said of the "cardiac skeleton", 
epicardium and endocardium. 








L 


ft >• 


<^£ DcytooiL A<vuCa_ 


BwvyvCC^, XUvctjuKoLecL 

V JL^CsxJcJisi^ 


f) nyfirv^o^ i/^w 


AfutAyw- 
/ \ijVLCr'- /JOYrffUCU&jCXAs CasvUxQ* 




(A tjJCtf tiOnn, Ta&^&C^kAx, 




Fig. 11. 

Pig embryo, 3.5 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 ji section through thorax; X 46. 

In an embryo of 3.5 mm., muscle trabeculae appear 
as irregular thickenings and ridges in the ventricul 
wall. At this stage the bilaterally dilated atrium 
communicates by a common canal with the primitive 
undivided ventricle. 






js^voO 

^Wft SaosoQ *4^ 




3 J ^ vl D vaoW^W<^ 



3000^ 0 


Jc^J&kjulW)^ ^mXwvvo^I 
^JJAtmS-V 







74 



Fig. 11. 

Pig embryo, 3.5 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 p section through thorax; X 46. 

In an embryo of 3.5 mm., muscle trabeculae appear 
as irregular thickenings and ridges in the ventricular 
wall. At this stage the bilaterally dilated atrium 
communicates by a common canal with the primitive 
undivided ventricle. 







Co-' let--- 

Rl<^£ Co-*rvvru>rv (X/ved/vvA-^ 
RlJit (Vwwoi < Sx^vxAO-_ 

» () V/x^vO-OUO lx 


(?.^t 


/■H 3 um/vw 


R,^^t l/^vdnicih. 



■L-^t P(yvaaJ 2 . /?<nfe- 

fLxjjt Cs-yn/n'UM'i' CaooU^voJ2- \/& x » o . 



1 / yvXx^vaov\£SjuCa*A^^ Se^oAovrL/ 

L-e|t \ZW£u*Jh_ 


Fig. 12. 

Pig embryo, 5 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 p section through thorax; X 22. 

Trabeculae and sinusoids present in Doth ventric 
but most extensively developed in the left ventr 
A few sinusoids penetrate to the epicardium. Th 
interventricular septum is composed entirely of 
compact muscle. The thin-walled atria are free 
trabeculae at this stage. 










>SUyflJX>Q 

j^xsSj %- r - 






oSL»J^Ok/dCryO<AJ^J^^ 



qh» »^* ^9-g .jW'cH ^Af>l t 

vj^XxO-OJ*vXV 0 


\ZWOLUj0rR it^l'B 


..jJLajJ&vvaV 


_5>^ -xlrt t/v-a^J 








75 



Fig. 12. 

Pig embryo, 5 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 jx section through thorax; X 22. 

Trabeculae and sinusoids present in both ventricles 
but most extensively developed in the left ventricle. 
A few sinusoids penetrate to the epicardium. The 
interventricular septum is composed entirely of 
compact muscle. The thin-walled atria are free of 
trabeculae at this stage. 











- 





„ 



Right Ventricle. 


76 



Fig. 13. 

Pig embryo, 11.5 mm. (Series A). 

Ventricular chambers and coronary arteries injected with 
Tieman’s soluble blue, 3% aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 p. paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 59. 

With the growth of trabeculae, sinusoids in both ventricles 
become increasingly complex and tenuous. The sinusoids are 
thin-walled and the endothelium is everywhere closely applied 
to the musculature. Note that at this stage, there are few 
free communications between right and left ventricles, through 
the interventricular septum. 















• . 









- ‘ - • : t 


„ 




... ’ ' •' , 




77 



Fig. 14. 

Pig embryo, 25 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with Tieman’s soluble blue. 
Transverse 75 p. celloidin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 27.5. 

An extensive plexus of sinusoids nourishes the entire ven¬ 
tricular musculature with the exception of the immediate 
subepicardial region which is supplied by coronary vessels 
(not injected in this specimen). By virtue of progressive 
thickening of trabeculae, sinusoids undergo a successive 
reduction in size and number. As shown above, the reduction 
of the terminal sinusoids progresses more rapidly in the 
left ventricle than in the right. Sinusoids of the right 
and left ventricles communicate freely through the inter¬ 
ventricular septum. 




78 



Fig. 15. 

Pig embryo, 25 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with 3$ aqueous solution of 
Tieman's soluble blue. 

Transverse 100 ji celloidin section from the apical third 
of the left ventricle. X 72. 

Sinusoids penetrate radially between muscle trabeculae, 
and present an extensive network of irregular vascular 
channels, which communicate centrally with the lumen of 
the heart. Note that terminal recesses are character¬ 
istically blind, branching and club-shaped. The arrow 
indicates an injected sinusoido-capillary connection. 















- •- * ' ■ 

. ' 

' . ' - 


. 

. • '■ • '■ ' ’ • • * : ' 


. . 


s «••••' : '- i; 


79 






















bju/J^O- 


idjt — 
idt \JjiiSMjJisL, 



■ Prf/UMJfA' 

scaJB&LbvA- 

CasfuoJls ■ 



S_t/yVoU)_ 


OQ 



Nl^YW^&VO&L 


Viw 


Uy\©YtO\<| 


/Ofi. 


JUtHguxr^suJ^oJL 


Fig. 


Origin of Coronary Yeins. 


Pig embryo, 7 mm. - uninjected* 
Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 ji sectiod^nrough thorax. 


A. - This low-power phot 

orientate structure 

B. - Commencing as a i^oXL 

ing pocket of the s* 
vein, shown above, 
tissue between sinui 


Micrograph (X 32.5) ser 
shown in B. 

.ow ^utgrowth from the d 
nus ve no he ear Xy 

;>enetrates to the 

and ventricle. (X 305 


to 


%JL. 


































■ » <r 


•J 


v 



























80 



Fig. 17. Origin of Coronary Veins. 

Pig embryo, 7 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 10 section through thorax. 

A. - This low-power photomicrograph (X 32.5) serves to 

orientate structures shown in B. 

B. - Commencing as a hollow outgrowth from the descend¬ 

ing pocket of the sinus venosus, the early coronary 
vein, shown above, penetrates to the connective 
tissue between sinus and ventricle. (X 305). 






























a 

■ 






81 


Fig. 18. 

Pig embryo, 25 mm. (Series D). 

Coronary sinus injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3$ aqueous solution. Injection pressure was sufficient 
to cause filling of the middle cardiac vein and its 
capillary branches. Following fixation in 10 % formalin, 
the heart was cleared by the Spalteholz method. Under 
the microscope, the portion of cortical layer bearing 
injected vessels, was dissected free. The resulting 
free-hand section was then flattened by compression 
between two glass slides. X 30.7. 

The middle cardiac vein ascends in the posterior longi¬ 
tudinal sulcus, receives tributaries from the walls of 
both ventricles, and in this specimen, joins the coronary 
sinus through two main channels. Both arteries and veins 
arise from net-like anlagen; the veins retain this the 
more, hence the numerous venous anastomoses of the adult 


heart 



















82 



Fig. 18. Complete Injection of the Middle Cardiac Vein. 


Pig embryo, 25mm 









83 


Fig. 19. 

Pig embryo, £5 mm. (Series D). 

Low pressure injection or the right atrium, with Tieman’s 
soluble blue, with resultant filling of the coronary sinus 
and its tributaries. Fixed in IQfo formalin. Gross speci¬ 
men. X 14.4. 

The posterior surface of the heart is shown. The middle 
cardiac vein begins at the apex of the heart, runs back¬ 
wards in the posterior longitudinal sulcus, and ends in 
the coronary sinus near its right extremity. It receives 
tributaries from the walls of both ventricles. The small 
cardiac vein runs in the atrioventricular groove between 
the right atrium and ventricle posteriorly, and opens 
into the right extremity of the coronary sinus. At this 
stage the vessel is of relatively large size. It receives 
tributaries from the walls of the right atrium and the 
right ventricle, the latter extending around the right 
margin of the heart to reaeh about one-third the distance 
across the top of the right ventricle. Note that a number 
of small veins from the left ventricle drain directly into 
the coronary sinus. 









84 



Tributaries 


Pig embryo, E5 mm 








85 


Fig* 20. Origin of the Left Coronary Artery. 

Transverse 12 u section through the truncus arteriosus, 
atria, dorsal aortae and cardinal veins of a 10 mm. pig 
embryo. (Class Series). Stained with haematoxylin and 
eosin. Uninjected. 

(A) . - Partitioning of the truncus is almost complete. 

The dorsal channel so formed communicates with 
the 3rd and 4th pairs of arches, while the 
ventral channel supplies the pulmonary arches. 

Distal conus cushions 1 and 3 have not yet 
fused. In order to attain their adult position, 
coronary ostia and distal conus cushions will 
rotate clockwise through approximately 90 
degrees. Compare with Fig. 26. X 22. 

(B) . - Photomicrograph, under higher magnification (X 400), 

of the rectangular area shown in (A). The primord- 
ium of the left coronary artery appears at the 10 mm. 
stage, whereas the right does not form until 11 mm. 

As shown, the left coronary artery arises as a solid 
angioblastic bud from the aortic endothelium. Normo¬ 
blasts crowd the lumen of the aorta. 









f?|0/ 


(A). 


jZQ*ji(La^aJX 


= Rcnuzxfcoru ^yuL JZ^cfayvX ^ S^Xpsm- 
Jloto$jL(yndl~ seivxsmyt, ■ 


(\s&aZo- 


Z>< dtoJi /C<y*AA~ jtUJ&jy*- } | 


(B). 

rJ.^wio^vc x&~ ■ 


LJft sOW- vrvaA*^ 
ygAuLoittfJlCoJLs -&vuIl • 


•CUvttV*^- 

^UL s&oPuL 


M/Clvu^x-^ 5 l_ 






'V^A^hxQxyYy. 

KcutRiLz-Ua ^Jbd«^ 


VjZaCCv^ 


Origin of the Left Corona ry 


Fig. 20. 


Artery* 

































































86 



(A). 


L A 

Fig. 20. Origin of the Left Coronary Artery. 










A/Y\t- 



Pig embryo, 11*5 ram. - uninjeeted. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse IS }x section through trune us ; X 70. 

The aortico-pulmonary septum, formed by the fusion 
of the proximal truncus ridges, divides the truncus 
arteriosus into definitive aorta and pulmonary 
artery. Note that the right and left coronary 
arteries emerge from the aorta some distance above 
the distal conus cushions. Endothelial nuclei are 
crowded and project into the lumen. At this stage, 
the left coronary artery, which is more advanced 
in development than the right, gives off several 
capillary branches. 


























—fc>r\A 



























87 



Fig. 21. 

Pig embryo, 11.5 mm. - uninjected. 

Haematoxylin and eosin. 

Transverse 12 }i section through, truncus; X 70. 

The aortico-pulmonary septum, formed by the fusion 
of the proximal truncus ridges, divides the truncus 
arteriosus into definitive aorta and pulmonary 
artery. Note that the right and left coronary 
arteries emerge from the aorta some distance above 
the distal conus cushions. Endothelial nuclei are 
crowded and project into the lumen. At this stage, 
the left coronary artery, which is more advanced 
in development than the right, gives off several 
capillary branches. 



























































, » . 




. 






" 




. 

. 

, 









' 




88 


Anterior 



Posterior 


Fig. 22. 

Pig embryo, 11.5 mm. (Series A). 

Ventricular chambers and coronary arteries injected with 
Tieman's soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section through the truneus, at 
the level of the left coronary ostium. X 40. 

The left coronary artery is shown as it emerges from the 
aorta. In adjacent sections, the injected vessel extends 
down the left side of the bulbus cordis. The right coron¬ 
ary artery in this embryo (not seen in this section) is 
less advanced in development. 




















.<■ J 




10-MM. PIG EMBRYO HEART. 
(VENTRAL VIEW) 





FIG. 23. 










90 


Fig. 24. 

Pig embryo, 19 mm. (Series A). 

Ventricular chambers and coronary arteries injected with 
Tieman’s soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the base of the 
heart. X 42. 

Coronary capillaries grow down the anterior interventri¬ 
cular sulcus, and spread laterally to invade adjacent 
compact musculature. The advancing capillaries form 
loops from which terminal projections arise. The extent 
of penetration of the muscle becomes less and less as one 
proceeds from the sulcus. On the posterior surface of the 
heart, a subepicardial layer of coronary capillaries 
appears as a row of irregular black markings arranged 
parallel to the epicardium. Sinusoids are present in 
enormous intricacy and constitute by far the greater part 
of the blood supply to the ventricular muscle. In regions 
where capillaries are absent, terminal recesses of sinu¬ 
soids approach the epicardium more closely. Note that the 
interventricular foramen Is still patent. 



T 







Jp&ctvfc- ^ 
-/&uyrv*Jv^ 


/vMW^A 


A/yCQ^eKi, 

/2juJLxjujx. ■ 


I/rO>A^*u^ /Co|a^aA^ 

fLee^^- . 


I ✓nXznxJ^V'-C uxu-^AA. 


-e 


Penetration of Coronary Capillar! 


into Yentricular Muscle, 


^ RyoC- 


*¥*■ 


■Fig. 24c 



















-ftXiJY'JyJsAaNj 


<- 





•±¥* 
















91 



Fig. 24. Penetration of Coronary Capillaries 


into Ventricular Muscle 






92 


Fig. 25. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section through the pulmonary- 
conus, atria and coronary sinus of a 19 mm. pig embryo. 
(Series A) . 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman f s soluble blue. 

3 fo aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. X 68. 

Coronary capillaries have invaded the compact musculature 
of the pulmonary conus. As vascularization progresses, 
terminal projections of capillaries penetrate the muscle, 
then anastomose to form fully canalized loops, from which 
further sprouts arise. In this specimen, coronary art¬ 
eries and veins are differentiated from the capillaries 
only near the base of the heart; their courses follow the 
major cardiac sulci. The anterior descending branch of 
the left coronary artery appears in transverse section; 
portions of the circumflex branch, and of the great and 
small cardiac veins are also shown. Two blind capillary 
projections penetrate the wall of the left auricular 
appendage. In adjacent sections they are seen to commu¬ 
nicate with the great cardiac vein. 






G-JUUiX joo^xAuxx^ 



Vascularization of the pulmonary 


Fig, £5. 


























































93 



Fig. £5 


Vascularization of the Pulmonary Conus 




94 


fig. 26. 

Pig embryo, 30 mm. (Series A). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3 fo aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section through the aortic and 
pulmonary semilunar valves. X 42. 

The coronary arteries are shown as they emerge from the 
aorta. Segments of the right coronary artery, circum¬ 
flex branch of the left coronary and small cardiac vein 
all appear in longitudinal section. Note that the right 
coronary artery lies deep to the accompanying small 
cardiac vein. Rotational changes affecting the aorta and 
pulmonary artery are complete. The compact musculature at 
the base of the heart is well supplied with capillaries. 
Trabeculae are present in the auricular appendages, but at 
this stage they remain as simple ridges of muscle and do 
not give rise to any extensive system of branching sinu¬ 
soids such as characterize the ventricles. Walls of the 
auricular appendages are avascular in this section. 








« 








3 


0 











/CisJeM^ ■ 


yajbfa^^ 


^o/wudQ. 

JjTLhJj^U^ 
AKArtj ■ 




PaofoJ&l/- 


dry Ostia in a 30 mm* Pig 




























Y 






























95 



Fig. £6 


Coronary Ostia in a 30 mm. Pig Embryo 






96 


Fig. 27. 

Pig embryo, 20 mm. (Series D). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3% aqueous solution. Following fixation in 10$ formalin, 
the heart was cleared by the Spalteholz method. Under the 
microscope, portions of cortical layer bearing injected 
vessels were dissected free. Free-hand sections, A and B, 
were first flattened by compression between two glass 
slides, and then photographed. X 46. 

(A) . - The primordial vascular system, as seen in apical 

portions of the 20 mm. pig embryo heart, consists 
morphologically of a sprouting meshwork rather than 
a set of definite supply and drainage channels. 
Capillaries are coalescing to form the posterior 
interventricular branch of the right coronary 
artery. Lateral branches have not formed yet. 

(B) . - The same vessel as shown in A, but from the base of 

the heart. Note that arrangements are similar, but 
more advanced. The main arterial trunk is recogniz¬ 
able. The plexiform character of lateral branches 
is indicative of their transitory condition. 


c- 


<5 










Base 


Fig. 27. 

Steps in the 
Formation of 
Coronary 
Arteries. 



Apex 


Base 



Apex 


(A). 


(B). 


Posterior Interventricular Branch, Right Coronary Artery 



















98 


Base 



Apex 


Fig. 28. 

Pig embryo, 20 mm. (Series D). 

From the same heart as in Fig. 27; similar in treatment 
but at a higher magnification. X 97. 

The portion of cortical layer shown, bears a segment of 
the anterior descending branch of the left coronary 
artery. While the main arterial trunk is fairly well 
established, lateral branches still contain a few 
dwindling capillary loops. 












- 






;; . ' 

' 


* , 

: . % ■ ' .. ■ • 

■ ‘ : • 

• 1 ’ • < ■■■■ ■ 




: 









99 


Base 


R 

i 

g 

h 

t 


V 

e 

n 

t 

r 

i 

c 

1 

e 


r 

L 




Apex 


Fig. 29. 

Pig embryo, 35 mm. (Series D). 

From the same heart as in Fig. 31; similar in treatment, 
but at a higher magnification. Gross specimen cleared 
by the Spalteholz method, X 32.5. 

a portion of the right ventricle is shown. The vascular 
architecture at this stage approximates the adult condi¬ 
tion. Note that the right coronary artery gives off 
marginal branches to the anterior surface of the right 
ventricle as well as small channels to the right atrium. 
Numerous myocardial branches penetrate the ventricular 
wall radially. 





















c 



t 


■ 





. ■ ' ■ 





100 


Fig# 30# 

Pig embryo, 20 mm# (Series D). 

Coronary arteries injected under low pressure with Tieman f s 
soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution# Following formalin fix¬ 
ation the heart was cleared by the Spalteholz method# In 
order to fascilitate examination of the coronary vascular 
tree, the auricular appendages and pulmonary artery were 
removed# X 13#4# 

The branches of the ascending aorta are the right and left 
coronary arteries, which supply the heart. The left coron¬ 
ary artery divides into two major branches, the left circum¬ 
flex and the left anterior descending, which are equal to 
the right coronary artery in size and importance. The 
anterior descending branch reaches three-fourths of the way 
down the anterior interventricular sulcus, and along its 
course, gives off two septal branches. The circumflex 
branch continues around the left margin of the heart and on 
the posterior surface extends almost to the root of the 
great cardiac vein. The right coronary artery extends 
around the right margin of the heart over the top of the 
right ventricle to the posterior interventricular sulcus, 
where it turns downward as the posterior interventricular 
artery, to extend about half the distance to the apex# 

Eight and left marginal branches are well defined# The 
intercardial artery arises by budding at the point where 
the right coronary turns downward to continue as the 
posterior interventricular artery. 













onary Arteries: 20 mm. pig embryo 












07 


V3 




T> 

JI 
10 
c 
00 


0 

50 

ft 

■+ 

(V 

0 

-O 



















102 


Fig. 31. 

Pig embryo, 35 mm. (Series D). 

Coronary arteries injected under low pressure with a vis¬ 
cous injection mass consisting of gelatine and Tieman's 
soluble blue. In other respects similar in treatment and 
magnification to the heart in Fig. 30. 

The cardiac-coronary system has increased both in size and 
complexity, so that the arteries are not only longer than 
those of the previous stage but they also extend farther 
along their lines of growth. Septal branches arise from 
the anterior descending branch of the left coronary as 
well as from the posterior interventricular artery. Of 
special interest is the intercardial artery, which at this 
stage extends into the heart giving off branches downward 
into the interventricular septum and upward into the inter¬ 
atrial septum, and ending as a capillary network on the 
posterior wall of the basal part of the aorta. Myocardial 
branches plunge at right angles from the surface vessels, 
through the heart substance. Note that arteries supplying 
the heart, like those of the brain, fail to enter through 
a central hilus, but penetrate diffusely from the surface. 







Anterior Surface 














a^t«CE 5 o« tU c C 














103 



P1p: - 31 ♦ - Coronary Arteries: 35 mm. pip; embryo. 













104 



DISTRIBUTION OF THE CORONARY ARTERIES, 

80 MM. PIG EMBRYO. 















105 



Fig. 33. 

Pig embryo, 29 mm. (Series A). 

Injection of coronary arteries with Tieman f s soluble blu, 
3$ aqueous solution, has resulted in complete capillary 
filling. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 305. 

A portion of the interventricular septum is shown. In its 
earliest stages, the proliferating capillary meshwork 
exhibits considerable irregularity in the form and size of 
its constituent channels. Capillary loops are ovoid in 
shape♦ 






106 



Fig. 34. 


Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Similar in magnification and treatment to the heart in 
Fig. 33. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. 

A portion of the left ventricle is shown. The myocardium 
is penetrated by an abundant three-dimensional capillary 
network* Siongated rectangular meshes, connected by means 
of cross and tangential anastomoses, are closely applied 
to, and parallel the direction of, the muscle fibres. The 
capillaries everywhere are of smaller calibre than those 
found in the earlier stages. Compare with Fig. 33. 




























SECTION B, 





107 


Section B. 


Development of Anastomotic Channels in the Pig Embryo Heart. 

Observations. 


Luminal Channels. 

Of the anastomotic channels occurring in the heart, 
the luminal vessels are the earliest to develop* They are 
observed by the 19 mm* stage as simple sinusoido-capillary 
connections (Fig. 35)* The primordial coronary vascular 
system, as seen in the pig embryo of 19 mm., consists 
morphologically of a sprouting meshwork of capillaries 
rather than a set of definite supply and drainage channels. 
In spreading inward, these exhibit a characteristic growing 
edge consisting of blind twigs and anastomosing loops, which 
can be seen as an advancing line marking off the non- 
vascularized area* Occasional communications exist between 
advancing capillary twigs and terminal recesses of sinusoids* 
These are simply tubes of capillary dimensions, representing 
the fortuitous junction of endothelium of the two systems 
(Fig. 36). Indicative of the patency of the communications, 
is the complete filling of involved sinusoids, when inject¬ 
ion is by the arterial route (Fig. 37). The anastomoses 
described are seen particularly near the base of the 
ventricle and in the cortical layers, where the coronary 
capillary bed is best developed. At this period however, 








c 


C 


\j%i- 1 







C 









' 







108 


the coronary circulation is far from complete, and hence 
the opportunity for anastomoses remains restricted. By 
the 30 mm* stage, with the extensive invasion of capil¬ 
laries, the sinusoids and coronary system coexist and 
interdigitate intimately* Anastomoses take the form of 
single and often tenuous endothelial tubes, and these may 
join any portion of a sinusoid with the adjacent capil¬ 
lary bed. By the 90 mm* stage, with the continued growth 
of the cortical layers and concurrent regressive changes 
in sinusoidal recesses, the only anastomotic luminal 
channels to remain patent, are those which are far 
removed from the epicardium (Fig* 39). This is especially 
true in the left ventricle and near the base of the heart. 
Following vascularization of the atria, luminal channels, 
similar to those occurring in the ventricles, make their 
appearance (Fig* 40). By the 220 mm* stage, ventricular 
luminal channels are almost entirely limited to the right 
ventricles and the portion of interventricular septum 
bordering on the right ventricle. They appear as tufts of 
capillaries issuing from the square-cut ends of regressing 
sinusoids, and are especially well demonstrated in the 
thick sections of Series C (Figs. 85 and 86). 

Hearts from Series B, injected through one coronary 
artery only, furnished interesting indirect evidence con¬ 
cerning the frequency and distribution of luminal channels. 



I 






c 


c 




c 



t 






t 












109 


The example par excellence, was a 90 mm* specimen which 
had been injected by way of the left coronary* In the 
left ventricle, though coronary capillaries were outlined 
in their entirety, adjacent sinusoidal spaces remained 
uninjected. In the right ventricle, where capillary 
injection was spotty, sinusoids were only filled with 
injection material in those regions where adjacent coron¬ 
ary capillaries were injected (Figs. 41 and 42). Conversely, 
in the left ventricle, and in those portions of the right 
ventricle where coronary capillaries remained uninjected, the 
sinusoids were also empty. The only possible conclusions are 
that (a) many of the sinusoids in the right ventricle commun- 

vv 

icate 4 adjacent corpnary capillaries, and that (b) sinusoido- 
capillary connections are far more numerous in the right 
ventricle than in the left. 

Actual counts of the number of sinusoido-capillary 
connections in the different portions of the heart were made 
on specimens from Series A. The results are shown in Graph 
XX, which gives the total number of anastomotic channels, 
and also the number in each region of the heart* There were 
two possible sources of error, namely incomplete injection, 
and faulty observation and interpretation* In order to 
reduce the latter source of error to a minimum, preparations 
were studied by means of a Greenough stereoscopic binocular 
microscope, and all luminal anastomoses of a doubtful nature 




0 












0 


* 


0 



0 


0 






i) 


< 


.0 


$ 


• • : .,o .... 0 • 


0-1 




c 







110 


were closely inspected under the high power from both 
sides of the slide* By and large, findings corresponded 
with those from Series C. Sinusoido-capillary connections 
were enumerated singly, whether they occurred individually 
or in tufts, for each had the same potentialities as far 
as adult persistence was concerned. In the right ventricle 
the sinusoido-capillary connections increase sharply in 
number with age. In the left ventricle, the number act¬ 
ually declines. The change in the interventricular septum 
is intermediate between these two extremes. As noted from 
Graphs V and VI, correlated to the differences in frequency 
of anastomotic connections, during the 30 to 90 mm. stages, 
is the greater persistence of sinusoids in the right ven¬ 
tricle as compared to the left. Luminal vessels in the 
atria increase in number as vascular density rises (Graphs 
IV and XX). 

In the adult pig heart, the ostia of Thebesian veins 
are observed as small depressions or crypts in the endo¬ 
cardium of both auricles and ventricles. However, they are 
more numerous in the right ventricle, especially toward the 
apex and in the papillary muscles. They are probably 
remnants of the original sinusoidal system of the embryo 
heart. With particular reference to the anterior papillary 
muscle of the right ventricle, injection studies revealed 
that some of these ostia are in direct communication with 




c 














in 


the large coronary veins♦ Some end as blind pouches, and 
as illustrated in Figs. 44, 46 and 47, others anastomose 
with one another by intercommunicating subendocardial 
venous and sinusoidal networks. When injection pressure 
is sufficient, the capillary bed is also filled (Fig. 48). 
In fresh specimens, endocardial foramina of Thebesian veins 
may be distinguished from blind pouches by virtue of the 
fact that when the surrounding muscle is compressed, the 
former in contrast to the latter, exude a fine trickle of 
blood. Radiating subendocardial vessels are also visible 
on careful inspection. Seventy-one adult pig hearts were 
selected at random. In each case, the ventricular surface 
of the anterior papillary muscle of the right ventricle, 
which presents as a discrete, easily definable area, was 
examined for endocardial foramina of Thebesian veins. 
Results are summarized in Table IV*-A and Text Figure 49. 

The number of ostia per anterior papillary muscle range 
from 0 to 10, with a mean of 3.48 and a standard deviation 
of + 2.20. Incidence bears no relationship to heart size. 
As in most such investigations in biology, where no one 
constant major factor can be detected as responsible for 
the variation, the frequency distribution tends to be of 
the w cocked hat” type. 

Bxtracardiac Anastomoses. 

Yasa vasorum of the aorta and pulmonary artery 
commence during the fifth week of prenatal life (35 to 40 



0 









112 


mm., C-R length) as a single layer of vessels in the 
adventitia. These vessels of the periadventitial network 
arise as capillary twigs from the first branches of the 
right and left coronary arteries. They run upward in the 
anterior aortico-pulmonary groove and spread laterally to 
partially encircle the ascending aorta in its proximal 
third. This corona of vasa vasorum is only one or two 
capillaries in depth (Fig. 50), The pulmonary artery is 
similarly vascularized, but at a somewhat later stage. 

The 210 mm. stage approaches the adult condition and is 
worthy of description. From the right coronary artery, 
branches run upward to spread anteriorly and posteriorly 
over the ascending aorta. Anterior branches spread in 
the aortico-pulmonary groove and then over the pulmonary 
artery, where they anastomose with pulmonary branches of 
the left coronary artery. Posterior branches furnish the 
root of the aorta with many small vessels and these supply 
the aortic wall over the right posterior sinus of Talsalva. 
From the left coronary artery, branches run upward and 
laterally. Anterior branches cross the aortico-pulmonary 
groove to spread on the pulmonary artery, finally anasto¬ 
mosing with the right coronary branches described. Many 
small twigs are also given to the aortic wall in the region 
of the aortico-pulmonary groove. Posterior branches supply 
the left and posterior half of the aortic wall. Capillaries 
from the atria and pulmonary conus also contribute to the 





■ 


* \ 













113 


halo of vessels. The result is an extensively anasto¬ 
mosing circle of vascular channels about the great cardiac 
vessels, extending at least beyond the first branchings 
(Fig. 52). Venous drainage is by way of tributaries of the 
great and small cardiac veins. The parallel course of the 
arteries and veins in the aortic wall is very striking and 
characteristic of the vasa vasorum of the vessel (Fig. 53). 

By the 210 mm. stage, vasa vasorum, composed of several 
capillary layers, completely encircle the aorta and pulmon¬ 
ary artery (Fig. 51). Quantitatively, vascularization does 
not proceed at a rapid pace until late in fetal life (Graphs 
XVIII eind XIX). At almost every stage, the vascularity of 
the aorta exceeds that of the pulmonary artery. In terms 
of absolute values, numerical results may be subject to 
considerable error because of shrinkage incident to histo¬ 
logical procedures. Other precursors of the adult extra¬ 
cardiac anastomoses appear in the walls of the superior vena 
cava (Fig. 54) and hemiazygos vein, but not until 70 mm., 

C-R. During late fetal life, these vasa vasorum increase 
both in number and extent. Frequently they empty directly 
into the lumen of the vessel whose wall they supply (Fig. 54). 
In passing it may be noted that contrary to the condition 
found in man, in the adult pig, the hemiazygos vein (derived 
in part from the left common cardinal vein) opens into the 
coronary sinus. 






114 


Intervascular Anastomoses, 

Both arteries and veins arise from netlike anlagen. 
The veins tend to retain this arrangement (Fig. 18). 
Intervenous anastomoses are first observed at 20 mm., 
between different epicardial branches of the middle cardiac 
vein. By the 60 mm. stage, communications also exist 
between epicardial branches of the great and small cardiac 
veins. Intervenous anastomoses vary in number and location 
from specimen to specimen. Late in fetal life they often 
reach a diameter of 100 microns. Anastomotic sites are 
readily revealed by the retrograde perfusion of single 
cardiac veins (Fig. 55). 

In some respects, a perfect injection is a wasted 
specimen, because no one can unravel in such a specimen the 
amazingly intricate network of blood vessels. It becomes, 
therefore, a question of skill to produce an injection 
which, while sufficiently incomplete to permit of study, is 
yet good enough to omit no essential detail. For this 
purpose, injection materials may be used which do not fill 
the capillary bed. The thin celloidin mixture utilized for 
the injection of some specimens in Series D regularly fills 
vessels down to 40 microns. Interarterial communications in 
pig embryo hearts are never of sufficient size to be demon¬ 
strated by this method. Furthermore, a continuous injection 
pathway is never visible grossly between arterial and venous 






0 


c 



t 


0 .'.' 


0 


0 


c 


o 


o i 


0 








115 


branches; nor is there any evidence of the colored 
injection mass passing by way of invisible connections* 

A painstaking search failed to reveal interarterial and 
arteriovenous communications in specimens of Series A. 

In Series B, following left coronary artery injection, 
adjacent arteries and veins are filled, only after the 
intervening capillary bed has been penetrated. The 
chief sites of capillary overlap in the embryo heart are, 
along the anterior surface of the right ventricle to the 
right of and parallel to the anterior interventricular 
groove, in the region of the posterior interventricular 
groove, and in the interventricular septum (Fig. 56, Text 
Fig. 58). Despite capillary continuity, spread of low 
viscosity injection material through the vascular 
reticulum occurs only if a high injection pressure is main¬ 
tained. 


Discussion. 


That communications between coronary vessels and 
sinusoids might be precursors of luminal anastomoses has 
been suggested by Grant (19E6) and Bennett (1936). In the 
present pig material every stage after the formation of the 
coronary capillaries shows definite connections between 
these capillaries and sinusoids. Despite the fact that the 








. o ; ... 








116 


two systems interdigitate intimately, free anastomoses are 
relatively infrequent. Bennett (1936) found two to six 
such communications in any one well-injected heart but 
admits of technical difficulty in identifying connections. 
During the present study, refinements in injection tech¬ 
nique permitted the identification of from 50 to 226 
luminal channels per heart, in fetal life. The increase in 
number of luminal channels with age seems dependent on sinu¬ 
soidal and capillary densities, and the opportunity for 
chance union of the endothelium of the two systems. Early 
in fetal life, luminal channels largely disappear from the 
left ventricle with the early obliteration of sinusoids, 
but they continue to be numerous in the right ventricle, 
where the sinusoids tend to persist. This explains why in 
the adult, luminal vessels are more abundant in the right 
heart than in the left. The variability in number of 
Thebesian ostia suggests a fortuitous embryonic origin. In 
the light of present evidence, Grant*s postulate, as set 
forth at the beginning of this paragraph seems not unreason¬ 
able, for sinusoido-capillary communications might easily 
give rise to connections in the intramural coronary circu¬ 
lation, between the chambers of the heart and the various 
subdivisions of the coronary tree (arterioles, capillaries, 
venules and sinusoids). There is a diversity of opinion 
concerning the number of these vessels in the normal heart 
and their functional capacity as collateral circulatory 


channels 




e 



0 




« 






117 


Grant (1926) has reported a case of a congenitally 
malformed heart in which there was a persistence of the 
sinusoids after fetal life* Connections were traced by 
serial section to the coronary vessels* Williams, Kent 
and Edwards (1951), and Alexander and Green (1952), 
recently reported cases in which anomalous coronary blood 
vessels communicated directly with ventricular chambers. 
These malformations are interpreted as a persistence and 
growth of sinusoido-capillary connections combined with a 
dilatation and molding of intramural embryonal sinusoids. 

The penetration of coronary capillaries into the 
walls of the great vessels has apparently not been pre¬ 
viously described in detail. Bennett (1936) places the 
embryological inception of the extracardiac anastomoses 
of the coronary arteries as between 75 and 125 mm., but 
actually the process commences at the 35 mm. stage. The 
ascending aorta is supplied by vessels arising from the 
left and right coronary arteries, by vasa arising from 
the great vessels of the aortic arch, and by channels 
originating directly from the lumen of the aorta 
(Schlichter and Harris, 1949). Although vascular 
elements from these three sources form a rich anastomo¬ 
tic network, it is obvious that in the present work 
only vasa arising from the coronary arteries have been 
adequately injected. Schlichter and Harris (1949) 



c 








118 


observed that the vascularity of the ascending aorta is 
comparatively greatest in the dog and decreases progress¬ 
ively in the human, chicken and rabbit. The species 
differences in number and distribution of the vasa vasorum 
are unrelated to the size of the aorta. 

In embryo and fetal hearts, coronary arteries and 
coronary arteries and veins, are connected through capil¬ 
lary networks only. Interarterial and arteriovenous 
channels of larger calibre are absent. Although inter- 
arterial anastomoses occur in the normal dog heart they are 
rarely witnessed in the adult pig heart. Blumgart, Zoll, 
Freedberg and Gilligan (1950) were able to demonstrate 
superficial intercommunicating twigs in only 2 pigs of 55 
studied. Following partial narrowing of a coronary artery 
in the pig, large anastomotic communications between the 
coronary arteries developed in a period of 4 to 12 days. 
This collateral circulation was shown to be of functional 
significance in that subsequent complete occlusion of the 
previously narrowed coronary artery was not followed by 
death of the animal nor by extensive necrosis of the 
involved myocardium. Of the various collateral channels in 
the heart, the interarterial is the last to develop, taking 
form after birth and attaining functional significance only 
in adult life in the face of persistent metabolic demand. 


t 




K - <■ 


o . . ’ o 


o 


'-'J 


•D 















/OimsuUteU/•Lcr 

sC6wnJLC&jyt\y m 


Fig, 35, 

Pig embryo, 19 mm, (Series A )• 

Ventricular chambers and coronary arteries injected with 
Tieman's soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart, X 97. 

In the portion of right ventricle shown, penetrating coron¬ 
ary capillaries form a well-defined subepicardial plexus. 
Sinusoids, however, constitute by far the greater part of 
the blood supply to the ventricular muscle, at this stage. 
The position of a sinusoido-capillary communication is 
indicated on the overlying tracing. Transitional channels 
of this type are the precursors of adult ^Thebesian vessels”. 



















f vjWKrOk J 
















110 



Fig. 35. 

Pig embryo, 19 mm. (Series A). 

Ventricular chambers and coronary arteries injected with 
Tieman's soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 97. 

In the portion of right ventricle shown, penetrating coron¬ 
ary capillaries form a well-defined subepicardial plexus. 
Sinusoids, however, constitute by far the greater part of 
the blood supply to the ventricular muscle, at this stage. 

The position of a sinusoido-capillary communication is 
indicated on the overlying tracing. Transitional channels 
of this type are the precursors of adult "Thebesian vessels". 









c 





c 


? 












Sj^r^Latye^oUl. 


■yO>rVL^}/ldZd^ X^J^ycttuk- 

*<UjYIAJL&&uJ^ . 


^yLdij<)^UjUX>ALX^ 


X^Y\MJLcXuy*l 


Fig 36* 

Pig embryo, 21 mnu {Series A), 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman*s soluble blue, 

3$ aqueous solution* 

Gounterstain, borax-carmine* 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart* X 70* 

The subepicardial plexus of coronary capillaries appears 
as a row of irregular black markings arranged parallel to 
the epicardium* Note that the superficial capillary net¬ 
work communicates with an adjacent terminal sinusoidal 
recess through a simple anastomotic channel. The area 
shown is from the right ventricle* 





















. 3c>j<s£X-x>j<rO^ 


jvoj5oOj\\jy 6^S. - -«35o^xyAXiv>L 

. Jkii>3&4>[ ^Aj&^icjcOv ijjOoJ&JU^oJ^W 

->^A>JoJ^AJ300£|- 3 

















120 



Fig 36. 

Pig embryo, 21 mm. (Series A). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3 f 0 aqueous solution. 

Gounterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 70. 

The subepicardial plexus of coronary capillaries appears 
as a row of irregular black markings arranged parallel to 
the epicardium. Note that the superficial capillary net¬ 
work communicates with an adjacent terminal sinusoidal 
recess through a simple anastomotic channel. The area 
shown is from the right ventricle. 








r 




t 




. 





& /VT^C<yC-£*-A^CuA/vvv/ 



Fig. 37. 

Pig embryo, 21 mm* (Series A)* 

Section from the same heart as in Fig. 36, and 80 u 
farther removed from the apex; similar in magnification 

and treatment. 

Other explanations as for Fig* 36. Since injection was 
by way of the coronary arteries, the complete filling of 
the involved sinusoid with injection material, is indic¬ 
ative of the patency of the communicating channel. 

Compare with the frontpiece. 















- -e>J<x>eyouo^ 

J '*^wA^usxxc|. 3 


^Ay><iojojyx8 













121 



Fig* 3?. 

Pig embryo, 21 mm* (Series A). 

Section from the same heart as in Fig. 36, and 80 u 
farther removed from the apex; similar in magnification 
and treatment. 

Other explanations as for Fig. 36. Since injection was 
by way of the coronary arteries, the complete filling of 
the involved sinusoid with injection material, is indic¬ 
ative of the patency of the communicating channel. 
Compare with the frontpiece. 


I 




122 


Fig. 38. 

Pig embryo, 33 mm. (Series A). 

Injection of coronary arteries with Tieman f s soluble blue, 
3$ aqueous solution, has resulted in complete capillary 
filling. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the base of the 
heart. X 194. 

Part of the anterior wall of the left ventricle is shown. 
Coronary capillaries may be readily differentiated from 
the sheet-like sinusoids, or the irregular, branching, 
finger-like terminal recesses. Although the coronary 
system and the sinusoids coexist and interdigitate inti¬ 
mately, they remain for the most part entirely separate. 

A definite zone of undifferentiated muscle or of connect¬ 
ive tissue, not shown in this preparation, separates them. 
Infrequent anastomoses between the coronary capillary bed 
and sinusoids, however, do exist. The position of one of 
these is indicated on the overlying tracing. Note that 
the communicating channel is quite narrow. With the 
further regression of sinusoids, it would undoubtedly have 
been completely obliterated. 



. 0 














Reg ressive Changes Affec 
S 1 ms e i a o -cap i liar y C o n ae at i on 


Fig. 38 


















-Nv'jJkiKnjooj^ 3 




JWvudkAJ^>O^W 













123 



Fig. 38. 


Regressive Changes Affecting a 


Si misoido-capillary Connection. 







12 <* 





/^OJljuJlJloAA^ 


srijCfcuLyo’lfa- ■ 


EjyOCOJtolZuJvyt 


Sj^uu^cLo- - /CO^^-aJuX^ 
yCcyrvi^iXjjcsrv^ . 


Fig* 39* 

Pig embryo, 90 mm* (Series A)* 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3 % aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart* X 9?. 

Compare with Fig. 38, and note the very definite increase 
in the relative abundance and complexity of the coronary 
circulation as opposed to the sinusoidal. In consequence 
to the regression of sinusoids, the only anastomotic luminal 
channels to remain patent, are those which are far removed 
from the epieardium* The area shown is from the right 
ventricle. 












.3 















124 



Fig. 39. 

Pig embryo, 90 mm. (Series A). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 97. 

Compare with Fig. 38, and note the very definite increase 
in the relative abundance and complexity of the coronary 
circulation as opposed to the sinusoidal. In consequence 
to the regression of sinusoids, the only anastomotic luminal 
channels to remain patent, are those which are far removed 
from the epicardium. The area shown is from the right 
ventricle. 


















/ . 





' 

' 

■ 

' 















Fig, 40, 

Pig embryo, 220 mm, {Series C)* 

Injection material (Tieman*s soluble blue), introduced 
into the ventricular cavities, has filled the atrial 
chambers as well. 

Counterstain, eosin. 

Transverse 100 u celloidin section, at the leva! of the 
aortic semilunar valves. X 97. 

A portion of the right auricular appendage is shown. 

Shallow intertrabecular spaces fGrm in the atria rather 
later than in the ventricles. Though similar in appear* 
ance, they are limited in complexity by the thinness of 
the atrial wall. Note that the injected capillary vessels 
communicate with an adjacent sinusoid through a transitional 
channel. 































125 



Fig. 40. 

Fig embryo, 220 mm. (Series C). 

Injection material (Tieman ? s soluble blue), introduced 
into the ventricular cavities, has filled the atrial 
chambers as well. 

Counterstain, eosin. 

Transverse 100 u celloldin section, at the level of the 
aortic semilunar valves. X 97. 

A portion of the right auricular appendage is shown. 

Shallow intertrabecular spaces form in the atria rather 
later than in the ventricles. Though similar in appear¬ 
ance, they are limited in complexity by the thinness of 
the atrial wall. Note that the injected capillary vessels 
communicate with an adjacent sinusoid through a transitional 
channel. 
















, * 




c , 






' 


. 

. 

. 






5 


■ 


* 

■ 




■ 



' 



. 

■ 

.. . . .... •" 1 


' 



■ ■ 


. 




♦ 

■ . ; 















126 



Fig. 41. 


Pig embryo, 90 mm. (Series B). 

Only the left coronary artery was injected in this specimen. 
Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 32.5 


A portion of the left ventricle is shown. Although coronary 
capillaries are outlined in their entirety, adjacent sinu¬ 
soidal spaces (indicated by blue arrows) have remained 
uninjeeted. The only inference possible is that sinusoido- 
eapillary connections are lacking in the left ventricle at 
this stage. 








. 









127 



Fig* 42. 


Pig embryo, 90 mm. (Series B). 

From the same section as in Fig. 41, and similar in magni¬ 
fication and treatment. 


The area shown is from the right ventricle. Note that sinu¬ 
soids are only filled with injection material (red arrows) 
in those regions of the right ventricle where adjacent coro¬ 
nary capillaries are injected. Conversely, in the left 
ventricle (Fig. 41), and in those portions of the right 
ventricle where coronary capillaries have remained unin¬ 
jected, the sinusoids (indicated by blue arrows) are also 
empty. We are therefore justified in concluding that (a) 
many of the sinusoids in the right ventricle communicate with 
adjacent coronary capillaries, and that (b) sinusoido- 
capillary connections are more numerous by far, in the right 
ventricle than in the left. 















c 








128 



Fig 43. 

Adult pig heart. 

The formalin-fixed specimen shown above, was dissected 
from the anterior wall of the right ventricle. Endo¬ 
cardial foramina of Thebesian veins, occurring on the 
papillary muscles, were injected with a viscous solution 
of gelatin and Tieman*s soluble blue. X 2. 

The moderator band, here very thick, extends to the base 
of the anterior papillary muscle. Chordae tendineae pass 
from the papillary muscles to the tricuspid valve flaps. 
This photograph mainly serves to orientate structures 
shown in Fig. 44. 







129 


Fig. 44. 

Adult pig heart. 

Microphotograph, under higher magnification (X 11.6), of 
the rectangular area shown in Fig. 43. 

Between the trabeculae carneae of the ventricles and 
auricles, especially in the right heart, are small endo¬ 
cardial foramina measuring up to 1 mm. in diameter. They 
are probably remnants of the original sinusoidal system 
of the embryo heart. Present injection studies demonstrate 
that some of these ostia are in direct communication with 
the large coronary veins. Some end as blind pouches, and 
as illustrated here, others anastomose with one another 
through intercommunicating subendocardial venous networks. 
Note that injected veins encircle the chordae tendineae 
near their attachment, ramify over the anterior ventricular 
wall, and arborize to end in capillary networks. The endo¬ 
cardial foramen shown, appears as a small depression on the 
ventricular surface of the anterior papillary muscle. 





t 







JUxfii XX^fiaJsL. 


/QjuJkstdxXAMAuJL JftajM*- 


Cho^dUxJL. 


fi/ritinxo'v 


/yruJLAx2si_ “ 

R{<^t uxrtfcdb- 


E/ridx&ulLdL' 

^uvmevt- ^ 
TJb&CAca*^ ArtisO* 


Jig. 44. 


Injected Ye :ao-luminal Anastomotic Channel. 



























^ -^Sayui,. jyjjji^jrxN 




~ _sSLximn 


^ JVSAVJCkr< 
-S>J^k vTMsii»^S^ 


.-Ufc^^A*****^ ^W>4H>Jtt^WjXN^ 






















130 



F ig. 44. 


Injected Veno-luminal Anastomotic Channel. 






















131 



Fig. 45. 




Injected "Thebesian Vein”, 

Moderator band, from an adult pig heart. 
Treatment as described for Fig. 43. X 11.7. 
Other explanations as for Fig. 44. 











132 



Fig. 46. 

Adult pig heart. 

Veno-luminal channels, occurring in the anterior wall of 
the right ventricle, were injected through their endo¬ 
cardial foramina, with a mixture of gelatin and Tieman f s 
soluble blue. Regions bearing injected vessels were 
dissected free, fixed in formalin, and then sectioned trans¬ 
versely at 20 u. 

Weigert»s elastic tissue stain. X 70. 

Histologically some of the injected vessels proved to be myo¬ 
cardial sinusoids. The subendocardial vessel, shown above, 
serves as an example. Note the irregularity and thinness of 
the wall. The intima, which contains a minimum of elastic 
tissue, is everywhere closely adherent to the myocardium. 
Compare with the uninjected artery on the right. Elastic 
elements in the endocardium stain intensely. 












133 



Fig. 47. 

Adult pig heart. 

From the same block of tissue as the section shown in 
Fig. 46. 

Transverse 20 u section, stained with haematoxylin and 
eosin. 32.5. 

The injected vessel is a thin-walled vein. In adjacent 
sections it communicates with the myocardial sinusoid 
shown in Fig. 46. The transition between the two types 
of vessels is quite gradual. 


i 
























: - 




i 






• - 

■ - 

• • ,v 


_ • ■ :■ : . • ■ ' ■' - 
* - , 

. . ' 


t 

* 














134 



Fig. 48. 

Adult pig heart. 

Yeno-luminal channels, occurring in the anterior wall of 
the right ventricle, were injected through their endo¬ 
cardial foramina, with Tieman^ soluble blue, 3$ aqueous 
solution. Regions bearing injected vessels were dis¬ 
sected free, fixed in formalin, and then sectioned trans¬ 
versely at 20 u. 

Counterstain, eosin. X 70. 

The fluid injection mass has penetrated the capillary bed 
extensively. It is clear that the Thebesian vessels do 
not form a closed system within the heart wall, but com¬ 
municate freely on the one hand with the cavity of the 
ventricle and on the other with coronary veins and 
capillaries. 












% 






13b 
























































136 



Fig. 50. 

Pig embryo, 42 mm. (Series A). 

Injection of coronary arteries with. Tieman f s soluble blue, 

3 fa aqueous solution, has resulted in complete capillary 
filling. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section, through the aorta and 
pulmonary artery, 0.44 mm. above the coronary ostia. X 40. 

Coronary capillaries are invading the walls of the aorta 
and pulmonary artery to form a corona of vasa vasorum 
(indicated by red arrows). The aorta (on the left) is 
partially encircled by a single capillary layer, but the 
pulmonary artery is still avascular. In this specimen, the 
vascularization of the aortic wall, as based on the standard 
section, is estimated to be 3.61$. 





137 



Fig. 51. 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Similar in treatment to the specimen shown in Fig. 50. 
The level of section was chosen so as to bear a corres¬ 
ponding relationship to coronary ostia. X 22.5. 

Vasa vasorum, now composed of several capillary layers, 
completely encircle the aorta and pulmonary artery. The 
wall of the aorta is more highly vascularized than is 
that of the pulmonary artery (53.8$ as against 35.8$). 
























138 


Fig. 52. 

Pig embryo 200 mm. (Series D). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman f s soluble blue, 

3$ aqueous solution. Following fixation in 10$ formalin, 
the heart was cleared by the Spalteholz method. Under the 
microscope, the ascending aorta and pulmonary artery were 
split lengthwise in the sagittal plane. The left-hand 
segment, still attached at the base, was dissected free, 
flattened by compression between two glass slides, and 
then photographed. X 42. 

Capillary vessels arising from the right and left coronary 
arteries grow into the walls of the aorta and pulmonary 
artery, and form an extensive vascular network. In late 
fetal life, the encircling capillaries, under the adventi¬ 
tia, accompany the great cardiac vessels at least beyond 
their first branchings. Note that the capillary vessels, 
which present the typical appearance of vasa vasorum, are 
in fact the precursors of the adult extracardiac anasto¬ 
moses of the coronary arteries. 


c 





r\ 


C 





139 



Vasa Vasorum of Aorta and Pulmonary Artery; 200 mm. pig; embryo. 
















140 


Fig. 53. 

Pig embryo, 200 mm. (Series D). 

Similar in treatment to the specimen in Fig. 52. X 400. 

A striking and characteristic feature of the vasa vasorum 
in the aortic wall is the parallel course of arteries and 
veins. This arrangement becomes evident at an early stage. 
Photomicrographs A, B, and C, taken from different areas 
in the same specimen, illustrate the genetic stages. 



The adventitial capillaries possess the irregular outlines 
characteristic of embryonal vascular beds. Three vessels 
run diagonally in the figure. The two lateral vessels of 
this trio are to form the venae comitantes in the region, 
while the larger middle one will form the corresponding 
artery. 








- 


c 






' :j / - 


■ 
















c 









The artery is much larger than the accompanying veins. 
The latter still exhibit embryonic features. 


(B) 



The three vessels are of equal caliber, and are now 
similar in outline. 










142 



Fig. 54. 

Pig embryo, 70 mm. (Series A). 

Injection of coronary arteries with Tieman's soluble blue, 
3 % aqueous solution, has resulted in complete capillary 
filling. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 u paraffin section, from the base of the 
heart. X 95. 

The superior vena cava is shown in transverse section, 
close to its entrance into the right atrium. Coronary 
capillaries supply the vessel wall. Three capillary twigs 
from the vasa vasorum, indicated by arrows, communicate 
with the lumen of the vein. 













c 


( 















~&7\j Mut Coj\Aj-&c* (JjZc^- 


■L^ \JesrfjjixJU, 


t\ /yCCL'VUKL.' 

^\J3^XjJJcLk^AxSL < iu^C<-U1. • 


P[<usvud2jL- 


S'rKoJUZ- C&aAmjjC- \JjU- 


\i JLrX&UjJJjLs 




I^^Ajo-Cvl^ou©- R/y^xMZtyvr^<UJ^- 


Fig. 55.. 

Pig embryo, 155 mm. 

A cannula was pushed through the thin wall of the 
coronary sinus so as to enter the small cardiac 
vein. Ti©man’s soluble blue (3 • aqueous solution) 
was then injected under low pressure. 

Gross specimen; X'5.7. 

Note that injection material has entered the great 
cardiac vein by way of an intervenous anastomosis 
located on the conus arteriosus. This anastomotic 
channel has a diameter of approximately 90 u. 


































143 



Fig. 55. 

Pig embryo, 155 mm. 

A cannula was pushed through the thin wall of the 
coronary sinus so as to enter the small cardiac 
vein. Tieman’s soluble blue (3 fo aqueous solution) 
was then injected under low pressure. 

Gross specimen; X 5.7. 

Note that injection material has entered the great 
cardiac vein by way of an intervenous anastomosis 
located on the conus arteriosus. This anastomotic 
channel has a diameter of approximately 90 u. 












r 


144 



Fig, 56. 

Pig embryo, 170 mm. (Series B). 

The left coronary artery was injected with Tieman f s soluble 
blue, 3# aqueous solution. 

Gross specimen. 

The sterno-costal surface of the heart is shown. X 4.9. 

The left ventricle and auricular appendage appear uniformly 
dark in color, to the unaided eye* This is indicative of 
complete capillary injection. The sharp line of demark- 
ation on the anterior aspect of the right ventricle out¬ 
lines the extent of capillary filling. In fetal life, the 
coronary arteries overlap considerably in their distribution. 
Despite the capillary continuity, however, spread of blood 
through the reticulum would not be rapid enough for func¬ 
tional needs should one of the larger tributaries become 
obliterated. 

















I 
















* 


. 

■ 

* 












j 

■ 



- . 

■ 


. 

' «/ 

. 

' 


' 

i 


' 



: 

e 

' 




- 










■ 

•• 












14S 


Endocardium. 

j v 



\ ' 

Epicardium. 


Fig. 57. 

Pig embryo, 140 mm. (Series C). 

Injection of ventricular cavities with Tieman's soluble blue, 
aqueous solution. 

Transverse 100 jx celloidin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. X 40. 

The area shown is from the left ventricle. With the growth 
of trabeculae, sinusoids are reduced to simple, slit-like 
spaces, with square cut ends. Penetrating myocardial branches 
anastomose through capillary networks only. Interarterial 
channels of larger calibre are absent. 








' 





■ 

.' . 

■ ' ■ .v- < ■ ■■ 


... ■ ( •• ■ r ■ . . ■ • . o.r ' ■ 

. ; .: r ^T-:r £."s... I * : 

■ • . - - • 

.:v : ■ 



. ' . . , , . - 

' 

] 

■ 


146 









































































147 


Section C. 


The following section deals with several peculiar¬ 
ities of the embryonic cardiac-coronary system, of little 
importance in themselves, but of some clinical significance 
should they occur in human embryos and persist into adult 
life. 


Origin and Development of Cardiac Venous Valves. 

As the examination of serially sectioned material 
progressed, it became apparent that late in fetal life, 
cardiac veins are well provided with valves. For purposes 
of a detailed study, twelve hearts were selected from 
Series A; the fetuses so represented, ranged from 82 to 
210 mm. in crown-rump length. 

At the end of the second or the beginning of the 
third month of prenatal life (90 mm.), the first valves 
have their inception in the developing epicardial venous 
plexus. The earliest valves to make their appearance, are 
those which occur in the coronary sinus, at the mouths of 
the great, small and middle cardiac veins. These valves 
commence as the bicuspid variety, but may later become uni¬ 
cuspid. The period of most active valvulogenesis falls in 
the last month of intra-uterine life, at which time bicuspid 
valves are established at the mouths of tributaries of the 















' 











14 * 


great, small and middle cardiac veins. Other valves form 
at the points at which venous channels become confluent, 
particularly at the mouths of tributaries of the second and 
third orders. Free stretches of the great cardiac vein are 
similarly provided, though to a lesser extent. In general, 
the valves first appear in veins which lie at the base of 
the heart and along the major cardiac sulci, and then show 
a tendency to progressive generation in a centrifugal 
direction. Thus the oldest or earliest cardiac venous 
territory acquires its valves first. In the specimen repre¬ 
senting a 210 mm. fetus, most of the valves are far along 
towards completion, but here and there one, just in its 
incipient phase is encountered. Valves are limited to the 
ventricular epicardial venous plexus, the larger channels 
being more liberally supplied than the terminal meshes. 

They are absent in the depth of the myocardium, in the atria, 
and in the apical half of the heart. 

Of necessity, a description of valvulogenesis must be 
built up from the study of a number of different specimens, 
each of which represents a single stage. While evanescent 
changes may be missed by this method, the general features 
of the process can be established with certainty. Bicuspid 
venous valves commence as intimal thickenings. Local endo¬ 
thelial proliferation causes a crowding of nuclei and a 
shallow ridge is formed which extends circumferentially. 

With the invasion of subjacent mesenchyme, the endothelial 
anlage grows in height to form paired rudiments of valve 











c 















0 ' •' 









' 

' 




flaps* As the barrier becomes more pronounced, it begins 
to slant in the direction of the venous current. A valve 
sinus commences as a slight outward bulge immediately 
above the base of the valve rudiment. 

At first the lips of the valval anlagen are rela¬ 
tively thick and plump, as shown in Fig. 59-C, but grad¬ 
ually as they grow in length they become transformed into 
tenuous flaps and project downstream at a more acute 
angle. A corresponding increase in the depth of each 
sinus is thereby achieved (Fig. 62). The consecutive 
genetic steps of the type of valve formation just con¬ 
sidered, are expressed in a simple way in the diagrams of 
Text Figure 65. The formative process is the same, irre¬ 
spective of whether the site is at the mouth of a tribu¬ 
tary, or in a free stretch of vein. In one case the valve 
arises from an endothelial proliferation that encircles 
the entrance of one vessel into another; in the other it is 
produced from the vessel wall. The completed semilunar 
valves are attached by their convex edges to the wall of 
the vein (Text Fig. 65); free concave margins are directed 
in the course of the venous current (Fig. 64-C). 

Veins are elliptical in cross-section at valve sites. 
The major axis of this ellipse is roughly parallel to the 
epicardial surface. All cardiac veins, however, assume an 
elliptical cross-section when drained of blood. The two 
valve cusps usually arise from the long curves of the 






s. 


c 



l ■ r ■ 





c 




















it 


c 




: iiO. 


150 


ellipse so that the interval between them is also parallel 
to the overlying compressing epicardium (Figs. 59-64). 
Edwards (1936) describes a similar arrangement in the 
veins of the extremities, and postulates that this orient¬ 
ation imparts to the valve a maximum of functional effic¬ 
iency. In the case of cardiac venous valves the relation¬ 
ship is by no means constant. 

The majority of cardiac venous valves are of the 
bicuspid type; examples are depicted in longitudinal 
section in Figs. 60-63, and in cross-section in Fig. 64. 
The tricuspid variety represent a common variation. Just 
as the normal number of cusps may be exceeded, so may one 
of a pair be suppressed to give rise to a unicuspid valve. 
Although the commencement of this process is often noted, 
it is infrequently carried to completion in fetal life. 

In the 170 mm. specimen, however, the entrance of the 
great cardiac vein into the coronary sinus is guarded by 
a single flap. Fig. 59 illustrates another peculiar con¬ 
dition. Here the valve flaps are suspended asymmetrically 
in the channel, one being fastened at a lower level than 
the other. Such obliquity, apparently is associated with 
the regression of one flap. Some tributaries of large 
veins lack true valves, but possess a sickle-shaped fold 
in consequence to their oblique entry. Small venous tri¬ 
butaries may enter valve sinuses (Text Fig. 65j; in so 
doing they contribute to the difficulty of proper inter- 



■ 










■ 


c 




t 




\f 



) 


■ ■ ) 




o.; n 





151 


pretation, particularly if the plane of section is awkward. 

A much larger series of fetal and newborn specimens 
must be systematically examined before valid comments can 
be made concerning numerical valves. The difficulty en¬ 
countered when retrograde venous perfusion is attempted by 
way of the coronary sinus, speaks for the functional effic¬ 
iency of these valves, particularly in late fetal life. 


Discussion 


In the literature, only scant reference is made to 
cardiac venous valves. There are noteworthy discrepancies 
in the descriptions given in standard anatomical texts. The 
following statement appears in Gray’s Anatomy (1938). 

”The tributaries of the coronary sinus are the great, small 
and middle cardiac veins, the posterior vein of the left 
ventricle, and the oblique vein of the left atrium, all of 
which, except the last, are provided with valves at their 
orifices”. 

Other authors take a different view. 

"The apertures of the tributaries of the coronary sinus are 
not provided with valves, except those of the great and 
small cardiac veins, and their valves are often incompetent”. 
(Cunningham’s Anatomy, 7th ed.) 

”The mouths of the great and small cardiac veins commonly 
have single cusped valves, but these are rarely competent”. 
(Grant, 1944). 




V 


. 



• i t 

c; 


1 ;l : .. 









152 


Tiie description offered by Patten (Morris’ Anatomy, 1942) 
agrees more closely with the writer’s findings. 

“The great cardiac vein . terminates in the commence¬ 

ment of the coronary sinus. Its mouth is usually guarded 
by two valves. It receives small veins from the left at¬ 
rium and ventricle, all of which are guarded by valves. 

The middle cardiac vein . joins the coronary sinus 

through an orifice guarded by a simple valve close to its 
termination.” 

In general, venous valves are said to be more numer¬ 
ous in infants than in adults. Assertions concerning the 
reduction and retrogression of valves during growth must be 
taken cautiously, because of the fact of numerical vari¬ 
ability at the start. 

Unless the writer’s survey of embryological liter¬ 
ature has been faulty, it may be claimed that the mode of 
development of cardiac venous valves has not been previously 
studied. The most pretentious and generally accepted paper 
on the subject of valvulogenesis is that of Kampmeier and 
Birch (1927j, which refers particularly to the saphenous 
district in human fetuses. Despite differences in method 
and material, the present findings are in close agreement. 

In all probability valves in cardiac veins, at the mouths of 
anastomoses already established or in the course of the main 
venous conduits, develop in response to specific hydrostatic 
conditions. The fact that they are rapidly completed towards 








• r J ■' 


-- -■ ■> 


: Oj 




153 


term suggests that their development, like that of other 
fetal vascular structures, is in anticipation of post¬ 
natal requirements. 

Recent workers, (Roberts et al., 1943; Beck et al., 
1948; and Stenstrom, 1948) have attempted to improve the 
coronary circulation by arterialization and retrograde per¬ 
fusion of the coronary sinus. It is in this connection 
that valves in cardiac veins assume some clinical sig¬ 
nificance. Roberts, et al., (1943) record that in one 
heart of their series of 15, a small valve, at the left end 
of the coronary sinus, was present and capable of prevent¬ 
ing a reversal of flow. Beck, et al. (1948) have over¬ 
looked the cardiac venous valves, as has Stenstrom (1948) 
who states: 

"There are no valves in the coronary sinus tributaries. 

The vestigial valve at the left end of the coronary sinus 
is incompetent and usually offers no obstruction to retro¬ 
grade flow". 

The procedure of coronary sinus arterialization can only be 
properly appraised when further information is forthcoming 
concerning cardiac venous valves. Bor this purpose, the 

hearts of many individuals, - fetuses, infants, children 

and adults, - will have to be carefully examined. 





6 



.. :■ ’ 





t 


c 




c 






' 




' 












154 


Intramural Coronary Arteries. 


In the adult pig heart, the primary and some of the 
secondary branches of the coronary arteries form a network 
which lies either on the outer surface of the myocardium, 
or in the epicardial fat. The coronary arteries of pig 
embryos, however, are not strictly surface vessels. Instead, 
they are in most parts of their course, and in diverse 
extent, intramural, i.e., covered by superficial laminae of 
cardiac muscle. The main coronary arteries attain their 
definitive adult positions by a process of "vertical migra¬ 
tion” . 


In order to study the details of this process, all 
hearts from Series A and B were examined. The vessels sel¬ 
ected for special study were the anterior descending branch 
of the left coronary artery and the posterior descending 
branch of the right coronary. These branches run a straight 
course and their linear measurements are readily obtainable 
from transverse serial sections. "Mural” coronary arteries 
are arbitrarily defined as those branches, which when viewed 
in cross-section, are seen to be completely invested by myo¬ 
cardium. This definition excludes from the mural group, 
intermediate forms which are difficult to classify. 

The coronary arteries appear as endothelial sprouts 
from the truncus arteriosus, in embryos of 10 to 11 mm. 

(Fig. 20). These buds grow out along the major cardiac sulci 




:) f 


:■! - v'. ; ' 




, ... . / 


. 






0$ ■ ' ' : ■' - ' ■ 


: ...... : 

':.ri 







: ■ . 




, 




: 




■ 





■ 






c 


' 




; .. '1, ... I--■ t 

l ’ ' ■ i: • - ft ■ -^ r 



• , ;) ; ...... \ ■ 0 . ■ i : ' ' ; 

;;o: ;■ :• / ' , - :r 

• . • m ... -'-2 : 






155 


and give rise to an extensive intramural capillary plexus. 

In 20 mm. specimens all the named branches of coronary 
arteries run an intramural course in their entirety. Mus¬ 
cular fibres covering the artery usually run at right 
angles to the course of the vessel and belong to the super¬ 
ficial layer of the myocardium, the so-called vortex fibres 
(Figs. 66 and 68). The muscular bridge consists of three or 
four cell layers, and is 10 to 30 u in thickness. It is 
usually supplied by several capillary loops. Arterial rt epi- 
cardialization" commences in the left anterior descending 
branch, at the 23 mm. stage. (Graph 2X1). This process of 
vertical migration is a rapidly expanding one, continuously 
involving new areas. For this reason it is best studied by 
comparing the condition of the most recent part,with each 
previous zone of development, from the apex of the heart to 
the base. The picture is completed by the examination of 
corresponding areas in a number of specimens representative 
of different stages, remembering that the histologic alter¬ 
ations are phases in a continuous dynamic process. Several 
factors are involved in the process of vertical migration, 
and these do not act independently, but in combinations and 
antagonistically. On the one hand, tending to prevent art¬ 
erial "epicardialization" is the increase in thickness of 
the muscular bridge in fetal life, not only by the addition 
of new layers, but by the hypertrophy of existing cells. 
Furthermore, since the coronary arteries are selected from a 
diffuse intramuscular capillary network by hereditary influ- 








•; I J 






156 


ences and hydrodynamic factors incident to blood flow, 
variations in vertical position are of common occur¬ 
rence. For example, the posterior interventricular 
artery shown in Fig. 69, runs a very deep intramural 
course; so much so that it lies approximately one-fifth 
of the distance from epicardium to endocardium. The mus¬ 
cular covering is sufficiently thick to effectively res¬ 
ist the opposing forces. In all likelihood, this artery, 
in consequence to its deep position, will persist into 
adult life as a "mural" coronaiy. Opposing forces, favor¬ 
ing "epicardializatlon" may now he considered. A coronary 
artery increases in calibre to keep pace with the enlarge¬ 
ment of its territory. The vessel wall, which is thickened 
by the addition of cell layers from the periarterial mesen¬ 
chyme, by the 100 mm. stage consists of three well differ¬ 
entiated layers, of which the media is the most prominent 
(Fig. 67). Continuous pulsation of the enlarging artery 
probably aids in the destruction of the overlying muscle. 
Certainly the mechanical pressure exerted by a growing art¬ 
ery is sufficient to distort and attenuate the muscular 
bridge, and render it avascular. Concurrently, invading 
cells from the proliferating adventitia break the muscular 
bridge into a series of fasciculi (Figs. 67-A and 68). 
Usually the muscular investment is completely split assun- 
der, so that the segment of coronary artery involved is free 
to erupt into the epicardium (Fig. 67-C). Atrial arteries 
are invariably "mural" in that they remain in the thin mus- 


i i ' ■ X 







157 


cular wall midway between epicardium and endocardium. In 
passing it may be noted that the coronary veins emerge 
from a capillary plexus, which for the most part lies in 
the epicardium. Throughout fetal life, they follow an 
epicardial course and only in their terminal portions do 
they dip into the myocardium. (Figs. 59, 64, 68 and 69). 

The point of earliest arterial break-through occurs 
where the muscular bridge is the weakest and the opposing 
forces most active. As shown in Text Figure 70, the init¬ 
ial point of eruption of the anterior descending branch of 
the left coronary artery is usually near its origin at the 
base of the heart. Infrequently, in consequence to a deep 
intramuscular course at the base, the artery first enters 
the epicardium in the midventricular region. By the 37 
mm. stage there are secondary sites of break-through in 
some specimens. The left anterior descending branch re¬ 
mains buried in heart muscle for distances of 120 u and up¬ 
ward; intramuscular stretches may be interposed in any part 
of the arterial course. With the completion of the process 
in late fetal or postnatal life, the artery pursues an epi¬ 
cardial course throughout its length. If "epicardializa- 
tion" is arrested, embryonic stages persist into adult life. 

The relationship of C-R length of pig embryos to the 
per cent of total arterial course which is intramural, in 
the case of the anterior descending branch of the left cor¬ 
onary artery, is shown in Graph XK1. Data are derived from 


A 0 


, ;; o j. 


T:,W. 





158 


140 hearts of Series A and B. The flat sigmoid curve 
shown is a free-hand attempt to approximate the curve of 
best-fit. In all embryos of less than 20 mm. and in 
some of 23 to 27 mm., the artery runs an intramural 
course in its entirety. "Bpicardialization" commences at 
the 23 mm. stage and judging from the slope of the curve, 
proceeds most rapidly from the 30 mm. to 70 mm. stages. 
The plotted points are closely grouped together at the 
left of the graph, but became progressively more scatter¬ 
ed towards the right. This feature is so apparent that 
it hardly requires further mathematical analysis. It 
indicates that vertical migration is completed early in 
some specimens, more slowly in others, and only part¬ 
ially in the small remainder. These variations do not 
begin with the finished organism, but are potent through¬ 
out ontogeny from the beginning onward. Data for the 
posterior descending branch of the right coronary artery 
are from the same source and have been similarly treated. 
(Graph XIII). In comparison with the left anterior 
descending branch, the intramural course is retained 
longer, the process of vertical migration proceeds more 
slowly, and the scatter of points is greater throughout. 






c ‘ 








. 


i 








■ . iu. ! ■ i ■ 


£ 

j; ;]■ 

.. , • i... 




15!> 


Discussion, 


The preceding results clearly indicate that the 
"mural coronaries" of adult life represent the persist¬ 
ence of an embryonic trait♦ Mural stretches, in the 
course of a coronary artery, are the type of trivial and 
slight deviation from the normal which one comes to ex¬ 
pect for any part of the notoriously variable vascular 
system. In examining the hearts from 100 unselected 
autopsies, Geiringer (1951) observed that in 23 instances, 
the anterior descending branch of the left coronary artery 
was buried in heart muscle in all or part of its course. 
One of the speculative assertions voiced by this author, 
concerning the origin of mural coronaries, has been con¬ 
firmed by the present work. In addition, details of the 
process have been established. 

Concerning the clinical significance of "mural cor¬ 
onaries", several points are of interest. Mural stretches 
of the left anterior descending coronary branch are only 
rarely affected by atherosclerosis, in contradistinction 
to comparable epicardial stretches ?/here this is a common 
finding (Geiringer, 1951). Intramural arteries in the 
adult have a considerably thinner intima than correspond¬ 
ing epicardial branches, and the extremes of medial hyper¬ 
trophy and atrophy are found less frequently in them. The 
effect of a myocardial investment is to reinforce the mus- 









{ , ? . f.' 




0.f\, 


« 


' ■-n 



160 


cular action of the media and prevent overdistention of 
the vessel. Coronary dilatation tends to occur at the 
end of systole, that is, just when the protective action 
of the muscular investment is at its height. It is 
somber to reflect that practical immunity from coronary 
athrogenic thrombosis can result through a chance shift 
of a few hundred miera, in the embryonic course of a 
main coronary artery. 

The process of vertical migration does not occur 
in all mammalian species. For example, in the adult 
chimpanzee, complete exposure by dissection, of even the 
more superficial parts of the coronary pattern necessi¬ 
tates the cutting through of overlying muscle laminae, 
especially in the right ventricle. The gorilla and 
gibbon resemble man in that they have an epicardial net¬ 
work of main coronaries. (Chase and De Garis, 1939). 








i).q 







■ ■- 


c 


■ 



c 


/ 




c 




) ;i ' * 




; 






161 


Congenitally High Placed Coronary Ostia. 

Variations in the origin and distribution of the 
coronary arteries are not unusual. In examining the hearts 
from 1000 consecutive necropsies, Von Glahn (1936) found 
that in 80, one or both coronary arteries arose above the 
upper level of their respective sinuses of Valsalva. A 
similar incidence was noted in adult pig hearts, during the 
course of the present work. The right coronary is more 
often so affected, than the left (Fig. 71). In connection 
with syphilitic aortitis, Bruenn (1933), and other workers, 
have called attention to the clinical importance of high 
placed coronary arteries. As syphilitic supravalvular 
sclerosis usually starts in the portion of the aorta above 
a base line drawn through the upper limits of the attach¬ 
ments of the aortic cusps, coronary arteries which are 
congenitally situated above this line are especially liable 
to scarring of their ostia, while those normally arising 
in the sinuses often escape encroachment. The frequency 
with which syphilis attacks the root of the aorta is said 
to be due to the rich supply of vasa vasorum in this region. 
Syphilitic coronary disease is practically limited to a 
narrowing or atresia of the coronary ostia, by the lesion 
in the aortic wall. 

In a recent paper, Shaner (1951) noted that the 
coronary arteries commence some distance above the distal 




c 








O 




c 




< 















162 


conus cushions; their ostia only secondarily acquire a 
close relationship to the developing semilunar valves. In 
order to check this point, 80 serially sectioned 10 to 12 
mm. embryos, from the Alberta Embryological Collection 
were examined, as were specimens from Series A, B, and D. 

The coronary arteries consistently arise above the distal 
conus cushions, and maintain this relationship until the 
18 ram. stage (Figs. 21 and 72). If a teleological expla¬ 
nation is to be invoked, it may be said that the coronary 
arteries arise, of necessity, above the expanding endo¬ 
cardial cushions in order to escape the effects of compres¬ 
sion. On the other hand, high coronary ostia may represent 
a half-hearted attempt at recapitulation of phylogenetic 
stages, rather than an adaptive trait. By the 21 mm. 
stage coronary arteries have assumed an adult relationship 
to the semilunar valves, which have meanwhile enlarged and 
hollowed out on their distal surfaces. Differential growth 
rates in the aortic wall undoubtedly account for the migra¬ 
tory process described. A retardation or failure of this 
process could well result in a high placed coronary orifice. 
The anomalous condition was indeed observed in two specimens 
(one of 25 mm., the other of 90 mm.) from Series A. 







163 


Fig, 59. Serial Sections of a Developing Venous 

Valve. 

Pig embryo, 170 mm. (Series A). 

Injection through coronary arteries. The highly fluid 
injection mass (Tieman’s soluble blue, 3 % aqueous solu¬ 
tion) has filled capillary vessels but not the coronary 
veins. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. X 70. 

Eleven photomicrographs of serial sections, labelled A, 

B, C, D,-K, appear on the following pages. 

These show a developing bicuspid valve which guards the 
mouth of a tributary of the great cardiac vein. The 
transverse, 40 p sections represented, are situated near 
the base of the heart, section K being farthest removed 
from the apex. From the serial photomicrographs, valve 
flaps and adjacent structures may be mentally reconstruct¬ 
ed. Compare with the schematic representations of text 
fig. 05. 















c 



u 






164 


Sections (A) and (B) show a tributary vein about to 
join the great cardiac vein. Both vessels lie in 
the epicardial mesenchyme of the anterior interven¬ 
tricular groove, superficial to the anterior desc¬ 
ending branch of the left coronary artery. In the 
next section, (C), the two veins are united. At 
the mouth of the tributary, rudimentary valve flaps 
project into the lumen. The free valve margins are 
directed in the course of the venous current. (D) 
and (E) show the two valve flaps suspended asym¬ 
metrically in the channel, the uppermost one being 
fastened at a lower level than the other. This 
obliquity, also evident in sections (F) , (G-) and (H) , 
apparently is associated with regressive changes in, 
or delayed development of, the uppermost flap. The 
two succeeding sections, (I) and (J), pass through the 
remainder of the tributary vein. The great cardiac 
vein, somewhat enlarged in diameter, is shown in sec¬ 
tion (K) . 









165 
















P J&jcjulo^ajcL jyoJpoz, ~i(Uy /nuudb ^ Mjl. ^uAutixJi^ 


. - CfMJZa$~. Coj^LouCy 

yOejSVU ■ 

































































166 





167 







168 





169 







170 







171 



Fig. 60. 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injection material, introduced into the coronary 
arteries, has penetrated to the coronary veins. 
Counterstain, eosin. 

Transverse 40 ja section from the base of the heart; 

X 97. 

A well-formed bicuspid valve is shown. It occurs at 
the point of entrance of a tributary vein into a 
larger vein. These vessels lie in the epicardium of 
the diaphragmatic surface of the left ventricle. 

Valve flaps and vein walls are outlined by virtue of 
the dye which is adherent to the endothelial surfaces. 
Note that the aperture between the free margins of 
the valve cusps is parallel to the overlying, compres¬ 
sing epicardium. 













i 




■ , . 


























172 




Fig. 61. 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injected with Tieman's soluble blue, Zfo aqueous 
solution. 

Section from same heart as figure 60; and similar in 
magnification and treatment. 

Note the bicuspid valve. It guards the mouth of a 
tributary vein which lies in the epicardium of the 
sterno-costal surface of the right ventricle. The 
valve flaps would be difficult to demonstrate by 
gross dissection, because of their small size. 

Other explanations as for figure 60. 






= 





, 








173 


Fig. 62. A Bicuspid Venous Valve. 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injection material (Tieman's soluble blue), has completely 
filled the coronary vascular tree. 

Section from the same source as figures 60 and 61. 
Counterstain, eosin. 

Transverse 40 p. section from the base of the heart; X 120. 

The bicuspid valve shown, is characteristically situated, 
in that it guards the point of junction of a venous trib¬ 
utary and the great cardiac vein. Valve cusps and vein 
walls are again outlined by virtue of the dye adherent to 
their endothelial surfaces. Other explanations as before. 
Note the relation of the small tributary, t, to the loca¬ 
tion of the valve flaps and their sinus. A small branch 
of the left coronary nerve plexus is seen to pursue a 
superficial course in the epicardial mesenchyme of the 
anterior interventricular groove. The nerve filament is 
poorly vascularized in comparison to the. myocardium. 






r 








C 









■ 1 









sc^uxxj^ 


QjxloX, Cojvc/Luouc* 

SjjtXy^j 


\JoJU>C 



£>c/Crto-*-«x>Q<3iXco-w 


^&ecL 


V-gort/ Mi f\_ 




Fig. 62. 










































. vTrr\*jjWocO^.^'^ 
^vjaS^c|-c>^ 


Qj^XJoo^^ 


J3 JlX/Y'*XC\ 


IXvCk -»c|jq5S- -3oSjo\/ 
-SUX>UJk)tXjBJVN^V 





-3<>a-6J\^K 


ojv>)cxaxO 

\^voaV 


3 oSjd\/ 


vjiajv^vQ 

~MJk5%SLf^ XU^Ji^r^VCK 
. vijJkxj^sS^. 




^uSJ^^vt ^UL>AA^-V 





































174 



Fig. 62. 


A Bicuspid Venous Valve. 









H> W CO 


tu-cL daiotL^Ou 





\jjg/yu^cux X-^an/»thf 


'SC&6fod- /^yCK^Jj^jCJl^ 
/& ^o-evvifvoC^Z_. • 


'h\ A y^<uxJ^cLu^^ ■ 

CtKjJbz-cL xm^cXjlcL 


Fig. 63* 


Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injected with Tieman’s soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution, 
ection from the same source as figures 60, 61 and 62; 
imilar in treatment, but photographed at a lower magni- 
ication. X 46. 


I /m/m, 

A small vein * scale - pimT - 
sterno-ccs Lai surface of the r 
of bicuspid valves follow each 
in the venous channel. Other 


""tiid epicardium 
ight ventricle. 
other in close 
explanations as 


of the 
Two sets 
succession 
before. 






































175 



Fig, 63* 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injected with Tieman’s soluble blue, 3$ aqueous solution. 
Section from the same source as figures 60, 61 and 62; 
similar in treatment, but photographed at a lower magni¬ 
fication. X 46. 

A small vein is shown lying in the epicardium of the 
sterno-costal surface of the right ventricle. Two sets 
of bicuspid valves follow each other in close succession 
in the venous channel. Other explanations as before. 







176 


Fig. 64. A Transversely Sectioned Bicuspid Valve. 

Pig embryo, 210 mm. (Series A). 

Injection material introduced into the coronary arteries 
has penetrated to the coronary veins. 

Section from the same source as figures 60 and 61; and 
similar in magnification and treatment. 

Photomicrographs A, B, and C, are of transverse sections 
through representative levels of a fully formed bicuspid 
valve. Comparable levels are indicated by the guide 
lines on text figure 65. The valve-bearing segment of 
vein under consideration, lies in the epicardium of the 
diaphragmatic surface of the right ventricle. A, the 
most apical of the three sections shown, passes through 
the lowest point of attachment of valve cusp, x. The 
sinus of the uppermost cusp (y), is the larger, probably 
because of its connection in more apical sections, with 
a small tributary vein. B follows two sections after A; 
each section is 40 )i in thickness. Distinctive features 
are the well-developed valve cusps and sinuses, and the 
elliptical cross-section of the vein. The two valve cusps 
arise from the long curves of the ellipse, so that the 
interval between them is parallel to the overlying com- 




' 


■ 





V - : 



15 



■ 







177 


pressing epicardium. Note the considerable width of 
the valvular aperture at this level. Section C, which 
passes through the valve margins, is separated from A 
by an interval of 240 }i. Free margins of venous valves 
are concave in outline. For this reason only the mural 
attachments of valve cusps are seen in the present 
section. The valvular aperture is reduced to a slit¬ 
like orifice, and the valve flaps are in juxtaposition. 
Other explanations as before. 





, • . '• : .. ' ■ 

- 

. 

• ■ , ' ■ 

' 







a.i;e:- 

. • .y';; ... C 

' 

l ■ 

s x 

' C. 



























































178 






179 






A FULLY FORMED BICUSPID VALVE (SAGITTAL). 
COMPARE SECTIONS A, B AND C WITH THOSE OF FlS. 64. 




Diagrams showing the 

VALVE FORMATION IN A 



FIG- 65- 


























180 



Fig. 66. 

Pig embryo, 60 mm. (Series A). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 

3$ aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 p. section from the mid-ventricular region 
of the heart; X 97. 

The posterior interventricular artery shown above, runs 
an intramural course. An early stage in the process of 
vertical migration is represented, in that the tenuous 
muscular bridge is still intact, but distorted by the 
expanding artery. Several layers of mesenchymal cells 
have joined the arterial wall to form a compact zone 
about the lumen. Note that the middle cardiac vein lies 
entirely within the epicardium. 




181 


Fig. 67. 

Pig embryo, 100 mm. - uninjected. 

Mallory f s phosphotungstic acid haematoxylin. 

Transverse 10 }i sections from the base of the heart; 

X 97. 

Photomicrographs A, B and C represent subserial sect¬ 
ions, taken at 100 intervals, along the course of the 
posterior interventricular artery. Since the process 
of vertical migration is a rapidly expanding one, 
continuously involving new areas, it is best studied by 
comparing the condition of the most recent part, with 
each previous zone of development, from the apex of the 
heart to the base. Of the three sections shown, A lies 
farthest removed from the base. It depicts a more 
advanced phase in the migratory process than does fig. 

66. Cells from the proliferating adventitia have invaded 
the muscular bridge, to break it up into a series of 
fasciculi. The arterial wall consists of three well 
differentiated layers, of which the media is the most 
prominent. Note that the artery gives off an anchoring 



, l 


5 












182 


myocardial branch. In section B, the expanding artery 
has also compressed and greatly thinned the overlying 
muscular investment. Section C shows that the artery 
has er^upted into the epicardium, the myocardial bridge 
having been split assunder by the same forces, whose 
effects were observed in A and B. In passing, note 
that the epicardium is devoid of fat cells at this 
stage. Several lymphatic channels are present. 






183 










184 



Fig. 68. 


Pig embryo, 60 mm. (Series A). 

Different specimen from that shown in fig. 66. 

Injection by way of the coronary arteries. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 p. section from the mid-ventricular region 
of the heart; X 113. 

This section shows the anterior descending branch of the 
left coronary artery about to er/upt into the epicardium. 
Invading periarterial mesenchyme has split the muscular 
bridge, composed of superficial vortex fibres, into sev¬ 
eral isolated segments. Other explanations as before. 

The great cardiac vein pursues an epicardial course. 





185 


Fig, 69. An Intramural Coronary Artery. 

Pig embryo, 42 mm. (Series A). 

Coronary arteries injected with Tieman's soluble blue, 
aqueous solution. 

Counterstain, borax-carmine. 

Transverse 40 jll section from the mid-ventricular region 

of the heart. 

(A) .- The posterior interventricular artery, shown on the 

following page, runs a very deep intramural course; 
so much so that it lies approximately one-fifth of 
the distance from epicardium to endocardium. In 
all likelihood, the said vessel, in consequence to 
its deep position, will persist into adult life, 
as a "mural coronary rt . Sinusoids, reduced in num¬ 
ber and complexity, interdigitate intimately with 
the coronary capillaries. X 32.5. 

(B) .- Photomicrograph, under higher magnification (X 97), 

of the rectangular area shown in (A). The well 
vascularized muscular covering is composed of a 
continuous sheet of vortex fibres. These run at 
right angles to the long axis of the artery. The 
epicardium, poorly developed at this stage, con¬ 
sists of a single layer of mesothelial cells. Note 
the superficial position of the middle cardiac 


vein. 



















' 












Ue|t \j^rCUuxJ&L*' 



mmm 

|M§1 

, , -v. : >/ : 

®t®aii 

v'.'-: • ./>’ 


O $yM 

Wmam 

WBEEm - 




RhjMi ^^^ouJU^0; 


'OfajicLjlji_ CexJi / ckiaLC~- l i Jlov^ 


^^lirux^w-uJ^oSL, ^C&CLnAJL.. 


. by. 


ramui 





































































186 



Fig. 69 


An Intramural Coronary Artery 






187 


r 


ALL EMBRYOS OF LESS THAN 



THE PROCESS OF VERTICAL MIGRATION AS SEEN IN 

THE ANTERIOR DESCENDING BRANCH OF THE LEFT CORON¬ 
ARY ARTERY. (PIG) 
















188 



Fig. 71. 

The aortic orifice, laid open to show the aortic semi¬ 
lunar valves and coronary ostia. 

Specimen is from an adult pig. 

Formalin fixation. 

X 1.4. 

The orifices of the coronary arteries are indicated by 
arrows. The left coronary artery arises, in a normal 
fashion, from the left posterior aortic sinus. The 
particular point of interest, however, is that the right 
coronary takes origin above the anterior sinus of 
Valsalva. Such high placed coronaries are a frequent 
congenital anomaly in both the pig and in man. 





189 


Fig. 72. 

Relation of Coronary Ostia to the Distal Conus Cushions. 

(1) .- Heart from a 16 ram. pig embryo. (Series D). 

Complete injection with Tieman's soluble blue, 3% 
aqueous solution. Specimen fixed in 10% formalin. Cleared 
by the Spalteholz method. The auricular appendages have 
been removed. Posterior (dorsal) view. X 22. 

Sinusoids are completely filled with injection material. 

The terminal recesses, because of their alignment, produce 
a saw-toothed effect. Note the clear cortical layer. The 
ascending aorta and pulmonary artery intertwine slightly, 
so that the latter crosses anterior to the aorta. The 
right and left coronary arteries are little more than cap¬ 
illary channels. At this stage, however, the circumflex 
and anterior descending branches of the left coronary, are 
readily recognisable. Primordia of the aortic semilunar 
valves, derived from the distal conus cushions, appear as 
"filling defects” in the lumen of the aorta. Note that 
the coronary arteries take origin above the valve anlagen. 

(2) .- Anterior (ventral) view of the same specimen. 

Other explanations as before. 

(3) .- Pig embryo, 16 mm. (Series A). 

Transverse 40 p. section, taken at the level of the 
coronary ostia. X 40. 

The coronary ostia lie well above the valve primordia. 



















■ 


■ 








' 

. 






■ . I . / ■ - 

. . 

.! . 


, 


» 






M. . 


; . r n ■ ■ •. 









yOhXl A^, 


\>&UXaaAu*^ BjvxvA, 

£*_ Ri^fcfc 


Px^^yvuaju^. 


f\ mfonjutyv 


Le^t >c<$^u>^aA<^ AUiXih/-( 


VxvvOvot^Z- 




ytuuL/vVV. 


* 


~ThasYyA/+&^&2-s SccZL&V\. sat. L jukJL 


Co^Uyy^oJU^ 


&/&*. 


;elati 























xA«JO. oojK«v{\ 

-OJ&s. vJv-uxj^x l -ajujy^K JLoDvajJ^ V 

. -ofc'C.fo^ iljCrOV ,j*\*" 


^A/ofcjVXK ^JUXJY<)JYv-i j^} 

|^W ^>.J 



-c^Wx >yujAjaWU^.V 




^u/um^AcC) JeL-/5? 


. *^mft 
A 


. -& &0& I^AgJrgJ^ g^) ^ A-XJ ia. J i)5K JVq jXs^C* v30>jV>Uv&jv>j^vr 


•Jtc^l 




















191) 



Fig. 72. 

Relation of Coronary Ostia to the Distal Conus Cushions. 

















192 


Section D, 


Histochemical Studies. 


In recent years various procedures have been 
devised for the chemical characterization of certain micro¬ 
scopically visible structures (see Pearse, A* G. E. 1951, 
for references)* These chemically definable procedures, 
when applied to tissue sections, lead to the formation of 
insoluble, colored or opaque end-products which permit the 
localization of a number of metabolically significant 
cellular components, such as nucleoproteins, polysacchar¬ 
ides, enzymes, lipoids, and formed cellular products* 

Sections prepared by these methods may be examined by the 
microscope, with the result that a degree of morphological 
precision can be obtained far greater than that possible 
with the microanalytic procedures* The histochemical 
techniques for alkaline phosphatase and glycogen were 
applied to embryo hearts in order to study functional 
changes associated with the development of the cardiac- 
coronary system. Emphasis was primarily placed upon morpho¬ 
logy and secondarily upon chemical rationale. 

Localization of Alkaline Phosphatase in the Pig Embryo Heart* 

The histochemical method for demonstration of alka¬ 
line phosphatase introduced by Gomori (1939) and independ¬ 
ently by Takamatsu (1939) has made possible the precise 














oO 


I’) 







193 


location of this enzyme in tissues and in individual cells 
in which it had not previously been found. Thus, phospha¬ 
tase has been shown to occur in the epithelium of the small 
intestine, the proximal convoluted tubules of the kidney, 
ossifying cartilage, embryonic perichondrium, capillary endo¬ 
thelium, and in certain tumors. (Kabat E. A. and Furth, J., 
1941). 


The method is based on the finding that alkaline phos¬ 
phatase is not destroyed by fixation in alcohol (or acetone) 

or by embedding in paraffin. Slides are prepared according 

o 

to routine methods, deparaffinized, and incubated at 37 G 
for a number of hours in a solution containing sodium glycero¬ 
phosphate, calcium chloride and sodium barbital, at pH 9.2* 
During this period, calcium phosphate is deposited in the 
sections as a result of the enzymatic splitting of glycero¬ 
phosphate. These steps are represented schematically in 
Text Fig. 73. Cobalt phosphate is less soluble than is cal¬ 
cium phosphate; consequently the treatment of a section with 
cobalt solution changes any calcium phosphate present to 
cobalt phosphate. Also, cobalt sulphide is less soluble than 
cobalt phosphate; consequently the treatment of a section 
with ammonium sulphide converts the cobalt phosphate into 
cobalt sulphide. The areas where this black precipitate 
occurs are considered to be the sites where the enzyme alka¬ 
line phosphatase is located in the tissues. The specificity 
of the stain for phosphatase has been demonstrated by Gomori 
(1939) and Kabat and Furth (1941), and in a critical study 


; u: 


li'; i 


.. r; 




r ) & 


194 


later, Danielli (1946) claimed reliability for the local¬ 
izations obtained. The use of magnesium ions to activate 
the phosphatase was introduced by Kabat and Furth (1941). 

Method and Materials. 

The material used consisted of a closely graded 
series of pig embryos ranging in size from 3*5 ram. to 180 
mm., C-R length. The following procedure, which includes 
some modifications of the G-omori method, was employed in 
the visualization of alkaline phosphatase, in order to 
insure optimum activity of the enzyme, constant conditions 
and maximum histological definition: 

o 

Tissues were fixed immediately in cold 95 % alcohol (5 C.). 

Twelve hours later they were transferred to absolute 

alcohol (two changes) and benzene (two changes) at room 

temperature for 4 hours each. Tissues were vacuum infil- 

, o 

trated in paraffin for 2 hours (below 58 C.) and then 
embedded. Sections were cut serially at 20 u, mounted 
with egg albumin and dried. Sections were immersed 
successively in xylol, absolute alcohol and diluted 
celloidin for 1-2 minutes and then drained. The membrane 
was hardened subsequently by dipping the section in 70 % 
alcohol, followed by distilled water for a moment. The 
sections were then transferred to substrate solution 
and incubated at 37°Q. for 12 hours. 















19N 


The substrate solution was prepared by mixing: 

60 c.c. of 3.2$ sodium glycerophosphate solution, 
90 c.c. of 2$ calcium nitrate solution, 

60 c.c. of 10$ sodium barbital solution, and 
60 c.c. of 0.1 M magnesium sulfate solution. 
Distilled water was added to bring the total volume to 
600 c.c. The final solution was 0.01 molar with respect 
to glycerophosphate and magnesium sulfate and had a pH of 
9.2. 

Control sections were placed in a dilute (0.1 per cent) 

i 

calcium nitrate solution. All sections were then put 
successively into the following reagents: 

0.1$ calcium nitrate for 5 minutes, into 1$ cobaltous 
nitrate for 5 minutes, then into 6-8 changes of distilled 
water for 30 minutes altogether; into 1$ fresh ammonium 
sulfide solution for 2 minutes, then for 10 minutes in 
tap water. They were finally dehydrated, cleared in 
xylol, and mounted in piccolyte. 

Some specimens were celloidin embedded, but in 
other respects they received identical treatment. In 
order to ascertain the regions of highest phosphatase 
activity, as well as the relative amounts of enzyme in 
different tissues and cells, 20 u sagittal sections from 
a 27 mm. pig embryo were incubated for a logarithmic 
series of times (Danielli 1950). The geometrical pro¬ 
gression (obtained by substituting values in the 

X 

expression, N= 5 (2 ), where x represented consecutive 


- J 


0 


; r /.< 





196 


integers, and N the incubation time) was chosen so that 
incubation times would be in accordance with the consen- 
trations of phosphatase present. Sites of highest 
activity appear positive for phosphatase before other 
sites; regions of lower activity become evident only 
after more prolonged incubation. A linear relation 
between incubation time and amount of substrate split is 
said to give a fairly accurate estimate of enzyme present. 
The inorganic phosphate split off by enzyme action is a 
strong inhibition for phosphatase activity. For these 
reasons, relative amounts of phosphatase in different 
tissues were estimated by comparing minimum incubation 
times necessary to produce similar positive staining reac¬ 
tions. 


Results 

Table V, wherein various embryonic tissues are 
arranged in descending order of alkaline phosphatase 
activity, summarizes the results obtained from the logar¬ 
ithmic incubation series (Fig. 75). Among normal cells of 
the embryos, and also the adult, osteoblasts, the epi¬ 
thelium of proximal convoluted tubules, and capillary 
endothelium of choroid papillae, are particularly rich in 
phosphatase. The characteristic osteoblasts and the spindle- 
shaped perichondrial fibroblast-like cells, wherever pres¬ 
ent, give strong phosphatase reactions even after as little 
as 5 minutes* incubation (Fig. 75). It is noteworthy that 



: 




.A:: ,U" 


VC . 


■ 3 


f 


. ' D 


iv"t r. s) " 






. . 






,, '}■ 






. - j • f ' ' 


' 


l 


i- i'i r ) i 





197 


in 15 mm. pig embryos, in the mesenchyme of the tail and leg 
rudiments, large amounts of phosphatase are found in cells 
which do not differ in appearance from the usual none-bone- 
forming mesenchymal cells. As already noted, cells of the 
convoluted tubules contain large amounts of the enzyme. 

Their brush border is most intensely stained. The distal 
convoluted tubules, loops of Henle, collecting tubules and 
glomeruli, contain no phosphatase, or traces only. Capil¬ 
lary endothelium of the choroid plexus shows a strong 
staining reaction after 5 minutes 9 incubation. Overlying 
ependymal cells, however, remain unstained (Fig. 74). To 
produce a staining reaction of similar intensity in skele¬ 
tal muscle a longer incubation period (320 to 640 minutes) 
is required. Muscle fibres show a diffuse coloration as 
well as a slight granularity. Judging from the prolonged 
incubation time necessary for a minimum staining reaction, 
and in marked contrast with the condition existing in 
corresponding cells of the adult, epithelium of the small 
intestine contains only an infinitesimal amount of phospha¬ 
tase. In all likelihood, embryonal precursors of phospha¬ 
tase-containing adult cells, do not possess the enzyme 
during their development, if functional activity is lacking. 
Again on the basis of incubation periods, capillary endo¬ 
thelium of the brain is shown to contain half as much 
alkaline phosphatase as perichondrium, etc. In approp¬ 
riately stained sections, the blood vessels of the brain and 
spinal cord appear black on a light background, in conse- 


. i ; 

.i 


> 


‘Si 


- 








198 


quence to their high phosphatase content in comparison with 
brain substance. The enzyme is intracellular and cyto¬ 
plasmic in distribution. Capillaries in all parts of the 
central nervous system stain uniformly, irrespective of 
their patency (Fig. 74). The method is particularly use¬ 
ful in that it permits study of the architecture and den¬ 
sity of the capillary bed throughout the nervous system, in 
uninjected specimens. In their high phosphatase content, 
capillaries of the pig embryo brain are unique; the blood 
vessels of other organs stain only after prolonged incu¬ 
bation. For example, coronary capillaries, at this stage, 
show a minimal though incomplete staining only after 640 
minutes f incubation. Endocardial endothelium stains uni¬ 
formly, but again the amount of contained enzyme is small 
(Figs. 76 and 77). 

Results from the logarithmic incubation series, 
indicated that in the exclusive study of alkaline phospha¬ 
tase distribution in pig embryo hearts, prolonged incu¬ 
bation periods would be necessary. Slight variations in 
technique, introduced of necessity during the preparation 
of the "heart” series, precluded further quantitative 
interpretations. The following descriptions in most in¬ 
stances represent the summation of a number of observ¬ 
ations, so that the more consistent effects of enzymatic 
activity are given, without reference to the variations 
inherent in the method. 



t - 


c 


19.9 


Embryos of 10 to 14 mm.: 

Endocardial endothelium, lining all heart chambers shows 
a moderately intense staining reaction. Sinusoidal spaces 
are consequently outlined with considerable clarity. The 
distribution of enzyme is entirely intracellular. Whereas 
cytoplasmic staining is diffuse, the stronger nuclear 
reaction is confined to the nuclear membrane, contained 
chromatin granules, and the nucleolus. Endothelial cells 
lining the truncus arteriosus and sinus venosus also con¬ 
tain alkaline phosphatase. Endothelial sprouts destined 
to form the coronary veins and the coronary arteries show 
a positive staining reaction particularly in their prox¬ 
imal stretches. Muscle nuclei stain slightly, but 
sarcoplasm is invariably devoid of enzyme. Areas of 
proliferating connective tissue are rich in phosphatase. 
This is particularly true of the aortico-pulmonary septum 
and distal conus cushions. The only normoblast nuclei to 
show a positive reaction are those adjacent to phosphatase- 
rich endothelial cells. The phenomenon is one of diffusion 
of either the enzyme or reaction products from areas of 
high to low phosphatase activity. 

Embryos of 17 to 20 mm.; 

Endocardial endothelium is outlined by virtue of its 
phosphatase content. Endothelial cells lining the aorta 
and pulmonary artery stain intensely while those of the 
coronary sinus show ohly a slight reaction. Of the various 

ar ea.$ 

A of proliferating connective tissue in the embryo heart. 












■ 








X 






n 






T, 





200 


only the aortico-pulmonary septum and semilunar valve 
primordia stain intensely. Main branches of coronary 
arteries almost invariably contain phosphatase. Coron¬ 
ary veins, however, are devoid of the enzyme. 

Embryos of 25 to 30 mm.: 

Endothelial cells lining the ventricles stain more in¬ 
tensely than do those of the atria (Fig. 77). Trends 
noted in the previous stage are now more evident. Endo¬ 
thelial cells lining the aorta and pulmonary artery give 
a conspicuous phosphatase reaction. Main branches of 
coronary arteries show a moderate staining reaction. 

The lining of the coronary sinus is scarcely outlined. 
Coronary veins, coronary capillaries and connective 
tissue structures are phosphatase-free. 

Embryos of 40 to 50 mm.; 

Terminal recesses of ventricular sinusoids stain more 
intensely than do central portions. Endocardial endo¬ 
thelium covering the atrio-ventricular valves shows an in¬ 
tense reaction. Main branches of coronary arteries and 
myocardial branches in the vortex layer are demonstrated 
by the method. A few coronary capillaries are outlined, 
as are vasa vasorum in the walls of the pulmonary art¬ 
ery and aorta. Other descriptions as for the previous 
stage. 







j 


f 


■J 


! .. 


t 


c 






201 


Embryos of 70 to 80 mm,: 

Significant changes to be noted are, a complete loss of 
enzyme from the ventricular endocardium, and an intense 
staining, of penetrating myocardial branches of coronary 
arteries (Fig. 78)* A trace of phosphatase is still evi¬ 
dent in atrial endocardial endothelium. Coronary capil¬ 
laries of the vortex layer stain irregularly. The cor¬ 
onary sinus and its tributaries are phosphatase-free. 
Endocardial endothelium covering atrio-ventricular and 
semilunar valves gives a conspicuous phosphatase re¬ 
action. Vasa vasorum of the aorta and pulmonary artery 
are stained. 

Embryos of 125 to 140 mm.: 

With the noteworthy exception of endothelium covering 
atrio-ventricular and semilunar valves, endocardium is 
devoid of phosphatase. Main coronary arteries and myo¬ 
cardial branches are well demonstrated. Coronary capil¬ 
laries, particularly in the vortex layer are irregularly 
stained. Previously described structures show no change 
in staining reaction. 

The localization of alkaline phosphatase in the 
embryo heart, varies considerably with different mam¬ 
malian species. For example, in a 25 mm. calf embryo, 
coronary capillaries alone show a phosphatase reaction. 
These vessels form a well-defined subepicardial plexus, 
which completely invests the ventricles except for a 






') '* • 


■4 


! . : ■ 




■' < 




' 






202 


small portion near the apex. The advancing capillaries 
penetrate the muscle as loops from which projections arise. 
In the 170 mm. calf embryo heart, coronary capillaries 
stain with such uniformity that the entire vascular bed 
is mapped out (Fig. 79). Endocardial endothelium, with the 
exception of that covering valve flaps, is devoid of phos¬ 
phatase. In adult hearts of some species, capillary endo¬ 
thelium also stains completely. All capillary endothelial 
cells of the guinea-pig heart stain deeply, and there is a 
light granular precipitate in muscle fibers. In the rat 
and mouse, there is additional staining of large blood 
vessels and of some muscle nuclei. 

Discussion. 

Alkaline phosphatase is now known to be present in a 
wide variety of both embryonic and adult tissues (Gomori, 
1939; Xabat and Furth, 1941; Bourne, 1943). The term 
"alkaline phosphatase" probably denotes a large group of 
phosphatases, all having in common the ability to hydro¬ 
lyze glycerophosphate (Sumner and Somers, 1943). These 
enzymes are moreover known to be concerned with carbo¬ 
hydrate, phospholipid and nucleotide metabolism as well as 
with the process of calcification (Moog, 1946). Alkaline 
phosphatase is a noteworthy component of absorptive sur¬ 
faces, such as the absorptive cells of the intestine, the 
proximal convoluted tubules of the kidney and the syn¬ 
cytium of the placenta (Dempsey and Y/islocki, 1947). 




' 




■J .. 




■ 

■ 






203 


Various views are held on the function of phospha¬ 
tase of the vascular endothelium. Landow, Kabat and 
Newman (1942) believe that it participates in the transfer 
of glucose from the blood to the parenchyma. In the rat f s 
thyroid, the enzyme is particularly concentrated in the 
capillary linings. After hypophysectomy, when the gland 
becomes inactive, the enzyme disappears from the endothel¬ 
ial cells, only to return upon reactivation of the gland 
by the administration of thyrotropic hormone. Similar 
changes in phosphatase occur in the adrenal cortex and 
testis after hypophysectomy and replacement therapy. 
(Dempsey, Greep and Deane, 1949). The inadequate visual¬ 
ization of endothelial cells by ordinary histological pro¬ 
cedures has resulted in a failure to consider the possible 
importance of the endothelial system in regulating the 
specific activities of tissues and organs. In other words 
since by ordinary methods all endothelial cells look alike, 
there has been a tendency to assume that diffusion or trans¬ 
mission through these cells is equal in all regions. The 
demonstration of concentrated deposits of an enzyme in some 
but not other endothelial cells throws new light on this 
system. It seems clear that regions containing the enzyme 
may transmit across the endothelial barrier phosphate- 
containing materials which are denied passage by other 
regions lacking the enzymatic mechanism. The view, that the 
presence of phosphatase in endothelial cells is indicative 
of special functional activity, is also supported by the 










, 





204 


following indirect evidence: 

(a.) Endothelial cells from chick embryo hearts are 
phosphatase-free when grown in tissue culture 
(Willmer, 1942). 

(b.) The vascular endothelium of neoplastic tissue 
is deficient in alkaline phosphatase 
(Manheimer and Seligman, 1948-49). 

(c.) Endothelial cells lining veins and lymph vessels 
lack the enzyme 
(Kabat and Furth, 1941). 

Alkaline phosphatase almost certainly does not act alone. 

In all probability it merely forms one of a battery of 
enzymes concerned in the transference and metabolism of 
nutritive substances. Until more information is avail¬ 
able about other members of the system, it is premature 
to speculate too far as to the functional importance of 
the one or two components which have been intensively 
studied. 

The alkaline phosphatase method has been considered 
the most reliable of the histochemical enzyme technics 
devised by Gomori. With proper precautions, this method 
is a sensitive tool for the identification of alkaline phos¬ 
phatase activity in tissue sections. The large initial loss 
of enzyme activity in the preparation of tissues for histo¬ 
chemistry should be borne in mind (Stafford and Atkinson, 
1948). A positive reaction may denote the presence of the 


1 


D - - 








205 


enzyme, but a negative reaction does not indicate its 
absence, furthermore, a positive nuclear reaction may be 
a genuine one or may be a pseudo-reaction due to a process 
of diffusion from neighbouring structures of high phospha¬ 
tase activity. With these points in mind, the present 
results may be considered. In endocardial endothelium of 
the pig embryo heart, alkaline phosphatase is present in 
relatively small amounts. During the period of maximal 
sinusoidal development, it probably aids specifically in 
the nutriment of the myocardium. In fetal life, the dis¬ 
appearance of endocardial phosphatase occurs concurrently 
with the regression of sinusoids and the ingrowth of capil¬ 
lary channels. The endocardial endothelium, covering valve 
cusps, continues to show a phosphatase staining reaction; 
this fact is not surprising in view of the avascular nature 
of valve cusps. During the short period of time preceding 
coronary artery formation, venous capillary sprouts may con¬ 
tain phosphatase. The marked differences in capillary 
staining, observed in pig embryo and calf embryo hearts are 
difficult to account for. 

The technical difficulties involved in demonstrating 
blood vessels in embryos and fetuses, constitute an import¬ 
ant limiting factor in the investigation of the development 
of the cardiac-coronary vascular system. Indeed, to date, 
this system has not been systematically studied in the 
human embryo. The methods available for the demonstration 









c 




t- • t 









206 


of blood vessels are based either on the injection of the 
vessels or on the staining of their content of red blood 
cells. Landow, Kabat and Newman (1942) applied the histo- 
chemical technique for alkaline phosphatase to the central 
nervous system, and observed that vascular endothelium 
stains selectively. They suggested, that the method, quite 
apart from the physiological significance of results, would 
be uniquely effective in outlining blood vessels. Scharrer 
(1950), who recently explored the possibility, recommends 
that the Gomori method for alkaline phosphatase be used for 
the study of developing cerebral blood vessels. The use of 
a histochemical method to bring out morphological detail is 
not altogether new. Purkinje fibres in the heart, because 
of their high glycogen content, have been demonstrated in 
sharp contrast to cardiac muscle, by the application of 
Best's carmine stain (Taussig, 1934) Bawlinson (1950) has 
applied the histochemical method for iron to the rodent 
mammary gland, and by this means has outlined ducts and 
acini, and traced alveolar development. Present results 
indicate that the phosphatase stain will outline sinusoids 
in the pig embryo heart. These, however, can be more eas¬ 
ily demonstrated by injection. Of greater interest is the 
fact that in the calf embryo and in the adult mouse and 
guinea pig, coronary capillaries are outlined in their 
entirety, by the Gomori method for alkaline phosphatase. 

The same method may indeed prove useful in the visualiz- 



t 





e 







207 


ation of coronary capillaries in the human embryo. Alcohol 
fixation would be the only preliminary treatment necessary. 


Localization of Glycogen in the Pig Embryo Heart. 

The distribution of glycogen in the adult mammal¬ 
ian heart has been studied by several groups of workers 
(Cruickshank and Shrivastava, 1930; MacPherson, Essex and 
Mann, 1931-32). It is generally highest in the auricles, 
next highest in the septum with the ventricles contain¬ 
ing slightly less. The glycogen content of the mammal¬ 
ian heart also varies somewhat as to the species of 
animal used. The "law of cardiac muscle", expressed by 
Lewis denotes a relationship between the diameter of a 
cardiac muscle fibre and its rate of conduction, rhythm- 
icity, length of systole and glycogen content (Table VII). 
In general, tissues which are relatively avascular, such 
as cartilage, epidermis and vaginal epithelium, contain 
an abundance of glycogen. In the various regions of the 
adult mammalian heart, a similar relationship between 
blood supply and glycogen content holds true. The possib¬ 
ility of demonstrating some such relationship in the pig 
embryo heart, and thereby assessing sinusoidal efficiency, 
prompted the present study. 











? 




- 


•f 






t - 


c 










208 


Methods and Materials. 

Eleven pig embryos, ranging in size from 14 to 120 
mm*, (C-R length), were used in the investigation. Hearts 
were dissected free, fixed in 95 % alcohol, dehydrated in 
absolute ethanol, cleared in benzene and embedded in par¬ 
affin. Frontal sections, cut at 20 u, were mounted from 
water, on slides coated with glycerin-egg albumin. As a 
special precaution, deparaffinized sections were coated 
with thin celloidin. Glycogen was demonstrated with the 
aid of Best's carmine stain, which though empirical, has 
remained in current use. Haematoxylin served as a 
nuclear counterstain. Prior to performance of the stain¬ 
ing routine just described, control slides were incubated 

o 

in saliva for 30 minutes at 37 C. All sections were dehyd¬ 
rated, cleared in xylol and mounted in piccolyte. Glycogen 
was identified in sections as deeply colored red granules 
that were absent in control sections. In order to record 
quasi-quantitatively, relative amounts of stained glycogen, 
the following arbitrary scheme based on morphological 
patterns was adopted: 


0 _ ....... Negative reaction. 

1 plus.. Very small scattered granules. 

2 plus .. Coarse granules, occupying a greater 

proportion of the cell volume. 

3 plus ....... Small clumped masses. 

4 plus ••••••• Large amounts, polarized against the 

cell wall. 










Results 


In embryo hearts, after alcohol fixation and Best f s 
carmine stain, glycogen appears in clumps and granules 
irregularly distributed inside and outside the muscle 
fibres* In subepicardial muscle fibres, glycogen is pre¬ 
cipitated towards one pole of the cell. This polariz¬ 
ation of glycogen is undoubtedly due to diffusion currents 
set up by the fixative (Fig. 80). More centrally placed 
areas contain granules of stainable glycogen evenly dis¬ 
persed throughout the substance of the muscle fibre (Fig. 
81). These aggregates of glycogen bear no detectable 
relationship to any of the cross striations. 

Results from the histological grading of glycogen 
in the pig embryo heart, are summarized in Table ¥1. 
Different regions of the heart are compared. In embryos 
of less than 25 mm., all muscular portions of the heart 
are equally well-provided with glycogen. In older fetuses, 
after the completion of the interventricular septum, the 
glycogen content of the right ventricle progressively dim¬ 
inishes. By the 60 mm. stage, glycogen cannot be demons¬ 
trated histologically in the right ventricle. All other 
muscular portions of the fetal heart, contain a high 
glycogen content until the 120 mm. stage, at which time 
the left ventricle and interventricular septum show a 
moderate decline in glycogen staining. Purkinje fibres, 
recognizable in embryos of 60 to 120 mm. are seen to run a 











y 




i 








210 


subendocardial course* Purkinje cells in the right ven¬ 
tricle, though in other respects indistinguishable, stand 
out as brilliant red against the yellow tone of cardiac 
muscle, because of their high glycogen content. Connect¬ 
ive tissue structures in embryos and fetal hearts are 
uniformly glycogen-free. 


Discussion 

Glycogen is a condensation product, or polymer, of 
dextrose. In the living cell, glycogen exists in the 
colloidal state in association with cytoplasmic proteins. 
Mancini (1948), using freezing-drying techniques followed 
by iodine staining in non-polar solvents, has shown that 
glycogen is homogeneously distributed throughout the cell. 
In the present study, with the use of a chemical fixative, 
glycogen appears as irregular clumps or granules, seldom 
in diffuse form* It is usually more or less displaced 
and localized in the cytoplasm according to the direction 
of the diffusion currents, produced by the fixative. Fre¬ 
quently it may be found extra cellularly in the inter¬ 
stitial spaces. These artifacts, however, do not affect 
the accuracy of histological grading. The smallest amount 
of glycogen detectable by the use of chemical fixatives is 
generally assumed to be 0*4$. (Mancini, 1948). 

The function of glycogen in the heart muscle is at 
present unknown. There is in the literature, however, 







211 


general agreement that glycogen breaks down and lactic 
acid appears when oxygen supply to the heart is defic¬ 
ient* A detailed investigation of the glycogen content 
of the heart of rats under various experimental condi¬ 
tions has been carried out by Evans (1934)* Important 
in his findings is the constancy of the values for 
heart glycogen. Fasting and exercise did not reduce 
the glycogen; anoxemia by inspiring air with 12 to 9 
per cent of oxygen had no effect. Extreme degrees of 
anoxia (0 2 - 7 to 5 per cent) reduced the glycogen some 
20 to 60 per cent. The suggestion is offered that car¬ 
diac glycogen is not decreased in ordinary aerobic 
activity but is reserved for anoxaemic emergencies. It 
may also be reasonably supposed that glycogen within 
muscle cells serves best in emergencies when the muscle 
is unable to draw glucose from the blood as quickly as 
it requires it. From the distribution of glycogen in 
the early pig embryo heart, it may be assumed that the 
primitive sinusoidal circulation is normally capable of 
supplying the heart muscle on a minute to minute basis, 
but is unable to meet sudden metabolic demands. In 
early fetal life, with the ingrowth of coronary capil¬ 
laries, the situation is not appreciably altered. The 
subsequent disappearance of glycogen from the right 
ventricle and its persistence in the left, would suggest 
that the combined sinusoidal and capillary circulation 
of the right ventricle is more efficient than is the left 







212 


ventricular capillary circulation* The greater abundance 
of sinusoido-capillary connections in the right ventricle 
must also be borne in mind* In the pig embryo, a dis¬ 
parity in thickness of the walls of the right and left 
ventricles is evident, (Fig. 82), even in early intra¬ 
uterine life. This functional hyperplasia of the left 
ventricle indicates an increased work requirement, which 
could well explain the higher glycogen content. It may 
be noted, that in the human fetus, the right and left 
ventricular walls are of equal thickness (Keen, 1942-43). 
In the pig embryo, by the 120 mm. stage, capillary 
densities have increased, and the adult distribution of 
glycogen is approximated. Atria are relatively avascular 
and contain an abundance of glycogen. 


' 


c 


c 





213 



Fig. 74. 

Pig embryo, 27 mm. 

Section 5(a), from the logarithmic incubation series, stained 
for alkaline phosphatase. Fixation in cold 95 f 0 alcohol. 
Embedded in celloidin and cut sagittally at 20 ji. Section 
incubated for 40 minutes in sodium glycerophosphate solution 
(pH 9.2). Sites of enzyme activity appear black. X 22. 

Medulla, 4th ventricle, and choroid plexus are shown. Marked 
phosphatase activity is demonstrable in the endothelium of 
small blood vessels; the enzyme is intracellular and cyto¬ 
plasmic. The fact that vascular endothelium gives a strong 
reaction for alkaline phosphatase makes the histochemical 
stain for phosphatase a uniquely effective method for out¬ 
lining the vascular tree of any portion of the embryonic 
nervous system. Nuclei and brain parenchyma show a slight 
reaction. Note that in the choroid plexus, the capillary 
endothelium in the stroma of each villus is sharply stained, 
while the overlying ependymal cells are unstained. 




















. 

- 







■ .-II 









214 


Fig. 75. 

Pig embryo, 27 mm. 

Sections 3(b) and 10(b), from the logarithmic incubation 
series, stained for alkaline phosphatase, are offered for 
comparison. Incubation times were 10 and 1280 minutes re¬ 
spectively. Other explanations as for figure 74. Micro¬ 
photographs were taken with Kodak Contrast Panchromatic 
film; identical exposure and development of negatives and 
prints, so that variations in intensity are due to differ¬ 
ences in the character of the precipitates. X 3.5. 

The sites of highest activity appear positive for phospha¬ 
tase before other sites (3b). With more protracted incu¬ 
bation times, areas of lower activity become evident and 


are eventually uniformly blackened (10b). The histological 
grading, based on microscopic examination, is as follows: 


Tissue 

3 (5) 

10 (b) 

Capillaries of brain. 

34- 

44- 

Nerve tracts. 

0 

24- 

Coronary capillaries. 

0 

variable 

Endocardium. 

0 

34- 

Myocardium. 

0 

14- 

Perichondrium. 

44- 

44- 

Proximal tubules, kidney. 

44- 

44- 

Adrenal gland. 

4 + 

44- 

Liver cells. 

1 + 

3 4- 

Endothelium, liver sinusoids. 

2 + 

44- 













ii - '.’f 

- ■ C 


0 . 




Oi 









■ -S 



pF ; 








c 











Section - 3(». StcTloK - /o(». 











2EC_L(014 - 2FCJ.10I4 - \o(T)' 















215 









216 



L A 


Fig. 76. 

Pig embryo, 30 mm. 

Transverse 20 }i celloidin section, Prom the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. Stained for alkaline phosphatase. 
Fixation in cold 95$ alcohol. Twelve hours t incubation in 
sodium glycerophosphate substrate solution (pH 9.2). Sites 
of enzyme activity appear black. X 21.5. 

Following prolonged incubation, endocardial endothelium 
shows a marked staining reaction. The sinusoids are conse¬ 
quently outlined. They penetrate radially between the 
trabeculae, and present an extensive network of vascular 
channels which open centrally into the lumen of the heart. 
There is additional slight staining of the adventitia of 
larger blood vessels, and of some muscle nuclei. Coronary 
capillaries, however, have remained unstained. 






217 


r "i 



Fig. 77. 

Pig embryo, 30 mm. 

Transverse 20 p celloidin section, from the base of the 
heart, passing through the tricuspid valve leaflets. From 
the same heart as in Fig. 76, and similar in magnification 
and treatment. 

The Gomori method for alkaline phosphatase, when applied to 
pig embryos, outlines capillaries in the central nervous 
system with great clarity (Fig. 74), but fails to consist¬ 
ently stain capillary endothelium in the heart. In early 
pig embryos, endothelial cells lining the endocardium 
regularly contain alkaline phosphatase, and possibly aid in 
the nutriment of the underlying myocardium. The sinusoids 
are thin-walled and the endothelium is everywhere closely 
applied to the musculature. Compare with Fig. 15, which 
portrays the sinusoids in an injected specimen. 






218 



Fig. 78. 

Pig embryo, 70 mm. 

Transverse 40 u celloidin section, from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart. A portion of the left ventricle is 
shown. Stained for alkaline phosphatase. Fixation in cold 
95$ alcohol. Twelve hours 1 incubation in sodium glycero¬ 
phosphate substrate solution (pH 9.2). Sites of enzyme 
activity appear black. X 22. 

At this stage, myocardial branches of coronary arteries 
stain deeply, following prolonged incubation. In addition, 
muscle nuclei exhibit a slight reaction. Muscle nuclei 
adjacent to zones of high enzyme concentration show a false 
localization of phosphatase. The phenomenon is one of 
diffusion from the primary site with subsequent adsorption 
elsewhere. Note that the endocardial endothelium no longer 
contains the enzyme. Compare with figures 76 and 77. 





21!f 



Fig. 79. 

Calf embryo, 170 mm. 

Transverse 20 celloidin section from the raid-ventricular 
region of the heart. Portions of right and left ventricles 
and interventricular septum, adjacent to the anterior inter¬ 
ventricular sulcus, are shown. Fixation in cold 95$ alcohol, 
followed by staining for alkaline phosphatase. Sodium 
glycerophosphate used as substrate and sections incubated 
for twelve hours at pH 9.2. X 22. 

The histochemical technic for alkaline phosphatase when 
applied to the calf embryo heart, stains the vascular endo¬ 
thelium, and therefore provides a uniquely effective method 
for demonstrating blood vessels. The procedure fails, how¬ 
ever, to outline sinusoidal endothelium. Essentially the 
situation is the reverse of that occurring in the pig embryo 
heart, (Fig. 76). Species variations in phosphatase dis¬ 
tribution are common both in the embryo and adult. 

















220 



Fig, 80. 

Pig embryo, 14 mm. 

Fixed in 95% alcohol. Embedded in paraffin. 

Stained with Best’s carmine. 

Nuclei counterstained with haematoxylin. 

Frontal section through the heart, cut at 20 ji. X 400. 

A portion of the right ventricle is shown. Note that 
embryonic heart muscle cells are abundantly supplied with 
glycogen. Following chemical fixation, glycogen appears 
in the form of irregular clumps. These, (indicated by 
arrows), are displaced to one side of the cell and occupy 
both the cytoplasm and the cell interstices. Polarization 
of glycogen is due to a streaming artifact. Histological 
grading, plus 4. 






o o 




P> Jtsu*' - 

7U ^V ■ 





hXr^' - >u<:/v3?uaaUU*a. ^ ■ 


JitttnuL jw>j>sifiU y 
^Vv fWuJL 




Fig. 01. 

Pig embryo, 4b mm. 

Fixed In 95i alcohol. Embedded in paraffin. 

Stained with Best's carmine. 

Nuclei counterstained with haematoxylin. 

Frontal section through the heart, cut at 20 u. X 97. 

The atrio“Ventricular node and adjacent portions of inter¬ 
atrial septum, interventricular septum and atrio-ventric- 
ular ring are shown above. Nodal fibres form a loose 
spongework of muscular trabeculae with the meshes occupied 
by loose connective tissue and abundant capillary blood 
vessels. The trabeculae branch and anastomose with each 
other, and are not orientated in any particular plane. 
Histological grading of structures as in Table VI. 




























22 ( 



Fig. 81. 

Pig embryo, 45 mm. 

Fixed in 95$ alcohol. Embedded in paraffin. 

Stained with Best’s carmine. 

Nuclei counterstained with haematoxylin. 

Frontal section through the heart, cut at 20 u. X 97. 

The atrio-ventricular node and adjacent portions of inter¬ 
atrial septum, interventricular septum and atrio-ventric¬ 
ular ring are shown above. Nodal fibres form a loose 
spongework of muscular trabeculae with the meshes occupied 
by loose connective tissue and abundant capillary blood 
vessels. The trabeculae branch and anastomose with each 
other, and are not orientated in any particular plane. 
Histological grading of structures as in Table VI. 







' 


. 

' 






. . 


: .. wC-:. ; 






■ 

. . 

■ - • 

■ .- ' <; , . : 





222 




Fig. 82. 

Pig embryo, 220 mm. (Series G). 

Uninjected specimen. 

Transverse 100 a celloidin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart; stained -with eosin. X 3.6. 

The wall of the right ventricle is thinner than that of the 
left, the proportion between them being as 1 to 1.5. The 
cavity of the right ventricle presents a crescentic outline 
in transverse section. Trabeculae carneae project from the 
whole of the inner surface of the ventricle. Some are mere 
ridges, others are fixed at their ends but free in the mid¬ 
dle, while a third set (papillary muscles) are continuous 
by their bases with the wall of the ventric3_e while their 
apices project into the cavity and give origin to the chordae 
tendineae. 






SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS 


HOU-rj .HMO'G GHA YH AMM'Jc 


Summary and Conclusions. 


223 


1. The ventricular sinusoidal spaces develop after 3.5 mm. 
(C-R), extend to the epicardium by 8 mm., and increase 

both in number and complexity so as to constitute the main 
blood supply to the ventricles, until the 25 mm. stage. 
Sinusoids exhibit an inclination from the perpendicular 
which corresponds to the spiral twist of adjacent musculature. 
As a result of the growth of trabeculae, sinusoids of the left 
ventricle undergo their main quantitative regression as the 
embryo grows from 30 to 100 mm., and from the right ventricle 
from 100 to 160 mm. In 170 mm. specimens, ventricular sinu¬ 
soids are for the most part reduced to lumenless strands. 

Free sinusoidal communications exist through the interven¬ 
tricular septum at least till the 55 mm. stage. True sinu¬ 
soids form in the atria after the 80 mm. stage and continue 
to increase in complexity throughout fetal life, but show a 
decline in percent volume in accordance with a linear curve. 

2. In pig embryos of 7 mm., endothelial buds from the sinus 
venosus invade the epicardial mesenchyme of the atrio¬ 
ventricular groove. Coronary veins of adult life emerge 
from the subepicardial network subsequently formed. Coronary 
arteries commence as endothelial buds, (the left at 10 mm., 
the right at 11 mm.) in the portion of the truncus arteriosus 
destined to form the definitive aorta. Early in prenatal life 
and even till 50 mm., the vascularity of the left ventricle 




























224 


exceeds that of the right. Capillaries invade the atria 
relatively late, and never reach the same density as in 
the ventricles. Cardiac valves remain avascular throughout 
fetal life. 

3. The first anastomotic channels to develop are the luminal 
(Thebesian) vessels, which appear in 19 mm. pig embryos, 

as simple sinusoido-capillary connections. Luminal channels 
largely disappear from the left ventricle with the early 
obliteration of sinusoids, but they continue to be numerous 
in the right ventricle where sinusoids tend to persist. 

Vasa vasorum of the aorta and pulmonary artery commence at the 
40 mm. stage. The vascularity of the aorta exceeds that of the 
pulmonary artery. Intervenous anastomoses are numerous during 
fetal life. On the other hand, interarterial and arteriovenous 
channels are absent. 

4. In late fetal life, valves develop in cardiac veins. 

5. Mural coronaries of adult life represent the persistence 
of an embryonic trait. 

6. Alkaline phosphatase is present in small amounts in endo¬ 
cardial endothelium of the pig embryo heart. The dis¬ 
appearance of endocardial phosphatase occurs concurrently with 
the regression of sinusoids and the ingrowth of capillary 
channels. The Gomori method for phosphatase consistently out¬ 
lines capillary endothelium in the calf embryo heart, but fails 
to do so in the pig heart. 

7. Glycogen disappears rapidly from the right ventricle. 


* 














• ' * 


c 






' 

. 


r 

t 

1 

j 




0 




BIBLIOGRAPHY. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Abramson, D. I., Crawford, J. H., and Roberts, G. H.: 
The coronary blood supply in the cat. 

Anat. Rec. 58: 25, 1933. 

Z 0 Abramson, D. I., and Eisenberg, H. J.: 

The coronary blood supply in the Rhesus monkey. 

J. Anat. 69: 520, 1935. 

3. Alexander, W. S., and Green, H. C.: 

Coronary blood vessel arising from cardiac ventricle. 
Arch. Path. 53: 188, 1952. 

4. Algire, G. H., and Chalkley, H. W.: 

Vascular reactions of normal and malignant tissues in 
vivo. 

I. Vascular reactions of mice to wounds and to normal 
and neoplastic transplants. 

J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 6: 73, 1945-46. 

5. Batson, 0. V., and Bellet, S.: 

The reversal of flow in the cardiac veins. 

Am. Heart J. 6: 206, 1930-31. 

6. Beck, C. S.: 

Natural and artificial circulation in the heart. 

In: Blood, Heart and Circulation, AAAS Pub. No. 13. 
Lancaster, Pa., 

Pp. 133-138. 


The Science Press Printing Co., 1940 




n 


c 


0 i 


226 


7* Beck, C. S., Stanton, E., Batiuchok, W., and Letter, E. 
Revascularization of heart by graft of systemic artery 
into coronary sinus* 

J.A.M.A. 137: 436, 1948. 

8. Bellet, S., and Gouley, B. A.: 

Congenital heart disease with multiple anomalies. 

Am. J. Med. Sc. 183: 458, 1932. 

9. Bennett, H. S.: 

The development of the blood supply to the heart in 
the embryo pig. 

Am. J. Anat. 60: 27, 1936. 

10. Blumgart, H. L., Schlesinger, M. J., and Davis, D.: 
Studies of the relation of the clinical manifestations 
of angina pectoris, coronary thrombosis and myocardial 
infarction to the pathologic findings. 

Am. Heart J. 19: 1, 1940. 

11. Blumgart, H. L., Zoll, P. M., Freedberg, A. S., and 
Gilligan, D. R.: 

The experimental production of intercoronary arterial 
anastomoses and their functional significance. 
Circulation 1: 10, 1950. 

12. Bohning, A., Jochim, K., and Katz, L. N.: 

The Thebesian vessels as a source of nourishment for 
the myocardium. 

Am. . j. Physiol. 106: 183, 1933. 


t J c ' 


. - 


S'- . - ; -0 • 


c - - * 


C C. " c 




227 


13# Bourne, G.: 

The distribution of alkaline phosphatase in various 
tissues. 

tyuart. J. Exper. Physiol. 32: 1, 1943. 

14. Brash, J. C., Young, A. H., and Robinson, a.: 

Blood vascular and lymphatic systems. 

In: Cunningham’s Text-Bo ok of Anatomy. Ed. 7. 

Edinburgh, Oxford University Press, 1937 f P. 1238. 

15. Bremer, J. L., and Weatherford, H. L. : 

A Text-Book of Histology Arranged Upon an Embryological 
Basis. Ed. 6. 

Philadelphia, Blakiston Co., 1944. P. 254. 

16. Bruenn, H. G.: 

Syphilitic disease of the coronary arteries. 

Am. Heart J. 9: 421, 1933. 

17. Burchell, H. B.: 

Large vascular sinuses in the myocardium of a dog. 

Anat. Rec. 74: 195, 1939. 

18. Cabot, R. C., and Mallory, T.: 

Case Records of the Massachusetts General Hospital; 

Case #16061: Pain between the thyroid and xyphoid. 

New England U. Med. 202: 287, 1930. 



t ' * t• . t 


t 4 


t 


o.': 


o 




228 

19. Chalkley, H. W.: 

Method for the quantitative morphologic analysis of 
tissues. 

J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 4: 47, 1943-44. 

20. Chase, R. E.: 

The coronary arteries in 266 hearts of Rhesus monkey. 
Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 23: 299, 1938. 

21. Chase, R. E., and DeGaris, C. F.: 

Arteriae coronariae (cordis) in the higher primates. 
Am. J. Phys. Anthropol. 24: 427, 1939. 

22. Cronk, E. S., Sinclair, JT. G., and Rigdon, R. H.: 

An anomalous coronary artery arising from the pulmon¬ 
ary artery. 

Am. Heart J. 42: 906, 1951. 

23. Cruickshank, E. ¥. H., and Shrivastava, D. L.: 

Action of insulin on storage and utilization of sugar 
by isolated normal and diabetic heart. 

Am. J. Physiol. 92: 144, 1930. 

24. Danielli, J. F.: 

A critical study of techniques for determining the 
cytological position of alkaline phosphatase. 

J. Exper. Biol. 22: 110, 1945-46. 



<L 





2 2 if 

25. Danielli, J. F. : 

Cytological demonstration of alkaline phosphatase. 
Nature, London. 165: 762, 1950. 

26. Dempsey, E. W., and Wislocki, G. B.: 

Further observations on the distribution of phospha¬ 
tases in mammalian placentas. 

Am* J. Anat. 80: 1, 1947. 

27. Dempsey, E. W., Greep, R. 0., and Deane, H. W.: 

Changes in the distribution and concentration of 
alkaline phosphatases of the rat after hypophysectomy 
or gonadectomy, and after replacement therapy. 
Endocrinology 44: 88, 1949. 

28. Eckstein, R. , Roberts, J. T., Gregg, D. E., and 
Wearn, J. T.: 

Observations on the role of the Thebesian veins and 
luminal vessels in the right ventricle. 

Am. J. Physiol. 132: 648, 1941. 

29. Edwards, E. A.: 

The orientation of venous valves in relation to body 
surfaces. 

Anat. Rec. 64: 369, 1936. 

30. Evans, G.: 

The glycogen content of the rat heart. 

J. Physiol. 82: 468, 1934. 





230 


31. Foxon, G. E. N.: 

A description of the coronary arteries in Dipnoan 
fishes. 

J. Anat. 84: 121, 1950. 

32. Geiringer, E.: 

The mural coronary. 

Am. Heart J. 41: 359, 1951. 

33. Goldsmith, J. B., and Butler, E. W.: 

The development of the cardiac-coronary circulatory 
system. 

Am. J. Anat. 60: 185, 1936-37. 

34. Gomori, G.: 

Microtechnieal demonstration of phosphatase in tissue 
sections. 

Proc. Soc. Exper. Biol. & Med. 42: 23, 1939. 

35. Gouley, B. A. : 

Anomalous left coronary artery arising from the pulmon¬ 
ary artery (adult type}. 

Am. Heart J. 40: 630, 1950. 

36. Grant, J. C. B.: 

A Method of Anatomy, Descriptive and Deductive. Ed. 3. 
Baltimore, The Williams and Wilkins Co., 1944. P. 521, 

37. Grant, R. T.: 

Development of the cardiac-coronary vessels in the rabbit. 
Heart 13: 261, 1926(a). 






231 


38. Grant, R. T.: 

An unusual anomaly of the coronary vessels in the mal¬ 
formed heart of a child. 

Heart 13: 273, 1926(b). 

39. Grant, R. T., and Regnier, M.: 

The comparative anatomy of the cardiac coronary vessels. 
Heart 13: 285, 1926. 

40. Grant, R. T., and Viko, L. E.: 

Observations on the anatomy of the Thebesian vessels of 
the heart. 

Heart 15: 103, 1929. 

41. Gregg, D. E., Shipley, R. E., and Bidder, T. G.: 

The anterior cardiac veins. Their functional importance 
in the venous drainage of the right heart. 

Am. J. Physiol. 139: 732, 1943. 

42. Gross, L.: 

The Blood Supply to the Heart in its Anatomical and 
Clinical Aspects. 

New York, Paul B. Hoeber Co., 1921. 

43. Hudson, C. L., Moritz, A. R., and Wearn, J. T.: 

The extracardiac anastomoses of the coronary arteries. 

J. Exper. Med. 56: 919, 1932. 





‘ 





232 


44. Humphreys, E. M. : 

Truncus arteriosus communis persistens, criteria for 
identification of the common arterial trunk. With 
report of a case with four semilunar cusps. 

Arch. Path. 14: 671, 1932. 

45. Johnston, T. B., and Whillis, J.: 

Gray’s Anatomy Descriptive and Applied. Ed. 27. 

London, Longmans, Green & Co., 1938. P. 804. 

46. Johnstone, P. N., Wakefield, F. H. , and Currey, H. M.: 

On the comparative vascularity of the heart muscle and 
of the Purkinje fibers. 

Anat. Rec. 24: 55, 1922. 

47. Kabat, E. A., and Furth, J.: 

A histochemical study of the distribution of alkaline 
phosphatase in various normal and neoplastic tissues. 

Am. J. Path. 17: 303, 1941. 

48. Kampmeier, 0. F., and La Fleur Birch, G.: 

The origin and development of the venous valves, with 
particular reference to the saphenous district. 

Am. J. Anat. 38: 451, 1927. 

49. Keen, J. A.: 

A note on the closure of the foramen ovale and the post¬ 
natal changes of the ventricles in the human heart. 

J. Anat. 77: 104, 1942-43. 






.o 














, 




' 









* 


€ 




l 


: 













50. 


233 


Kerr, W. J. , and Mettier, S.: 

The circulation of the heart valves. 

Am. Heart J. 1: 96, 1925. 

51. Landow, H., Kabat, E. A., and Newman, W.: 

Distribution of alkaline phosphatase in various normal 
and in neoplastic tissues of the nervous system. 

Arch. Neurol. & Psychiat. 48: 518, 1942. 

52. Leary, T., and Wearn, J. T.: 

Two cases of complete occlusion of both coronary orifices. 
Am. Heart J. 5: 412, 1930. 

53. Lendrum, B. , Kondo, B., and Katz, L. N. : 

The role of Thebesian drainage in the dynamics of coron¬ 
ary flow. 

Am. J. Physiol. 143: 243, 1945. 

54. Lewis, T.: 

The Mechanism and Graphic Registration of the Heart Beat. 
Ed. 3. New York, Paul B. Hoeber Co., 1920. 

55. Lowe, T. E.: 

Some principles governing the supply of blood to the 
myocardium in occlusive arterial disease. 

Am. Heart J. 21: 326, 1941. 

56. Lowrey, G. L. : 

Prenatal growth of the pig. 

Am. J. Anat. 12: 107, 1911. 


c 




C 4 ' • t 


t J « 


( 




c 







234 


57. McAllister, F. F., Leighninger, D., and Beck, C. S. : 
Revascularization of the heart by vein graft from aorta 
to coronary sinus. 

Ann. Surg. 133: 153, 1951. 

58. Macpherson, W. E., Essex, H. E., and Mann, F. C. : 

Rate of disappearance of glycogen during contraction 
of perfused heart of rabbit. 

Am. J. Physiol. 99: 429, 1932. 

59. Mancini, R. E.: 

Histochemical study of glycogen in tissues. 

Anat. Rec. 101: 149, 1948. 

60. Manheimer, L. H., and Seligman, A. M.: 

Improvement in the method for the histochemical demon¬ 
stration of alkaline phosphatase and its use in a study 
of normal and neoplastic tissues. 

J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 9: 181, 1948-49. 

61. Monie, I. ¥., and BePape, A. D. J. : 

Congenital aortic atresia. Report of one case with an 
analysis of 26 similar reported cases. 

Am. Heart J. 40: 595, 1950. 

62. Moog, F. : 

The physiological significance of the phosphomonoester- 
ases. 

Biol. Rev. 21: 41, 1946. 










c • . t 





0 " 






235 


63. Nussbaum, A.: 

ft Tt 

Uber das Gefasssystem das Herzens. 

Arch. f. Mikro. Anat. 80: 450, 1912. 

Cited in: 

Batson, 0. V., and Bellet, S.: 1930-31. 

64. Patten, B. M., and Philpott, R.: 

The shrinkage of embryos in the processes preparatory 
to sectioning. 

Anat. Rec. 20: 393, 1921. 

65. Patten, B. M.: 

The cardiovascular system. Section VI. 

In: Schaeffer, J. P.: Morris 1 Human Anatomy. Ed. 10. 
Philadelphia, Blakiston Co., 1942. P. 597. 

66. Pearse, A. G. E.: 

A review of modern methods in histochemistry. 

J. Clin. Path. 4: 1, 1951. 

67. Piannetto, M. B.: 

The ooronary arteries of the dog. 

Am. Heart J. 18: 403, 1939. 

68. Pratt, F. H.: 

The nutrition of the heart through the vessels of 
Thebesius and the coronary veins. 

Am. J. Physiol. 1: 86, 1898. 

Cited in: 

Batson, 0. V., and Bellet, S.: 1930-31. 






236 


69. Prinzmetal, M., Simpkin, B., and Bergman, H. C.: 
Studies on the coronary circulation. 

II. The collateral circulation of the normal human 
heart by coronary perfusion with radio-active erythro¬ 
cytes and glass spheres. 

Am. Heart J. 33: 420, 1947. 

70. Proescher, F. , and Baumann, F. W.: 

Abnormal, origin of left coronary artery with extensive 
cardiac changes in female child 13 months old. 

J. Pediat. 25: 344, 1944. 

71. Quiring, D. P.: 

Collateral Circulation. 

Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1949. P. 95. 

72. Rawlinson, H. E.: 

The use of an iron stain for the study of alveolar 
development in the mouse mamnary gland. 

Canad. J. Research, Sect. E. 28: 1, 1950. 

73. Reagen, F. P.: 

On the later development of the azygos veins of swine. 
Anat. Rec. 17: 111, 1919. 

74. Robb, J. S., and Robb, R. C.: 

The distribution of the coronary vessels to the ven¬ 
tricular muscle bands. 

Am. J. Physiol. 113: 111, 1935. 


* I. 


C ' 


t 


t 




0 



0 



c 





























c 





237 


75. Robb, J. S., and Robb, R. C.: 

Localization of cardiac infarcts in man. 

I. A comparison of anterior-posterior infarcts with 
muscle bundle nodes of localization. 

Am. J. Med. Sc. 197: 7, 1939. 

76. Roberts, J. T., Wearn, J. T., and Boten, I.: 

Quantitative change in capillary-muscle relationship 
in human hearts during normal growth and hypertrophy. 

Am. Heart J. 21: 617, 1941. 

77. Roberts, J. T.: 

Experimental studies on the nourishment of the left 
ventricle by the lumenal (Thebesian) vessels. 

Federation Proc. 2: 90, 1943. 

78. Roberts, J. T., Browne, R. S., and Roberts, G.: 
Nourishment of the myocardium by way of the coronary 
veins. 

Federation Proc. 2: 90, 1943. 

79. Roberts, J. T., Spencer, F. D., and Browne, R. S.: 
Drainage of myocardium by cardial lumenal (Thebesian) 
vessels of the left ventricle. 

Federation Proc. 2: 90-91, 1943. 

80. Roberts, J. T.: 

Dynamics and circulation of heart muscle; cardiac reserve; 
the cardiac cycle. 

In: Sodeman, W* A.: Pathologic Physiology. 

Philadslphia, W. B. Saunders Co., 1950. P. 48. 



« ' 


t 


< - ■ « 






- } 


) 





' 


Z • t 

. .. . • o ; i I 
















238 


81. Robertson, H. F.: 

Vascularization of the thoracic aorta. 

Arch. Path. 8: 881, 1929. 

82. Scharrer, E.: 

A technique for the demonstration of the blood vessels 
in the developing central nervous system. 

Anat. Rec. 107: 319, 1950. 

83. Schlesinger, M. J.: 

An injection plus dissection study of coronary artery 
occlusions and anastomoses. 

Am. Heart J. 15: 528, 1938. 

84. Schlesinger, M.J.: 

Significant variations in the anatomic pattern of the 
coronary vessels. 

In: Blood, Heart and Circulation, AAAS Pub. No. 13. 
Lancaster, Pa., The Science Press Printing Co., 1940. 
Pp. 61-72. 

85. Schlichter, J., and Harris, R.: 

The vascularization of the aorta. 

II. A comparative study of the aortic vascularization 
of several species in health and disease. 

Am. J. Med. Sc. 218: 610, 1949. 


c 


t * c 




86 


23 ?) 


. Shaner, R. F.: 

Tlie development of the muscular architecture of the 
ventricles of the pig's heart, with a review of the 
adult heart and a note on two abnormal mammalian hearts. 
Anat. Rec. 39: 1, 1928. 

87. Shaner, R. F.: 

Complete and corrected transposition of the aorta, 
pulmonary artery and the ventricles in pig embryos, and 
a case of corrected transposition in a child. 

Am. J. Anat. 88: 35, 1951. 

88. Shipley, R. E., Shipley, L. J., and Wearn, J. T.: 

The capillary supply in normal and hypertrophied 
hearts of rabbits. 

J. Exper. Med. 65: 29, 1937. 

89. Soloff, L. 

Anomalous coronary arteries arising from the pulmonary 
artery. 

Am. Heart J. 24: 118, 1942. 

90. Spalteholz, W.: 

Die Thebesischen Venen; Vorlaufige Mitteilung. 

Anat. Anz. 79: 212, 1934-35. 

91. Stafford, R. 0., and Atkinson, W. B.: 

Effect of acetone and alcohol fixation and paraffin 
embedding on activity of acid and alkaline phosphatases 

in rat tissues. 

Science, 107: 279, 1948. 




c 


C - 6 

)' 

■ 







240 


92. Stella, G.: 

The part played by the Thebesian vessels in the blood 
supply to the heart. 

J. Physiol. 73: 36, 1931. 

93. Stenstrom, J. D.: 

Vascularization of the myocardial capillary bed by 
arterialization of the cardiac veins: an experimental 
study. 

Canad. M. A. J. 59: 420, 1948. 

94. Sumner, J. B., and Somers, G-. F. : 

Chemistry and Methods of Enzymes. Ed. 2. 

New York, Academic Press, Inc., 1947. 

95. Takamatsu, H.: 

Histologische und biochemische Studien uber die Phospha¬ 
tase. (I. Mitteilung). Histochemische Untersuchungs- 
methodik der Phosphatase und deren Verteilung in 
verschiedenen Organen und G-eweben. 

Tr. Jap. Path. Soc. 29: 492, 1939. 

Cited in: 

Landow, H., Kabat, E. A., and Newman, ¥. : 1942. 

96. Taussig, H. B. : 

On the technique for the demonstration of the specialized 
tissue in the heart. 

J. Tech. Methods & Bull. Internat. Ass. M. Mus., 

Montreal. No. 8: 85, 1934. 





o 


0 


t r V t 


' 


0 






<■ 


c 








241 


97. Thebesius, A. C.: 

Disputatio medica de circulo sanguinis in corde. 

Lugdunim Batavorum, 1708. 

Cited in: 

Wearn, J. T.: 1928(b). 

98. Vieussens, R.: 

Nouvelles decouvertes sur le coeur. 

Toulouse, 1706. 

Cited in: 

Wearn, J. T.: 1928(b). 

99. Von Claim, W. C.: 

The pathology of coronary arteries. Chapter IV. 

In: Levy, R. L.: Diseases of the Coronary Arteries and 
Cardiac Pain. New York, The Macmillan Co., 1936. 

100. Wartman, W. B., and Souders, J. C. : 

Localization of myocardial infarcts with respect to the 
muscle bundles of the heart. 

Arch. Path. 50: 329, 1950. 

101. Watkins, W. M.: 

The cardiac-coronary circulation of the 18 mm. human. 

J. Med. Assoc. Georgia 36: 231, 1947. 

Abstracted in: 

Biol. Abstr. 22: 344, 1948. Abstr. #3915. 

102. Wearn, J. T.: 

The extent of the capillary bed of the heart. 

J. Exper. Med. 47: 273, 1928(a). 





j. 0 


e 



■J 





242 


103* Wearn, J. T.: 

The role of the Thebesian vessels in the circulation of 
the heart. 

J. Exper. Med. 47; 293, 1928(b). 

104. Wearn, J. T. , Mettier, S. R., Klumpp, T. G. , and 
Zschiesche, L. J .: 

The nature of the vascular communications between the 
coronary arteries and the chambers of the heart. 

Am. Heart J. 9: 143, 1933. 

105. Wearn, J. T.: 

The anatomy of the coronary vessels. Chapter I. 

In: Levy, R. L.: Diseases of the Coronary Arteries and 
Cardiac Pain. New York, The Macmillan Co., 1936. 

106. Wearn, J. T.: 

Alterations in the heart accompanying growth and hyper¬ 
trophy. 

Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. 68: 363, 1941. 

107. Wheeldon, T. F.: 

The coronary vessels of the 20 mm. pig embryo. 

Anat. Rec. 11: 430, 1916. 

108. Williams, R. R., Kent, G. B., and Edwards, J. E.: 
Anomalous cardiac blood vessel communicating with the 
right ventricle. 

Arch. Path. 52: 480, 1951. 


« 



243 


109. Willmer, E. N.: 

The localization of phosphatase in cells in tissue 
cultures. 

1. Exper. Biol. 19: 11, 1942. 

110. Wright, S.: 

Applied Physiology. Ed. 7. 

London, Oxford University Press, 1940. P. 381. 

111. Zoll, P. M., Wessler, S., and Schlesinger, M. J.: 
Interarterial coronary anastomoses in the human heart 
with particular reference to anemia and relative cardiac 
anoxia. 

Circulation. 4: 797, 1951. 





' 




c s t 





c 















244 


Table I, 

Empirical test to determine the accuracy of Chalkley*s 
method for quantitative morphologic analysis of tissues. 

The right ventricle in section (2)-E-40u - 45mm. -#8-5 was 
used as a test object. The "hits" of 5 points, on various 
components of the embryonic heart, were tabulated for each 
of 100 consecutive microscopic fields, and the percent vol¬ 
umes calculated. Using the same section, the process was 
repeated eleven times. For purposes of comparison, results 
are summarized below. Note that all values show satisfact¬ 
ory agreement. 


Trial 

Components of the Pig Embryo Heart. ; 

(Percent Volume) 

Count 

Mus cle 
(M) 

Sinusoids 

(S) 

Capillaries 

(C) 

s/c 

1. 

72.8 

8.8 

18.4 

0.48 

2. 

74.4 

8.2 

17.4 

0.47 

3. 

75.8 

7.8 

16.4 

0.48 

4. 

73.2 

9.6 

17.2 

0.56 

5. 

72.6 

10.0 

17.4 

0.57 

6 . 

70.4 

10.4 

19.2 

0.54 

7. 

72.6 

8.8 

18.6 

0.47 

8. 

73.4 

8.8 

17.8 

0.49 

9. 

73.2 

8.8 

18.0 

0.49 

10. 

71.4 

8.8 

19.8 

0.44 

11. 

71.8 

8.6 

19.6 

0.44 

Mean = 

72.9 

9.0 

18.2 

0.50 

































245 


Table II. 

Percent volume of vascular components in the anterior papil¬ 
lary muscle of the right ventricle. — Adult pig heart. 

(as determined by the Chalkley method). 



Number of microscopic 

Percent volume of components 

Count 

fields examined. 

Muscle 

Sinusoids 

Capillaries 

1 . 

100 

64.8 

0.0 

35.2 

2. 

100 

66.0 

0.0 

34.0 

3. 

100 

65.2 

0.0 

34.8 

Mean= 

— 

65.3 

0.0 

34.7 























- 



















. 





















Age Changes in the Dimensions of Coronary Capillary Loops — Pig Embryos. 


£ 

o 













21 

£ « 

£ £ , 

W 0 L 














a> 




























05 Q) 

< 

O- 

[V 

vO 

to 

ON 

vO 


4 

4 

UN 

ON 

O- 

tj .£ it 

- 4 - 

ON 

rH 

CNi 

rH 

rH 

UN 

nO 

sO 

4 

UN 

4 

£ -p 

•—^ 

• 












a 5 

40 Ch 

CO O 

IS 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CNi 

CNi 

ON 

O 

O 

O 

d 

O 

O 

b 













£ 1 














-POO 
£ -H O 
0 -p «H 














•H 0 

0 *H X 

IS 

i> 

- 4 - 

4 

On 

CNi 

NO 

CO 

nO 

CNi 

CNi 

vO 

On 



CO 

-4 

CM 

ON 

UN 

rH 

0 

UN 

CNi 

ON 

UN 

CM 



• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


on 

1—1 

CM 

O 

UN 

ON 

£>- 

rH 

4 

ON 

CO 

O 

gn » 

0 0 > 


on 

-4 

4 

-4 

ON 

4 

CNi 

<v\ 

ON 

CNi 

CM 

ON 

£ 














TJ O 



























ON 

cd -p 

,— , 

un 

CM 

CO 

CNi 

CNi 

0 

4 

UN 

CNi 

CNi 

vO 

-d a? , 



CO 

UN 

ON 

1—1 

NO 

O 

O 

rH 

ON 

4 

O 

c-h L 
cd > 

• 

O 

• 

O- 

• 

O 

• 

CNi 

• 

O 

• 

4 

• 

CO 

♦ 

On 

• 

ON 

• 

O 


• 

O 

-P 0 

cm 

cm 

ON 

on 

ON 

4 







CO 0 














£ 


O 

ON 

0 

CNi 

O 

CO 

ON 

CO 

UN 

CNi 

CM 

ON 

cd 


cm 

rH 

-4 

O 

CO 

4 

NO 

sO 

nO 

4 

rH 

O 

0 

• 

• 

• 

• 

. 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

s 

rH 

r- 

CNi 

O 

4 

ON 

ON 

CO 

nO 

0 

sO 

CM 



0 

vO 

O 

CO 

CO 

O 

rH 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CM 

CM 

0 

— 

0- 

CM 

CV 

CO 

ON 

rH 







5x0 


rH 

CO 

ON 

VO 


sO 

4 

CNi 

UN 

UN 

O 

O 

£ ■ 


<—1 

rH 

1—I 

I—1 

rH 

CNi 

UN 

UN 

UN 

4 

UN 

4 

0 

\ 

1 

3 

1 

3 

1 

] 

h 

1 

9 

8 

1 

8 


__^ 

ON 

UN 

O 

0- 

4 

1—1 

4 

O 

CNi 

CM 

CM 

O 


rH 

f—1 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

ON 

rH 

rH 

1—1 

1—1 

rH 

rH 

W 














a 














O 














O 














►£ 














T 3 














«H >> 0 
O £ £ 














0 £ 














S_i 1—1 W 

O 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

0 rH 0 

£ 

O 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

rQ 0 

S as 
£ 0 


CM 

cm 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CNi 

CM 

CM 

CM 


3 O 














a 














cs ^ 














1 -p 














£ fcO 

• 

O 

0 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

£ £ 

s 

on 

vO 

ON 

CNi 

NO 

rH 

ON 

vO 

ON 

CM 

nO 

rH 

0 0 

B 




rH 

rH 

CNi 




rH 

rH 

CM 

£ M 














O 














« 














•H 

X 



JoCe^j 





JOUT]/tf 



< 















































r > 


i 




*i 


■ 












. 


* 














247 


Table IV. 


Prenatal Growth of the Pig Embryo Heart. 


Data from:- 

Lowrey, L.G. 1911. Am. Jour. Anat., Vol.12, pp. 107-158. 


Crown-Rump 

Length. 

Average. 

! (mm. ) 

Total (gross) Body 
Weight. 

Average. 

(gms.) 

Heart, 

Per Cent of 

Body Weight. 

Heart Weight. 

Average. 

(Calculated). 
(gins.) 

15 

0.2919 

4.64 

0.014 

18 

0.701 

3.51 

0.025 

25 

1.7 

3.26 

0.055 

37 

3.25 

2.23 

0.073 

42 

4.97 

2.31 

0.115 

58 

10.33 

2.10 

0.217 

82 

28.2 

1.52 

0.429 

86 

36.38 

1.46 

0.531 

108 

74.3 

0.83 

0.617 

105 

89.8 

0.88 

0.790 

108 

96.2 

0.88 

0.847 

131 

115.2 

0.88 

1.014 

125 

135.1 

0.66 

0.892 

139 

151.1 

0.89 

1.344 

150 

214.3 

0.72 

1.543 

156 

285.4 

0.72 

2.055 

166 

329.3 

0.48 

1.581 

191 

388.9 

0.67 

2.606 

| 215 

456.2 

0.99 

4.516 

242 

718.2 

0.83 

5.961 

262 

727.6 

1.03 

7.494 










































Table IY - A. 


248 


Frequency of endocardial foramina of Thebesian veins, on 
the ventricular surface of the anterior papillary muscle, 
right ventricle. — Adult pig heart. 


Number of ostia per 

anterior papillary muscle 

V 

Frequency 

f 

Incidence 
(f/n) 100 = £ 

0 

2 

2.82 

1 

10 

14.1 

2 

15 

21.05 

3 

15 

21.05 

4 

12 

16.9 

5 

5 

7.1 

6 

4 

5.64 

7 

3 

4.23 

8 

2 

2.82 

9 

2 

2.82 

10 

1 

1.41 

n 

71 

99.94 


Constants:- 

Me 0 -* 1 . ••••••* 3.48 ostia/ant. 

.* 0 - 10ostia/ant. 

Number of specimens.. .= 71 

Average deviation....= 1.72 ostia/ant. 

Coefficient of variation... 3 63.25 per cent 
Standard deviation.= 2.20 ostia/ant. 


papillary muscle, 
papillary muscle. 

papillary muscle. 

papillary muscle. 


Measures of Reliability:- 


Standard error of the mean. = 0.26 ostia/ant. papillary muscle. 





















$ 






249 


Table V. 


Relative alkaline phosphatase activity in the tissues of a 
27 mm. pig embryo. (Logarithmic incubation series). 


Tissues arranged in descending 
order of alkaline phosphatase 
activity. 

Minimum incubation time 

required for a 14 

staining reaction, 
(minutes). 

1. 

Perichondrium. 

1-5 

2. 

Proximal tubule, kidney. 

1-5 

3. 

Choroid plexus. 

1-5 

4. 

Capillaries of brain. 

5-10 

5. 

Muscularis, stomach. 

CJl 

i 

H 

O 

6. 

Adrenal gland. 

5-10 

7. 

Interstitial cells, gonad. 

o 

C\2 

o 

r-| 

8. 

Submucosa, tongue. 

10 - 20 

9. 

Liver sinusoids. 

5-40 (variable) 

10. 

Liver cells. 

10 - 40 (variable) 

U. 

Thyroid. 

40 - 80 

12. 

Mesenchyme of lung. 

40 - 80 

13. 

Dorsal root ganglia. 

160 - 320 

14. 

Skeletal muscle. 

320 - 640 

15. 

Anterior pituitary. 

320 - 640 

16. 

Endocardial endothelium. 

320 - 640 

17. 

Nerve tracts. 

320 - 640 

18. 

Coronary capillaries. 

640 - 1280 (var.) 

19. 

Medulla, brain. 

1280 - 2560 

20. 

Mucosa, small intestine. 

2560 - 5120 

21. 

Myocardium. 

5120 4 









































c 


c 



Results: - Histological Grading of Glycogen In the Pig Embryo Heart. 


250 



to 













<D 













A-V 

Valv 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 















A-V 

Rln 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 



+ 

4- 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 


1 o 

d- 

■d- 

d - 

d- 

d - 

K\ 

d- 

d- 

d- 

K"\ 

K\ 


P P 
<4 P 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

+ 

4 

4 

4 


<U 

hd P 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d* 

m 

d* 

KV 

•d 













o 













c 













•H 

i 

P !§ 
r* 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

X 

<D 

faO U 

P P 
ft < 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d* 

d- 

d- 

KN 

d- 

KV 

-P 







































Q) 













£1 

1 












<D 

o a 












Xi 

p p 












P 

(h P 

P ft 













a <u 

+ 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

J. 

4* 

o 

<U CO 












pj 

> 

p, P) 


d- 

d- 

KV 

kv 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

CM 

pH j 

o 

<L> Cj 












P 

P H 












to 

c d 












<D 

H 












Pi 














<u 













p 













o 













Left 

itri 

4 

4 

+ 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 


d* 

d- 

d* 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d- 

d - 

tn 

CM 


<u 













i> 













Q> 













P 













P O 
,C P 

M 

P P 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4 

4* 

4 






k o 

d- 

d- 


CM 

CM 

H 

H 

o 

o 

O 

O 


> 













•£}’ — 













p 

pH CO g 









ft 

< 

ft 


i c a 

d- 

o 

in 

CO 

o 

LT\ 

VO 

O 

o 

o 

O 


O o 

P 

OJ 

CM 

CM 

K\ 

d- 

IT\ 

vo 

VO 

CM 

CM 


id 










P 

P 

































(a) . Applied Physiology - Wright: Oxford Univ. Press, 7th Ed. 1940. (After Lewis) 

(b) , Wearn, J. T.: The extent of the capillary bed in the heart, 

J. Exp. Med., vol. 47; P. 273, 1928 


251 





























*P 

rH 
















o 

P. 
















O 

P. 



K\ 

rH 

CM 









R 


rH 

P 
















a 

a 


































p 

















•H 

















O 


X 





* * 










H 


bo 

> 




10 










a 


p 

O 




4) 










E 


a 

a 




rH 

10 


CO 







5 







o 

•H 


cd 

4) 






>> 




CM 

rH 


•H 

a 



10 

>» 





X 






to 




* 

cd 

Pi 





a 






<u 

3 



4) 

4) 

O 









__ _ 


to 

cd 

o 

Pi 

Pi 

Pi 

P 









CW. 

CW. 

to 



a» 

P 

O 

O 











cd 


<D 

x> 

•H 

d 

cd 











H 

•H 


d 


•H 

Pi 











O 

■H 

X) 

PS 















•H 

d 


o 

d 

4) 











Pi 


n 















3 


a 



•H 












O 

d 


o 

X) 

p 

4) 











Ph 

cd 

CU 

CO 

Pi 

o 

Jq 












x 

x 

P 

cd 

ps 

p 











O 

p 

p 

a 

O 

X) 












P 





d 

<M 











d 

* 

• 

p 

<P 

o 

o 











•H 

to 

a) 

Pi 

o 

o 






p 

a 






4) 

• 

cd 



d 



o 

4) 

o 






XJ 

H 

P 

4) 

CO 

<p 

o 




rH 

p 

XJ 





4) 

o 

W' 

X 

4) 

o 

•H 



X 

O 

o 

o 





•o 

«H 



p, 


p 



p 

P 

cd 

•H 





•H 

Pi 

(1) 

bO 


4) 

cd 



bo 

CO 

H 

Pi 


KN 

CM 

rH 

> 

P 

P» 

o 

p 

P 

Pj 



d 

>» 

<+H 

4) 





■H 

d 

CO 

X) 


cd 

Pi 



4) 

a 

4) 

a 





■o 

cd 

CO 


Pi 

Pi 

X) 



X 


a 







> 

•H 

p 

PS 













4) 


p 

rH 

O 

XJ 

«k 

• 










x 

.—^ 


pi 

<M 

d 

4) 

Pi 











•H 

4) 

X) 


cd 


4) 










>» 

P 

P> 

cd 

4) 


O 

XI 










cd 

*—* 

X 


X 

* 

P 

Pi 










a 


p 


P 

P 

CO 

o 











<P 

X 

o 


d 

>» 











■p 

O 

5 


d 

4) 

CO 

4) 










Pi 


pi 

co 

p 

P 


CO 










Cd 

CO 

PL, 

4) 


d 

Ph 

Pi 










4> 

4) 


P 


o 

o 

4) 




a 


. 




X 

Pi 

0) 

P 

rH 

o 


> 




d 


O 





x 

X 

Pi 

4> 


X 

4) 




o 


4) 




<u 

P 

p 

4) 

> 

d 

p 

Pi 



o 

•H 


CO 




X 



P< 

p 

CD 

bO 





P 


\ 




p 


— . 

o 

P 

bO 

d 

4) 



4) 

O 



B 

B 

— 


Pi 

> 

Pi 

cd 

O 

<d 

X 

C5 


P 

P 


a* 





4) 

P 

Pi 

P 

o 

rH 

P 



cd 

Xl 






O 

XJ 

>— 


•H 

l» 



o 


a 

q 


CM 


o 

o 


cd 


rH 

P 

rH 

CD 

d 




o 


a 

• 



cd 

o 


cd 

d 

U> 

X 

*H 

a 



o 


O 

o 

1—1 

x- 

Pi 

Pi 

o 

P 

cd 


EH 











PS 

X 


d 

3 

« 


4) 










-P 


CO 

4) 

D* 

4) 


CO 










cd 

•a 

a) 

a 


Pi 

• 

cd 










H 

CO 

Pi 

3 

>» 

P 

4> 

4> 










P 

<u 

X 

X) 

Pi 

p 

P« 

Pi 










O 

•d 

P 

d 

cd 

<P 

CO 

o 










to 

o 

<P 

3 

> 


to 

d 










p 

d 





p 

rl 










a 


P 


CQ 

O 

p 












CD 

to 

4) 

d 



>» 



d 

• 






4) 

x 

a> 

X 

o 

4) 

4) 

P 



0) 

p 






x 

p 

X) 

Eh 

P 

N 

PS 

p 



bO 

d 






•p 


cd 


P 

P 

X 

O 



O 

<u 







p 

o 


P 

CO 

P 

P 



o 

p 


rH 

CM 



>» 

cd 

P. 

• 

X( 


X 

a 



!>a 

d 






r—1 


X 

,-. 

d 

4) 

U 

X 



l —i 

o 






rH 

CO 


CO 

o 

X 

P« 

p 



CJ 

o 






cd 

0) 

a> 

4) 

o 

EH 

PL| 

>s 










d 

u 

X 

X 




X 










O 

x 

p 

Q 

rH 


o 

Pi 










P 

P 


d 

cd 


p 











-P 



cd 

o 

s 


XI 










O 


>s 

5 

P 

o 

rH 

d 




• 






d 

4) 

H 

P 

bO 

H 

cd 

cd 










P 

q 

P 


o 

4) 

•P 











a 

p 

CO 

CO 

rH 

P 

o 

*. 



4) 

• 








cd 

p 

O 


d 

xl 



Pi 

Q) 








rH 

P 

P 

d 


o 



X 

N 










CO 

S 

a 

H 



H 

•H 


pH 

CM 





Xl 

xs 

>s 

o 

o 

Pi 



a 

c0 







p 

d 

d 

X 

X 

Pc 

4) 











* — - 

cd 

cd 

Pi 

CO 

^H 

Pi 
























Pi 

















cd 














• 



rH 

Pi 













4) 



P 

cd 

4) 












P 



O 

rH 

•ra 












X 



P 

P 

d 












P 


rH 

Pi 

O 

p 












a 


cd 

P 

P 

X 














xl 

d 

Pi 

Ph 














O 

4) 

P 

P 














a 

!> 

<1 

a 



















Graph I. 

The relation of percent volume ol* coronary capillaries in 
the right ventricle, to C-R length of pig embryo. 



C-R length of pig embryo, 



































































































































































































































Graph II. 

The relation of percent volume of coronary capillaries in 
the left ventricle, to C-R length or pig embryo. 


253 


* 



“H length or pig embryo 









































































































































































































































Graph III. 

The relation of percent volume of coronary capillaries in 
the interventricular septum, to C-R length of pig embryo. 



R length oi* pig embryo 










































































































































































































































Graph IV. 

The relation of percent volume of coronary capillaries in 
the right auricular appendage, to C-R length of pig embryo. 



C-R length of pig embryo 







































































































































































































































Graph h 256 

The relation of percent volume of sinusoids in the 


right ventricle, to C-R length of pig embryo. 







































































































































































































































Graph VI. 257 

The relation of percent volume or sinusoids in the 


y left ventricle, to C-R length oi pig embryo. 














































































































































































































































Graph VII. 25^ 

The relation of percent volume of sinusoids in the 
y interventricular septum, to C-R length of pig embryo. 


V2 - 


o 

> 

4-5 % 

G 

© 

O 

U 3V 
© 
ft 


/Vo 


C-R length of pig embryo, x mm. 


/3o 


rso 


too 


- 4 - 

t2o 



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































graph IX. 

The relation of sinusoid:capillary ratio in the 
right ventricle, to C-R length of pig embryo. 


26 u 


y 













































































































































































































































Graph X. 2 61 

The relation of sinusoid:capillary ratio in the 
left ventricle, to C-R length or pig embryo. 



































































































































































































































































Graph XI 


262 


The relation of sinusoid:capillary ratio in the 
interventricular septum, to C-R length of pig embryo. 


y 








































































































































































































































































































































Sinusoid:capillary ratio in the right auricular appendage 


Graph XII. 263 
The relation or sinusoid:capillary ratio in the right 
auricular appendage, to C-R length of pig embryo. 

7 


. i 





































































































































































































































































Graph XIII. 

Ratio of capillary densities (right ventricle as to 
left ventricle!, versus C-R length of pig embryo. 


264 


K 

A 


O 

rr> 

rt 


o 

IN 

fN 



‘s 0 iq.isa 9 p ^js^Tideo i o oiq.0j *8T0T,iq.u©A q.j©x:©TOjjq.U 9 A q.tpTH 


H length or pig embryo 






































































































































































































































26 b H 



C~R length of pig embryo 











































































































































































































































Average heart weight, y gma. 







































































































































































































































Mean dimensions of coronary capillary loops, y microns. 


Graph XVI. 267 

Curves illustrating the changes in mean dimensions 
of coronary capillary loops during prenatal life. 



























































































































































































































































Standard deviation (coronary capillary loops), y microns. 


Graph XVII ■ 26'^ 

Curves illustrating the degree of variability of 
dimensions of coronary capillary loops, during 
prenatal life. Standard deviation (coronary cap¬ 
illary loops), versus C-R length of pig embryo. 

y 

































































































































































































































































































26 !) 


Graph XVIII. 

Curve illustrating the changes in percent 






































































































































































































































Graph XIX 


270 


Curve illustrating the changes in percent 
vascularization ot the wall of the pulmonary- 
artery, during prenatal life. 


y 











































































































































































































































Number of sfnusoido-capillary connections, 


Oraph XX. 271 


Curves illustrating the distribution of 





































































































































































































































272 


Graph XXI. 

The relation of C-R length of pig embryo to the per cent 
of total arterial course which is Intramural (anterior 
descending branch of left coronary artery). 


Data derived from 140 hearts of Series A and B. 




































































































































































































































Graph XXII. 


27.3 


y 

too* 


>>*> 

0 

ft 

d 

aj 

ft 

o So - 
.d 

-P 

5JD 

d 
0 



■p 

o 

-p 


o 6o 


-P 

d 

0 

o 

d 

0 5© 
ft 

>> 


0 

0 




Yo 


O 

O 



ft Zo 

O 

,d 

ft 


so 

d 



The relation of C-R length of pig embryo to the per cent 
of total arterial course which is intramural (posterior 
descending branch of right coronary artery). 

Data derived from 140 hearts of Series A and B. 



I 1 , I I i 1 I i — ' - J - L 1 y 

Lto 5 o Go 7o Sfo 7o /bo no 'U* ilo No 15a l(,o ^170 

C-R length of pig embryo, x mm. 


0 


j. 

lo 


2 a 


3 o 















































































































































































































































































































































—,— ( — 





























































































© 



n- 

n 

✓ 


4*/4 

35.o 

o.t 

•51 .3 

L, 

33$ 

02 

147 

73.d 

26.? 

0.2 

111 





3.0 

l.fiLf 

*7 

2 

0 

0 

4 




l~ 







e • 

y 




















3 

2 

0 

0 

5 





-4.1 v 


/oo 

-/Oo_ 



e 

/ 


l+H 

zu 

1-7 

Ub 

774 

24-0 

14 

(5.0 

7o.6 

274 

0-0 

- 





o.Jtf 

1-01 












- )oo 

loo 



D- 

y 































no_ 

. /OO 



e- 

y 


72.6 

m 

0.0 

- 

15.b 

m 

0.0 

- 

7M 

25.4 

0.0 

- 





0.0 

LIZ 

0 

O 

0 

0 

0 







/0 0 

loo _ 



F 

y 


714 

2U 

0-0 

- 

lt-% 

Zl.z 

0.6 

- 

43.0 

320 

lO-O 

_ 





0.0 

lol 












_/-6_0_ 

- loo 



6- 

y 































,00 

loo _ 


Zo 

A- 

y 































_/Q_Q_ 

1#\ A 

/oo_ 



B- 

y 


?n 

25,2 

0 0 

_ 

73.t 

2 b- 4 

0-0 

_ 

/fc.z 

xii 

0-0 

_ 





0.0 

0 . 9 s 












- /jOlO__ 

J A A 

. loo 



c 

/ 































_ uw _ 

_ too 



r- 

/ 































/ 00 

.no 

IOU _ _ 

lOt) 



e- 

/ 































-f-O-U- 

/ oj2 

_/ V/U_ 

loo 


F- 

y 


#4 

30. H 

oz 

ISa. 

bn 

27.2 

/■4 

15.2 

77.* 

22.2 

0.0 

. 





0.0 

lt>9 

1 

0 

0 

C? 

1 







_loo_ 

loo 


21 

4- 

✓ 


7?4 

2o.o 

c-b 

33.3 

Hi 

454 

04 


51.2 

14.0 

2? 

5.71 





;-5o 

}.3o 












100 

Ion 



5' 

y 


iu 

/tf.4 

2-0 

7-2 

?2M 

/5.o 

2-4 

5.77 

75-0 

154 

44 

233 





0.77 

12 3 

5 

Z 

z 

0 

7 







loo 

loo _ 




✓ 































loo _ 

loo 


23 

Pi 
































_ loo _ 

loo 



5 

✓ 































/oo 

loo 



c- 

✓ 


I*# 

25.0 

1.2 

20.7 


474 

1-2 

4-5 

?b.? 

22.6 

1 . z 

12.3 





). 00 

M*/ 

7 

l 

0 

O 

y 







_7od_ 

loo 



D 

y 


m 

27-^ 

/.% 

13.6 

33. 1 

15.2 

/•!/ 

A?5l5 

774 

20.4 

2o 

/o-3 





/■27 

Ul 












_12,5_ 

_ loo 



E- 

✓ 


76 z 

23-2 

O'b 

35.7 

So2 

17.* 

2 0 

57c 

7?.o 

7»-4 

M 

4-7 





0 -3o 

I.30 

V 

1 

0 

O 

// 







liL 

_ /Oft_ 


Ztf 

A- 

✓ 


755 

Z/.0 

3-2 

fc 55 

77-4 

//.$ 

!o-t 

j./l 

772 

154 

54 

2.-35 





0.30 

1-75 












ioo _ 

/Oo _ 



Z 

c- 

y 


731 

77 </ 

234 

20-3 

32 

l.$ 

737 

l/.&b 

75.5 

44 

I3.4 

4-4 

2/21 

7^.o 

u% 

0.2. 

7o7 





0.# 

0.31 

tf* 

1-53 












/o 6 

. ioo_ 



y 



2.3*1 

77? 

fro 

3-2 

574 





7 

<? 

% 


2.4 







loo 

/oo_ 


25 

p 

y 


l hi 

75.o 

234 

U 

J</.b3 

52-2 

15.4 

y-o 

72 

71 

75-4 

2)4 

0-0 






0-73 

1-bo 












55.7 

$Y5 


■27 

6- 

fl* 

0 

C 

y 

y 

y 

y 


7M 

71- 2 

72- 0 

77*/ 

21M 

27.0 

25.? 

2'4 

a 

22. 

l-z 

'17 

/5.0 

>'•7 

m 

“&0 

772 

75.4 

774 

12 0 

(5-? 

n-o 

17.4 

5.0 

20 

5o 

2.70 

?4o 

3.56 

4.53 

0U 

75.5 

774 

f.5 

14.0 

20.2 

21-4 

154 

2% 

1-0 

0% 

0■% 

5.7) 

20.2 

Z7.o 

23.0 





0.36 

0 fft 

O.ft 

0- Vo 

1.75 

W 

/■fz 

1.07 












/oo 

744 

/oo 

?f2 

/OO 

loo 

00 

>t>0 




























































































































































































© 


1iA 

23X 

3-0 

7.fb 

7b .0 

(3? 

fo 2 

r*s 4 

21.0 

3-b 

5.7?3 





0*9 

1 1 1 

IS* 

2t.t 

3x 

6.75 

7?.«f 

/3-*/ 

$.z 

/.t3 

L 

■ 17-2 

7-b 

12b 





037 

’•If 

ISl 


















7to 

22.H 

3 b 

6.21 

#2.0 

*3.4 

$A 

/.o<| 

lot 

23.4 

3.2. 

7-3/ 





f)A:i 

2.-33 

7/.? 

22.0 

2-2 

/#-0 


/o.o 

7-6 

l.3l 

7*1 

)2? 

f.t 

Hi 





0. 2? 

2.2o 

74 

7?? 

7b.? 

2o.fc 

u 

«f4 

HI 

VSo.lf 

75, b 

m 

Hit 

g.o 

Jof 

2.05 

7?i 

HA 

J3-X 

/b .0 

S-2 

lt> 

m 

i.yj 





O. 33 

P. 5f 

l.?V 

/.2 b 


lib 

5b 

.? 

73-6 

Zo.o 

i-4 

3.13 

13.0 

/?.£) 

u 

z.o 





Mf 

o.y.3 

%b 

j?.2 

2-2 

f.2b 

77-0 

llo 

b.o 

2 ¥3 

m 

;y.5 

k-(o 

2.ZH 





0.37 

".07 

h-b 

m 

/o-b 

].t- 

77-2 


12-2 

0701 

7«.a 

9-z 

/2-b 

0-73 





A*7 

2.07 

H-Z 

Jl-ST 

f.O 

/•bO 

ft* 

?■? 

?.f 

fob 

9.0 

4.4 

o?b 





1 

os* 

1 

i.?b 

7V o 

lb A 

9A 

J.77 

7?.4 

7.2. 

M 4 

0.54 

75.0 

9.% 

/5.2 

P.b*/ 





D.10 

2.31 




















2^.0 

4.b 

60^ 

751 

'%.b 

f.z 

7.-01 

73.0 

/<?.£ 

7.2 

2,75 





0.5 b 

.A Si 

7,.c 

24,0 

5o 

4/0 

73? 

/fe.b 

7-6 

1.73 

?2.5 

190 

?.2. 

2-32 





O.fz 

IAS 

7?.? 

2o-2. 

(p.o 

5-?i 

7f.O 

7? 

1 22. 

0 ?t3 

7?0 

loA 

/o.z 

/.Ob 





DA 9 

2 Ob 

7z ^ 

22.0 

5.b 


<?0.£ 

7. •' 

UA 

o.b7 

77.2 

Ho 

//•I 

1J.43 





0A<f 

Z%% 

75.* 

It.1 

i.o 

2.'- 


. 

,oA 

0.?3 

7?# 

Its 0 

/0.2 

o.y<? 





-0.77 

z.ot 

M 

it.? 

16 


Si.<i 

4 

12.0 

0.55 

1 ?.fc 

! 1A 

10 .b 

I.ll 





0- 7z 

7? 55 

75-' 

ISS 

f.l 

!•: ■ 

$Q.$ 

bA 

lZ.$ 

0.5 9 

77.2. 

is 

iS.o 

0. 52- 





0.b? 

2-?7 

IS.c 

l/.o 

7.o 


Si* 

U 

it.2, 

&?4 

7?.* 

9* 

Ho 

o.?4 





0.6? 

2-0? 



















7b t> 

n 7 

6. b 

2 .bi 

?2$ 

3.1 

13-1 

0.2 b 

fob 

S.o 

HA 

0.41 





oAi 


l3-$ 

15.0 

//.X 

1.34 

7?i 

3S 

/b-b 

0.23 

77? 

to 9 

ISA 

144 





O.il 


?2-i 

IS* 

/2-1 

U5 

77? 

5-? 

Hi 

O.Vo 


v> 

Ib-o 

0.?f 





OSS 

2.^2- 


31 


22 . 


2 | 










276 


y?./ 

I On 












i S'v_ _ 











ioA 

loo 

A 

23 

0 








%S.i 

92.0 











£ 3.0 _ 

—nz. 

loo __ 











?I6 











fa A 

/no 











92,1 

/oo 











m 

f SJ so 

j no_ 

f 

/7 

0 _ 

5b 







— u-i—f. — 

?3.6 

/oo 











p-o 


6 

32 . 

0 

bo 







%L 

n.x 











iLl 

loo 

/5 

/£ 

0 

91 







<&5AL.. 

SIS— 











loo 

/oo_ 











-414— 

/oo 











HA— 

/oo 

/3 

z 1 

0 

55 







_ M- 

loo 











_?55.. 

m 











7?.' 

/oo 





J 0.31 

1).0D0 

0. 00 

on 

0.000 

0, 00 

1?J_ 

'00 





J 0.3b 

7 0 5o 

7 o. ‘/o 

^ o.s<{ 

t 0 .59 

D.oobx 

0. ooz^ 

0 . 000 

0.00*5 

0.00 2*7 

/. 44 

tt?f 

0.00 

0.5x 

<?.*// 

0-36 

OAI 

0 AS 

o-m 

0.53 

0 . oooi 

0.0010 

0.000 

0 .000 

0.0 Do 

a. II 

0.3? 

0.00 

0.00 

0. 00 

f3-6 

15-/ 

U-2 

73-/ 

.«/ 

;0O 

.^Zqq_ 

1 00 

2t.\ 

c l5Ak — 

/oo 

/oo 












































































































































































































© 















Si 

A- 

¥ 





























277 






6- 

J 






























_ ¥56 

ZLS _ 



c- 

P- 

J 

J 


p.fc 

77,0 

/7-LO 

Hi 

n 

5U 

/.fo 

IS) 

i\* 

52.4 

*o 

¥■6 

Id$ 

lit 

o.n 

034 

IS-o 

\iu 

n 

(26 

/o.z 

0.75 

m 





0.7/ 

0.67 

2 20 

3,22 






/_ J ¥3 

O.ooo 

0-00 

o.ff 

0.060 

O' 00 

60 .^ 

/oo aJ 

- ? 0,6 _ 

fi T 



£• 

J 































6 2.5 

77.g 



F- 

</ 

























P-¥.7 

0, oo3z. 

oGS 1 


0 . 0 00 8 



Ho 

rt- 

J 


p3.6 

U 


D-St 

m 

5.0 

10 -2- 

o.n 

no 

u 

?•¥ 

OlD 





fliif. 

/5a 

56 

7 

5 

j 

¥7 




0.33 


0 . i 4 / 

07.2 

-2i97- 

J, , 



B* 

j 


p-2 

fi 

U 

MS 

m 

f.2 

/O.2. 

0.61 

in 

56 

Hi 

05 a 





o.f¥ 

U8 












* ^0 

72.5 

— X6.2—— 



C- 

J 

























/ o.l }7 

0.001 (s. 

0. 3¥ 

0 , 5 ^ 

0 0 0 3 0 

r> Ciu 


77 3 


Hi 

A- 

J 






























U* *3*t 

- ia 

^£4 

— {MP - 

7H-? 



B- 

j 































87.7 

tip 

/n a ‘"i 



c • 

J 


!7¥c 

m 

H-b 

\.2A 

no 

¥•£ 


0,26 

IP 

b.O 

lb.2 

0.31 





o.6¥ 

3.00 






z_027i - 

0.0 ifS 

3-Cl 

0 55 

0.0076 

/. 3 ^ 

—— 

Uf _ 



P- 


R.I 

J 
























„ 0.5S 

0. oofs 

0.83 

0.56 

0000 

00 

77-¥ 

/OO ; 



£- 


R-I 

/ 






























755 

73./ 


¥5 

fl- 

J 



































B- 

J 






■ 

























%S.5_ 

/OO _ 



C* 

J 































it 2- 

/oo ;.■! 



H • 

J 


5/.z 

/e.o 

n 

/./V 

.'5.7 

¥5 

?.£ 

n.HI 

nH 


tO- 2. 

0.73 





o.io 

-2o? 













?</■%. 



£. 

J 


C5.D 

1 o 

u 



V.z 

Id. o 

oyz 


£g 

££ 

066 





0%0 

/.67 

6¥ 

2 

¥ 

/ 

7/ 







652- 




F- 

/ 


7?.2. 

r' J 

13 J, 

C.fco 

53 i 

3.o 

Hz 

0.13 

%5.o 

3.z 

y/5 

0 . z7 





/■Oi 

273 






/ 0.74 

O.oo 3b 

0-18 

0.5£ 

O .005 6 


_A1 - 

/oo 




J 


&>.f 

_ 

f-6 

(o.o 

0.% 

/2.0 

U 

I 3 .H 


&,6 

56 

US 

(7. ¥7 





P. 7 ? 

^■0? 






tQH4 

o. oo£¥ 

7.71 

P-73 

O.O 02.0 

o-z7 


56./ _. 


$0 

//• 

J 


7?.¥ 


/¥• o 

9.^7 

7fi 

6.2. 

IHO 

o.v^ 

fo.H 

¥6 

15° 

0 .?/ 





I. 00 

/.06 















55 

Pi- 

B- 

J 

J 

R-I. 

J 

111 

?•¥ 

/J.2. 

D-V 

ft. 2. 

3-6 

13. 2- 

0-27 

i n 


11.i 

O. 2-5 





/.£>£> 

2.6/ 












fU- 

ifeZ_ 

f¥5_ = 

?¥J _ 



o- 

J 

]l. (, 

ID. 6 

I3.¥ 

0-1S 

52-6 

M 

130 

0.5f 

n.i 

5-4? 

Hi 

0 . 3 ? 





I.03 

2.37 






J o.Sf 

O.O/SH 

z./7 

A 00 

O.OOS8 


__¥i? 

/Oo 

S 2 .S 



£• 


L.I. B 

J 
























J o.f* 

O.oofo 


0 S 0 

o.ooV> 

p.7 ? 

HSJ 

>0.2 























































































































































































£l 


too 

ft- 

y 


















1 



8- 

y 


72.6 

U 

19. b 

Oft 7 

fao 

a.fe 

IU ft 

0.1s 

fzft 

Si.o 

H* 

3.2 

lift 

031 





/,°l 

2-6x 


c- 

y 


?2.x 

Ho 

13$ 

0.2.1 

?/.6 

4.o 

lift 

0.2? 

13-8 

0.23 





Oil 

1.00 


p. 

j 
















£• 


R.i. 

y 




















F- 

✓ 





















6- 


ai. 

y 




















H- 

y 


77-4 

w 

13.8 

0-L 

ft.* 

5-0 

m 

035 

11,0 

5.x 

Iftf. 

0.3) 





0.97 

lib 


I- 

/ 


Soft 

4.x 

15ft 

oxi 

7X1 

2-f 

ft.o 

0.1? 

Soft 

Ift 

7$: 

O./o 





‘ 1 / 

_ j.03 

J.5o 


J- 

y 





















K- 

/ 


11.0 

ft 2- 

11$ 

0.25 

&/.& 

Zz 

Ib.o 

o.iH 

Sift 

Ift 

1 7.4 

0,lo 





1,05 

JJj 


L- 


R.X. 

J 




















M- 

y 


in 

3-x 

Lib 

6.1b 


Zx 

11.0 

0 .13 

Soft 

2ft 

/U 

0 . 1 7 





_ 7./5 

145 

bS 

ft- 

y 


m 

S- 4 / 

\ft.2 

O.tf 

fo.O 

/.f 

15.2 

0.12 

IftL 

3-0 

173 

ft/7 

%.t 

7 , 0.0 

1,0 

5,00 

1.20 

131 


P- 

y 





















c- 

y 


ioi 

3.^/ 

lb.P 

0M 

W.f 

l.o 

Mi¬ 

0.01 

%l .0 

1ft 

I5x 

O./F 

11$ 

21.8 

1.2 

,5.x 


?fto 


P- 

j 









u l 












E- 

j 





















F- 

J 





















Qr- 

j 


IS.to 

5.0 

lift 

0.3 r; 

m. 

1.8 

ll, ft 

o.ll 

7,o x 

Ift 

IS ft 

0. tffc 

75.2 

21.2 

3-6 


1.00 

Z-18 

10 

ft ■ 

6- 


L.l. 

R.l. 
















J-u 1 




c. 

J 


m 

6? 

IU 

0-37 

JSH 

1% 

lift 

0-15 

Uo 

Ift 

>n 

0/0 

7F0 

lift 

lb 

5.11 

Oftft 

2-13 

%x 

ft- 

j 


n% 

4Z 

n.b 

i .it 

Soft 

1.2 

lift 

O.DJ 

m 

2-o 

11-8 

0-lo 


lift 

fto 

ft.Ss 

o-U 

343 

% 

ft- 

j 


m 

fo 

I1.S 

0.2? 

?/.o 

eft 

IS ft 

t.O / 

m 

1-0 

ns 

0.10 

7Vf 

22. D 

3.x 

bn 

0.96 

/x.5 


B- 

C- 

J 

L.l' 

in 

3.t 

\u 

0-20 

S/ZO 

oft 

m 

0.02. 

Sift 

i-ft 

no 

0.6S 

m 

m 

3.0 


1. CO 

u 1 


P- 

j 


Tar.o 

U 

IU 

0-/5 


1.0 

in- 

O.0£ 

%<o 

1.0 

nft 

0.6b 

IU 

22? 

3.0 

1-ftl 

1.05 

i-t . 


£. 

F 

j 

R.l. A 

in 

34 

lt.0 

0.2/ 

?3.o 

O.j 

IU. 

0.011 

Soft 

04 

m 

0,02, 

%-z 

Ifft 


mJ 

l.ll 

ft.]5 




J 





278 


i/2.3 

cjLjjf 










23.g 


li 

lb 

0 

III 







53. Z 

- 0 2'J-- 











27-3 

_ 

"77 / 











■11.1 

-txj- 

(,2-t 











l2n 

9,17 _ 











211 

76.2 











34.x 

69 .7 

IZ 

f 

0 

% 







0,0 

ftl.ft 











21.1 

_ fts.C, _ 





Z Loo 

0,0 2 fto 

2-fto 

/■ft 5 

fl.no/ 6> 

O.ll 

21ft 

7 7-5 











__ ft0.5 _ 

56-2 











31.1 

5-7.5 





! 1-38 

0 .0 2x4 

l- f 0 2- 


D, 00 lb 

Q.I3 

56-ft 

%-/_ 











fto 






L.L13. 

0.0 357 

JLI£l 

L Sft 

O.Oftjl 

2-b3 

21.6 

_ 

ft-S.ft 





i_L3± 

0.O33& 

2.-SL 

2-13 

0. O D3X 



c 3.0 I 











_$~3J.. 

1 

?i.f . 











^U- 

lfl-6 





/ 0.73 

Q.oftftS 

Lift 

1,35 

0,00 fto 

0,5ft 

. . C_3 ... 

21.5 





/ O-82- 

O.0X2I 

213 

l.l 3 

0,0256 

2.27 

33? 

52.2_ 






f ^ 





- ^5- . . 

2. 

1$ 

21 

III 

J l.l 6 

0.05 60 

ft-S3 

t.OX- 

0,00ft 0 

0.3ft I 

-34.... 






11-43 

0-l5oH 

/p.SI 

2.23- 

0/232 

5-5S 

nm~ 

^r.5- 











13.3 


‘ t 

3b 

u 

2x6 

L /,o*~ 

0.03X0 

3- Ift 

l./ft 

O.00 lx 

0 -h\ 

LSI 

7o-z 





f hzl 

0.01 ft ft 

to 4ft 

l-ftft 

0.0 0ftg 

0-3 3 

_ <7.0 

3o4 _ j 









11-2 

6-2.6 





{ 1.35 

0.O33& 

2 ft ft 

l-Hft 

0-0032 

°.xx j 

lit 

5?z 





1 /,</<) 

O.o3 oft 

2-01 

1-91 

o-oofto 

o.ftl I 

00 

5/,7 


















































































































































































9 7 0 

too 

no 

p) 

&■ 

fl 

J 

J 

J 


in 

1 U 

17* 

hz 

2 .z 

o4 

n.o 

H-t 

22-V 

0.11 

0 .11 

ft 01 ? 

h* 

109 

7’t 

0 . 

h 

D.z 

20.0 

It* 

230 

0.01 

0.55 

DM 

Ub 

in 

%> 

l.b 

i-t 

0.0 

n.t 

lo.z 

Zlf 

0.01 

0.0 b 

0.00 

in 

ju 

7M 

ITS 

1%J 

H* 

5-0 

U 

f 0 

3.5b 

Ul 

w 

^ r- 0 

-~© 0 

"i «> u? 

llo. O 

2-Zo 

2.00 






L /.Si 

0 - 1072 - 

♦ 

S-?z 

- L32L 

<>4 

0.33 

17 z 

3SJ 

lf.% 

37/ 

-JILL— 

L a c, 

/4e 

/7o 

fl- 

ft- 

J 

J 


75V 

%* 

n 

2l.o 

23.Z 

0.1? 

OtZb 

7U 

m 

u 

04 

26.V 

■22.0 

0 . 01 $ 

0.0// 

}1.0 

77? 

Az. 

04 

11.S 

21.1 

D.ob 

O.oz 

%1 

in 

!b(o 

111 

7-o 

u 

1.31 

1.37 

1,03 

its 

l.z 5 

IJo 






J 1.14 

J V-?i 

Q.U52- 

0 - /oos 

2 -zl 

4*1 

7-5o 

o-o(,z4 

0-3l 36 

US 

4, IS 

7b 4 

00 •'0 

7o,fe ,• 

fo,3 

■ZIO 

fi 

J 


n$ 

°4 

%\.s 

0 . 01 $ 

m 

o.y 

22,1 

0 .OZ-] 

1U 

0-1 

214 

0 . 0 L 

75M 

13.1 

ll.z 

/./* 

o.n 

0.67 






J V-43 

4. 5z3>8 

53 77 

/2?? 

4. &! So 

35 S3 







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































T— T ~ 





























































































































iHfli 





Figures 85 to 88. - Stereoscopic Photomicrographs. 

* 

Each stereogram consists of two separation pictures. 
These when viewed through a stereoscope, combine to 
produce an illusion of depth. Sinusoidal recesses, 
regressive changes in sinusoids, and sinusoido- 
capillary connections are realistically depicted by 
the method. 


M 






Fig. 83. Stereogram. 

Pig embryo, 25 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with Tieman’s soluble blue. 
Transverse 100 ji celloidin section from the apical third 
of the left ventricle; X 72. 

Sinusoids form an extensive three-dimensional network of 
slit-like spaces terminating peripherally in numerous blind, 
branching, club-shaped recesses. Vertically, they follow 
the spiral direction of the surrounding muscle trabeculae. 







Fig. 84. Stereogram. 

Pig embryo, 30 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with Tieman’s soluble blue. 
Transverse 100 }i celloidin section from the mid-ventricular 
region of the heart; X 72. 

A portion of the interventricular septum is shown. Sinusoids 
of the right and left ventricles communicate freely. 

Injection material has entered the adjacent capillary bed, 
(centre), by way of sinusoido-capillary connections. 






Fig. 85. Stereogram. 

Pig embryo, 140 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with Tieman’s soluble blue. 
Transverse 100 celloidin section from the middle third of 
the right ventricle; X 72. 

The injected capillaries, shown below, communicate with an 
adjacent sinusoid. Patent stretches of sinusoids are re¬ 
duced in number and complexity. Note their square-cut ends. 











Fig. 87. Stereogram. 

Pig. embryo, 55 mm. (Series C). 

Ventricular chambers injected with Tieman r s soluble blue. 
Capillary vessels are only partially filled. 

Transverse 100 ji celloidin section from the apical third 
of the right ventricle; X 45. 

Coronary capillaries supply the muscle trabeculae, and in 
so doing, they interdigitate intimately with the regressing 
sinusoids. 







Fig. 88. Stereogram. 

Pig embryo, 40 mm. (Series C). 

Injection by way of the coronary arteries. 

Transverse 100 jx celloidin section, through the base of 
the aorta; X 35. 

The right and left coronary arteries are shown as they take 
origin from the aorta. At this stage, both the pulmonary 
artery and aorta are avascular. The pulmonary conus, how¬ 
ever, is well-supplied with capillaries. 




































