
THIS SOCIAL CtUiLlX IHILKIM PHOGaaM 
aWD IMS aLSAHTA IAAASUaY HaALCHAS 













UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and do recommend to the School of Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled f, The Social Credit Interim 
Program and the Alberta Treasury Branches", submitted by 
Bruce Allen Powe, B*A., in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Arts* 


Professor 



Professo 


Professo 



Date (//nU&f, && 









THE UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


THE SOCIAL CREDIT INTERIM PROGRAM 
AND THE ALBERTA TREASURY BRANCHES 


A DISSERTATION SUBMITTED 
TO THE SCHOOL OP GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 
DEPARTMENT OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 


BY 

BRUCE ALLEN POWE 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April 1951 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



i. 


https://archive.org/details/socialcreditinteOObruc 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


I am indebted to Mr. R. G. Brownie, administrative 
supervisor of the Alberta Treasury Branches, whose 
cooperation and infinite patience made the preparation 
of this thesis possible. I would also like to express my 
appreciation to Mr. A. K. Olive, superintendent of the 
Treasury Branches, for permission to use the Treasury ~ 

Branch records (excluding, of course, those of a confidential 
nature), to Mr. R. E. Browne, investment supervisor, Mr. 

R. A. Raisbeck, chief accountant, other members of the 
Treasury Branch head office staff for their assistance on 
technical details, and to Mr. G. A. Clash, chairman of 
the Provincial Marketing Board who provided the information 
on the Marketing Board organizations. Except where obherwise 
specified the opinions expressed on the following pages are 
those of the writer. 

The helpful advice and assistance of Mr. E. J. Hanson, 
Assistant Professor of Political Economy, and other members 
of the Political Economy Department, at the University of 
Alberta, is also gratefully acknowledged. 



, ' . • • 

.' -i T 

■ ■ ■■,--m ©j^rirr* '.»;m rcr,jtrj-ri^qor.o 

■ ■ - ... , ■ " ■ - l* 

, ■: : JV '"^ , 

. .... ; ' .*/ ■, ■ ■ '■ , ■ ' 

■ ■ \ t .■_ 1 i , • ' -r ■■ i> - ‘ ■ i! '. 1 " ■- 

t ' . - » 

: " . •> »' ‘ • ' : 1 • - 

. « •' - t 

. t . . . • 

«• : . ... .V : J 

• . . ■ ■ ' ■ i; ' ; 

. ' • ! 0 ' f - .-t w:ii: .*. ;:i 

, ; ■■ ■ - 

t ■ 




TABLE OP CONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION.. i 

CHAPTER 

I. ALBERTA: THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND.. 1 

Characteristics of a Pioneer Econoray ....... 2 

Transportation and Other Costs ...•»•»••••». 4 

The Costs of Mechanization ... 6 

Marketing Problems and Organizations ....... 9 

The Role of Government ..................... 15 

The Burden of Long-Term Gredit.. 16 

Short-Term Credit and the Banks ........... 18 

Collapse of the Farm Economy, 1930 ......... 28 

The Economic Background and Western Politics 34 

II. SOCIAL CREDIT MEASURES IN ALBERTA, 1935-1938 

Preliminary Measures ....................... 40 

The Credit House Act ... 43 

Alberta Social Credit Act. 45 

Revival of Disallowance .................... 52 

The Bill of Rights, 1946 ................... 58 

Prosperity Certificates .................... 59 

III. THE INTERIM PROGRAM: FIRST PHASE (1938-1941) 

The Legal Framework ........................ 73^ 

The First Branches ...... 81 

Forms of Withdrawal .. 84 

Certified Non-negotiable Transfer Vouchers . 85 

The Non-negotiable Transfer Vouchers ....... 88 

Merchants * Accounts .. •••••••••.» 92 

The '’Basic Rate* ........................... 93 

Results of the Voucher System .............. 97 

The 3 % Consumers* Bonus 101 & 

Savings Accounts .. 108 

Treasury Branch Financing .................. Ill 

Imperial Bank as a ’’Clearing Bank’’ ......... 113 

First Loans to the Marketing Board .. 116 

Conclusions on the First Phase .. 117 




















































TABLE OP CONTENTS 


(Continued) 

Page 

IV. THE INTERIM PROGRAM; SECOND PHASE (1941-1945) 127 

Transition Period of One Month .129 

Operation of the 1941 System; 

1o The Bonus . 133 

2 0 The 1941 Voucher System. 136 

3. Goods Replacement Cash Orders ........ 139 

4. Trade Claims Control Board ........... 141 

5. Operation of the Accounts ............ 145 

6. Demand and Term Savings Accounts ..... 149 

7. Loaning Policies ..... 151 

Disadvantages of the 1941 System.. 154 

Difficulties With the Vouchers ... 155 

The Changes Made in 1943 ................... 159 

Retention of the Vouchers .................. 163 

Summary and Conclusions .................... 172 

V. TREASURY BRANCH LOANING POLICIES.. 179 

Outline of General Loaning Policies ........ 189 

Loans Guaranteed by the Province ........... 192 

Treasury Branch Loans Compared With Bank 

Loans .. 195 

Administration of Loaning Policies ......... 202 

Reserve for Bad and Doubtful Debts ......... 204 

Loans * Investments and Profitability ....... 208 

Summary and Conclusions .................... 211 ^ 

VI. TREASURY BRANCH AGENCIES AND OTHER SERVICES ... 223 

Other Treasury Branch Services .......230 

VII. THE PROVINCIAL MARKETING BOARD .. 234 

Activities of the Marketing Board. 236 

Subdivision of the Board *s Activities ...... 238 

Financing of the Marketing Groups .......... 241 

Financing of Transactions .. 243 

Summary and Conclusions ... 245 ^ 

VIII. CONCLUSIONS. 252 

I. The Interim Program ... 252 

II. The Treasury Branches .. 264 



































( OriiJD.i JTI C-V- ; 




C t ' - ’S' 





.1 V/-. r.'SJ*" .. ‘:j.v -1 • . 




r 






) ; . ": v[ ' -J- M •••• > . r .1- ■' ..... *> :■ 

* iy y. .. \ • , J f.V Xi J7 .. 

. „ . . : : fL ! 































TABLE OF CONTENTS 


(Continued) 


Page 

APPENDICES . 289 

et seq 

A. A Review of Social Credit Theory 
A-l: The $25 Per Month Dividend 

B. A Note on the Treasury Branches 
Accounting System 

C* Analysis of a Treasury Branches Balance 
Sheet 

D. The Alberta Banking Powers Acts of 1940 
and 1944 















:- ' 


til* 




. 



J.e 

£ ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ • 




TABLE 


LIST OP TABLES 


Page 

I* Average Wheat Production Per Capita 1926-1930 4 

II* Transporting, Handling and Selling Costs of 

Canadian Wheat, 1931 .... 5 

III* Tractor Sales in Alberta, 1927-1936 .. 8 

IV. Estimated Farm Indebtedness of the Prairie 

Provinces, 1931 ..... 19 

V. Price of Wheat per Bushel in Alberta for Various 
Periods, 1910-1936 ..* * 29 

VI. Alberta Treasury Branches: Transactions on a 

Consumers Account. 90 

VII. Detailed Transactions on a Treasury Branch 

Consumer 1 s Account, 1938-1941 System.. 126 

VIII. A Comparison of the Transfer Vouchers Issued 
per Month in December 1943 and September 1950 
in Six Alberta Towns .. 169 

IX. Treasury Branch Accounting System After the 

1941 Changes . .. 176 

X. Alberta Treasury Branches: Growth of Deposits 
and Loans; Vouchers and Cash Orders Issued, 

1941 to 1950 ...... ... 178 

XIo Estimated Reserve Ratios Maintained by Treas¬ 
ury Branches, 1941-1950 .. 187 

XII. Classification of Treasury Branch Loans 

According to Purpose, as at March 31, 1950 .. 191 

XIII. Alberta Treasury Branches: Effects of Lend¬ 
ing and Investment on Revenue and Expenditure, 
1943-1950 . ..... 206 

XIV. Total Deposits Received by Treasury Branch 

Agencies for Calendar Year 1949 ... 226 

















LIST OP EXHIBITS 


EXHIBIT Page 

I. Illustration of Non-negotiable Certificate 

Form as Devised by William Aberhart .. 47 

IIo Treasury Branch Non-negotiable Transfer Voucher: 

Form Used up to February 15, 1941.87a 

III* Non-negotiable Transfer Voucher: Form used 

from February 1941 to September 15, 1945 ...... 135 

IV. Goods Replacement Cash Order, 1941-1943 .... 138 

V. Non-negotiable Transfer Voucher: Form Used 

from September 15, 1943 to April 25, 1945 ..... 160 

VI. Treasury Branch Cash Order (present form) ..... 166 

VII. Non-negotiable Transfer Voucher (present form) 171 

VIII. Memorandum of Agreement (Merchants Contract) 

Form Used From 1938 to February 1941 .......... 286 

IX. Memorandum of Agreement (Merchant ! s Contract 

C-4) Form Used from February 1941 to September 
1943 ...... 287 

X. Depositors Savings (Term) Account Agreement 

Form Used up to 1945 ... 288 

MAPS 

I. Map of Alberta Showing Location of Treasury 

Branches, Agencies, and Sub-branches .. 233 

































- 





INTRODUCTION 


It is perhaps somewhat of a paradox that the chief interest 
shown in a monetary reform movement such as the Social Credit 
Party has been centred on the constitutional, political and 
psychological aspects of its history. There are probably two 
economic reasons for this outlook: (1) the Social Credit party 
in Alberta was not able to launch its programs on anything like 
the scope outlined on the political platform or in the disallowed 
statutes, and (2) the basic economic programs carried out by the 
government to relieve public and private debt were based on 
prairie tradition rather than social credit theory* 

Doctrinaire social credit legislation carried out by the 
Alberta legislature between 1936 and 1938 aroused interest and 
study chiefly through the constitutional conflict between these 
statutes and the B.N.A. Act* Politically, the Social Credit 
victory in 1935 was a fascinating study of another wave of 
popular protest characteristic of the western Canadian region in 
times of depression. Closely related to this feature was the 
psychological impact of the evangelist methods of William 
Aberhart and his followers on the peoples of Alberta imbued with 
varied racial, religious and cultural backgrounds. 

Except for the short-lived scrip experiment in 1936-37 the 
social credit economic programs of the Alberta government have 
received little attention outside of the province. But in 1938, 
after all other attempts had been thrown back by federal 
disallowance, the Alberta government embarked on a modified 









y : 

■ • 

. 














; ; 






. ■ ■' 

' 

■ 










. 




' 

: 






« 


■ ■. : : -;.v 

. 












' 



-ii- 


“interim Program” containing the essence of Aberhart f s inter¬ 
pretation of social credit watered down to a form not likely 
to provoke further disallowance. The immediate object of the 
Interim Program was to establish a provincial medium of exchange^ 
to assist in the recovery of the economy, and probably to form 
the foundation for a social credit system within the province. 

But exclusive of its long run or ultimate objectives (for 
these can only be speculated upon) the Interim Program is worth¬ 
while studying as an example of an attempt to set up and operate 

a regional system of exchange. The administration of the Interim 

a 

Program was carried out byAsystem of provincial Treasury Branches, 
organized on banking lines, and a Provincial Marketing Board, 
which carried out promotional and supplementary activities. A 
considerable part of this thesis will thus be devoted to a survey 
of the operations and innovations brought about by the Treasury 
Branches as a provincial banking Institution in competition with 
the established chartered banks. 

This thesis generally follows the conventional lines set out 
for a work of this nature. The first chapter, dealing with the 
economic background to the Alberta scene, leans he a vily on the 
classical work in this field* W. A. Mackintosh*s “Economic 
Problems of the prairie Provinces” (1935). A knowledge of the 
peculiar economic structure of the prairies Is essential to an 
understanding of the economic foundation of western protest 
movements, such as the Alberta Social Credit Party. The second 
chapter reviews the policies and activities carried out by the 
Social Credit government prior to their retreat to the Interim 


1 . • < 

i 

' 

... , ... , ... ..... I 










; 




- 

' 

,-v. K-'-y-:.* . : ? ■ ■ ■ ■' 

'e ••• . ■. / . •• ■ ' v' ' ..o c ":. v 










.. I-; ■/ . . : 

. ■: " ■ •. ■ ■ • - - 

* 






. 





V - ... 


* 



. 







* 






, 


■ 


; i .' ; . .' J ; 

. 







-iii- 


Program. Their legislative efforts are quoted at some length 
in this chapter because the organization of the Interim Program 
was a direct outgrowth of the provisions contained In the early 
statutes. 

Chapters III and IV are a detailed description of the 
Interim Program divided into the two main periods of its life¬ 
time. The remaining chapters form an institutional study of the 
organizations of the Interim Program. Chapter V deals with 
Treasury Branch loaning activities, Chapter VI with the Treasury 
Branch agency system and other operations, and Chapter VII gives 
a brief description of the evolution of the Provincial Marketing 
Board and its subsidiaries. In the appendices may be found a 
review of social credit theory, a few quotations by Mr. Aberhart, 
and some details on Treasury Branch accounting methods. 



- 


* 








. . 






■ 




. 



, 

, 











CHAPTER I 


ALBERTA: 


THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND 




1 


CHAPTER I 

ALBERTA: THE ECONOMIC BACKGROUND 

To the economic historian the history of Alberta over the 
past 45 years must appear to him as a vindication of his 
particular branch of study. The story of Alberta 9 s development 
may be told almost entirely in terms of the economic factors 
governing its phases of growth and recession; even the political* 
constitutional and cultural aspects of its history have been 
dependent upon or intimately related to the economic background. 

Along with the two other Canadian prairie provinces the 
preponderancy of the economic factor in Alberta was attributable 
to the peculiar conditions of settlement and development in the 
latter part of the 19th century. The occupancy of the prairies 
was perhaps undertaken partly for a political reason* i.e.* to 
preserve the autonomy of the western British North American 
territories. But the methods of securing and carrying out the 
possession of these lands* and their subsequent evolution into 
the provinces of Manitoba * Saskatchewan and Alberta were 
influenced largely by economic conditions. As the development 
of these lands proceeded* particularly in the period after 1896* 
the range of economic influences contracted until by the beginning 
of the 20th century the history of these areas could be expressed 
in terns of a single economic factor* wheat. 

It was not surprising, in view of the development of these 
western grasslands* according to pioneer tradition dependent on 
the production of a staple commodity, that the Canadian prairies 
should choose wheat as the backbone of their economy. The ebb and 


































• V 














- 

w 





. 



■ 






* 






-• ;■ .. • © A ' . ' ' ■ 

, . ' J ' ' 

■ 

- 

, 

t 



- 2 - 


flow of prairie settlement may be told in terms of fluctuations 
in grain prices on world markets. The political fortunes of 
prairie governments can be traced in correlation with the pros¬ 
perity of the wheat farmers and the people dependent on farm 
incomes. The social and cultural evolution of the peoples of 
the prairies may be traced in terms of their isolation, indebted¬ 
ness and economic fortunes, at times overshadowing their racial, 
religious and educational backgrounds in determining their social 
outlook. Directly or indirectly, the prosperity of the prairies 
and many of the ramifications resulting from the presence or 
absence of prosperity, depended fundamentally upon the long term 
trends and the short term variations in the price of wheat and 
other bulk grains on the world markets. 

Characteristics of a The development of a pioneer 

Pioneer Economy community 1 of the type that was established 

on the western prairies depended primarily upon two conditions: 
(1) a supply of capital replacing and adding to that brought in 
by the original immigrants to provide for the growth of the 
area, (2) a staple product easily produced, with accessible 
markets outside of the region to ensure future income. 

A scantily populated region such as the Canadian West was 
able to undertake the production of a staple commodity on a large 
scale coinciding as it did with the mechanical innovations of the 
late 19th century. As the first inflow of capital receded the 
continued prosperity of the area depended increasingly on the 


1: Mackintosh, W. A®, Economic Problems of the Prairie Provinces . 
Toronto, 1935, pp. 3-5. 






: / fT j. I 

' ! 

... • ' : ; ' " • 

* 

• t . 1 

... . : ■ '■ t ' ‘ 

.... , .... . ' .. ... ■ . . -Vx •' 

... : 1 :: .. * 

* 






' 




: ■ 

* :/ . ■; i ; . ■’ 1- :. )b ; ' ) ’ 

■ 

. , .’ : . ■ ■ t 

, 










- 










. 


• •• 








3 - 


marketability of its staple product* To a certain extent the 
stability of the outflow of the staple product ensured the 
continued inflow of capital; marketability of the staple enabled 
the pioneer community to meet its indebtedness* and the lenders 9 
optimism that tended to accompany it allowed the community to 
borrow more capital* 

The marketability of grain in the Canadian west depended 
only partially upon world demand* In its pioneer stages the 
prosperity of the west rested on the rapid construction of 
transportation and storage facilities so that the produce could 
reach world markets speedily and in good condition* The prairie 
farmer 9 s net income was influenced greatly by the charges made 
for the use of these services * The need for the rapid development 
of facilities produced the third chief characteristic of prairie 
settlement* government control* direction or subsidization of 
transport* storage facilities* and provision of other services* 

As the prairie settlers moved beyond the first pioneer 
stages* cleared their lands and began to ship grain in large 
quantities over the newly-built transportation system* chiefly 
to the Great Lakes* they found that their control of their fortunes 
was limited by other even more powerful conditions* In the back¬ 
ground of these conditions as they developed were the original 
and basic hazards of climate variations and price changes in the 
world markets® The extent to which the prairie settler retained 
control of his environment was physically limited by a climate 
which at various times and in various regions showed an aptitude 
for devastating frosts* torrential rains during the ripening 


, . - 

• io .. t'inJ- J 'I, J.v 

t 

• ... : .. , - - r«:- 

* 


, , • • - . v •■ 

. 

' 

* 

. 


...■ 








* 


« 


’ . • f. ' !'• i:- \! J :‘j •"> V- 






' 




j ' 


. 


' 



4 - 


season, droughts, and hails toms* While the world demand for 

bread was reasonably stable, the demand for Canadian wheat was 

elastic, because (1) Canadian wheat was blended with others and 

formed only a small proportion of the cost of world bread, and 

2 

(2) of high transport costs attached to Canadian wheat. The 
western farmer, then, was confronted with these two basically 
unstable factors of climate and world prices around which a 
host of others revolved. The existence of these two basic 

on 

conditions, together with many other unbtrollable items, meant 
that the wheat producers could control neither their prices nor 
their output. Pew other countries had a major industry whose 
entire operations were subject to influences completely beyond 
the control of its owners. Some indication of the importance of 
wheat to Canada in the recent past is shown in Table I. 


Table I; 


Average Wheat Production per Capita 1926-1930 


3 


Country 


Bu. per capita 


Canada .. 43.7 

Australia ......................... 24.0 

Argentina ......................... 22.6 

United States .. .•••••••»*•• 7*0 


Transportation The high transportation charges char- 

And Other Costs acterizing prairie grain production have 


influenced farm incomes inversely as the world price of wheat* 


2: Mackintosh, W. A., Qp* Cit 0 * p* 20-22* 

3: Ibid , p. 7. In Alberta in 1920 agricultural production 

formed 64$ of gross production in the province. By 1946 it 
had fallen to 43$ while manufacturing had expanded from 22$ 
in 1920 to 35$ in 1946. Department of Industries and Labor, 
Bureau of Statistics, Alberta Facts and Figures. Edmonton. 
1950, p. 15. 













* 
























5 


In periods of high prices the transport charges have been no 
burden to the farmer; in periods of low prices transport costs 
have at times been ruinous. The minimum cost of transporting 
grain from the prairies originates in the several phases of 
the transportation process. Firstly, there is the first phase 
of the journey to Europe from the country elevator to th© rail 
head at the Great Lakes. To this rail rate is added the lake 
rate for shipment to an ocean port, usually including another 
rate for shipment down the St. Lawrence river to the port, or 
another rail rate if the grain goes out through a U. S. port. 
Lastly, there is the ocean rate across the Atlantic. Added 
to these charges are costs of Insurance, storage, inspection, 
weighing, registration fees, brokerage fees, cleaning, etc. A 
typical breakdown of transportation costs is shown in Table II 


Table II: Transportation, Handling and Selling Costs 
of Canadian Wheat, 1951 4 


Cents per 
bu. 


1. Costs at shipping point, loading, and 

selling to exporter on Winnipeg market 5 

2. Railway rate from average shipping 

point to lakehead.. 13J- 

3. Unloading at lakehead, storage, ship¬ 
loading .............................. 2|r 

4* Lake freight rate to Montreal ........ 7 

5. Storage at Montreal, unloading and 

loading .............................. 1 

6. Average cost of freight and insurance, 

Montreal to Liverpool ................ 8 


35 


4: Based on Mackintosh, W. A. Op. Pit. , chart p. 21. 














r 






6 


At their best the transportation costs have tended to 
remain stable, forming high fixed charges during periods of 
low prices, and vice versa; at their worst the transport 
charges, or various components within the aggregate charge, 
have fluctuated at different times* An example of the latter 
was the astronomical jump in ocean freight rates during World 
War I. 

With the passing of the first, or ’’homestead” phase of 
settlement the element of land prices and an accompanying 
increase in fixed indebtedness through mortgage borrowing grew 
in importance. Early settlement under the homestead system was 
stimulated by a low fee of $10 for title to a quarter section 
in return for certain settlement requirements* As might be 
expected many of the first settlers were speculators who resold 
the land to succeeding waves of immigrants* With this change 
in conditions, plus turnover in land ownership resulting from 
cyclical fluctuations and tendencies towards land ’’mining”, 
the farmer was often faced with high fixed charges in the form 
of mortgage payments to individuals or companies for his 
original land or for land purchased during a period of prosperity* 
Beside these fixed obligations in the form of mortgage payments 
the farmer often had other debts in the form of advances of 
credit from equipment suppliers, storekeepers and banks* 

The Costs of Another condition characteristic of the 

Mechanization Canadian prairies was the increasing technical 
efficiency of the farmer* In a region where the growing season 
was short, labor scarce, and holdings large, the exploitation of 




':j J ... ."... ; 

■ ' ■- ■ ■■ r.; t 

••• \ . 

• •• 

* 

» • 



« r X .. ' ; ■ • 'i . ' 

... X. ... j ' . - ■ -i. -v X.' i 1 • 

, 


» i'j ■■ -*■ ... 

. /I•••;"}. • . . •. • o' ; 

, ’ ■ . .. ..‘ ' ' -1 .. ... . ... ‘ : .. ... *;..ii, .1 J.o J?I . 

w . .... . : : . 7 . , 7 ... .’ 7 . Ci^C'io ;.,,vv ' ./'i: 7 r fu-J 



. •- . 'j. .7.7 .. , •. . . ,7..;:... , 


‘ 


•M: x -x ‘lerlit'oa - 


‘lu ’:■! .: e.i X 




■ 




♦ 














7 


mechanical faming skills was applied to its utmost. On the 
other hand, the extensive use of machinery had other effects 
which were not to the advantage of the prairie economy. Generally, 
the wide use of machinery tended to reduce the density of 
settlement by enabling fewer persons to gain control of, and 
efficiently cultivate, large tracts of land. Mechanization, 
then, resulted in the existence of a fairly small population 
increasingly dependent on export markets, and therefore uncon¬ 
trollable foreign prices, for its livelihood. The outstanding 
characteristic of the Canadian west was not that it was a wheat 
producing area; the crucial point was that it had to export 
nearly all of its produce. 

Two other largely uncontrollable factors resulted from 
mechanization. Firstly, the costs of mechanization increased 
the fixed charges to the farmer and increased his indebtedness, 
particularly to the implement companies who advanced the credit 
directly. With an increased demand for their machines and a 
fairly rapid rate of replacement resulting from the large areas 
farmed, the implement companies were able to charge high prices 
for their machinery, replacement parts, and credit or installment 
purchases. In 1937 a parliamentary inquiry stated: "over the 
period 1891-1936 retail prices of farm implements have been 
maintained at too high a level. 

The high cost of farm implements has been maintained because 
of the oligopolistic nature of the industry in Canada (i.e., four 

5: As quoted in Stewart, A., Report of the Special Committee 

on Farm Implement Prices, 1937, Canadian Journal of Economics 
and Political Science . February, 1938, p. 92-99. 





. 

, • •' :i 

■ 

t ’ : . , • 

; j •:' :.*■ - j 1 r> ■■ ■: . . ... 

3 ■ : v 

* 

.. 

•J^c ..-j < -■ • . .. --J- . .. .J; i - >.3 ; 

. 

.. t , 

t ..... . ; ; • : . ?. 

.* .' - ./ •• '..0 J. : ’' ' 

* 

») . : .; -jI a ... • .•.:. , ? . . 

t " 1 : J : .... r ..... •/ » 









J.. j': . 



... 











t * • / j' : .i. .■ o a. ■. , 


. . t 

.. . ..... t . •; t ■ 

• “ * ^ 


* 





8 


firms controlled 75$ of the value of gross sales in 1937), 

high tariffs on imported farm machinery (raised from 6$ to 25$ 

in 1930), and the burden of freight rates in shipping the 

implements from eastern Canada — for example, freight rates 

to Regina were found to be 9$ of the cash purchase price of 
6 

the equipment. In addition, the companies were able to 
maintain high charges for credit or installment buying and 
they charged an average mark-up of over 65$ on replacement 
parts. An indication of the burden of machinery costs to the 
farmer is shown in Table III. Total tractor sales for the 
five years of low wheat prices from 1931 to 1936 failed to 
equal sales for one prosperous year, such as 1928. 


Table III: Tractor Sales in Alberta, 1927-1956' 


1927 . 

1928 . 

1929 ...... 

1930 . 


. 3,100 

1931 . 



1932 . 


. 404 

1933 . 


...... 307 

1934 ...... 


. 603 

1935 . 


...... 938 

1936 . 




The fall in farm incomes ultimately meant that the efficiency 
of farmers through machinery was reduced at a time when they 
had to produce more to offset the fall in grain prices. 
Generally speaking price reductions after 1930 were not slg- 

6: Ibid , p. 93. 

7: Executive Council of Alberta, The Case of Alberta , based 
on a table, p. 22. 






















9 


nifleant; the most that farm machinery prices were reduced 
during this period was 15$ of the 1930 price. Obversely 
the implement companies faced heavy losses resulting from 
their lavish credit advances during the 1920*s; one company 
alone estimated its bad debt losses at $4 million. Farm 
implements, then, a vital necessity to the prairie farmer, 
represented another important and uncontrollable item in his 
budge t. 

Marketing Problems Besides fluctuations in the world 

And Organizations price of wheat and the volume of returns 
dependent on weather, the western farmer had had to contend 
with variability in grading. Closely allied to this factor 
were those problems connected with the marketing of grain. 
Problems of marketing in the early stages of mass crop 
production centred around the grain elevators at country 
shipping points. During the railroad building era the rail- 
ways, particularly the CPR, encouraged construction of country 
elevators (1) by offering rent-free sites near the railroad, 
and (2) by prohibiting anyone from loading grain into freight 
cars except through the facilities of the elevators. Usually 
the elevators did not bid competitively against each other, 
and in effect the farmer was forced to accept the terms of 
elevator operators with regard to price, weight, grade and 
dockage.^ 

8: Stewart, A. Op. Cit. passim. Of course, some of the 

implement cos. had retained large reserves in anticipa¬ 
tion of such losses. 

9: Mackintosh, W. A. Op. Cit. pp. 44-47. 












' 

a 

...1 -i ~ 5 -aa/.r jf. ] 

r . . • i - ’ ■ U ■ )' 

. 


..... •• 


' . M i 

.. • 








. 


* 


. ♦ 




• -JO 












, ■- 





, 

, 






. ♦ 


10 


The Manitoba Grain Act of 1900, applied throughout the 
west, helped to alleviate this situation by permitting farmers 
to load railway cars without using elevator facilities, by 
prescribing a government inspected system of grading, and by 
stating regulations on terms of sale and storage* If the 
farmer did not care for the terms offered by his local 
elevator operator he could ship his grain to commission 
agents on the grain exchange* This Act failed to solve the 
problems of marketing; commission agents took equal advantage 
of the farmer in many instances, and provisions of the Act 
were not enforced either by the railways or the elevator 
operators• 

Marketing difficulties and the high proportion of other 
uncontrollable items forced the western farmer into a 
pattern of living characterized by variability of income 
combined with heavy fixed obligations. It was only natural 
in response to this situation that the farmer would direct 
his energies towards counteracting those conditions over which 
he had no control. The movement to gain control of his destiny 
manifested itself in the cooperative movements, the wheat pools, 
the formation of political parties, and pressure on provincial 
and Dominion governments to provide an extensive and costly 
range of services and institutions. 

In the field of cooperation and organizations among 
themselves, the western farmers have centred their attention 
on solving the problems of marketing. To secure enforcement 
of the Manitoba Grain Act the farmers organized themselves 


... 




* 




' 




■ 

. . 

' 

■. .. - .J i-v 

„ ■ 

_ 

. «x... •••;:.• j 

. 

• •• . ■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 

ao 



11 


into the Grain Growers Association of Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 

Later, the United Farmers of Alberta formed for a similar 
10 

purpose. Pressure by these groups has been instrumental in 
obtaining revisions to marketing legislation and other con¬ 
cessions for the farmer 1 s protection. In periods of low or 
unstable prices these groups have expanded their activities to 
the political sphere to redress their grievances, in such 
parties as the Progressives of the early 1920*s and the United 
Farmers of Alberta. The Cooperative Commonwealth Federation, 
with its emphasis on public control of many sectors of the 
economy, and the Social Credit party, in Alberta, whose plat¬ 
form coincided with prairie antipathy towards financial 
institutions and the debt burden, have also been able to cap¬ 
italize on the social outlook of the westerner. 

Before 1900 attempts to organize cooperatives on the 
prairies had not been successful because of poor management, 
lack of public support, and the strength of the elevators. 

The first Grain Growers Company was launched successfully in 
Manitoba in 1906 to operate for the farmer on the commission 
market. Five years later the Saskatchewan Cooperative Elevator 
Co. began operations partially financed by the provincial govern¬ 
ment which issued mortgaged-secured loans for construction of 
elevators. In 1913 a similar organization was started in 
Alberta, but with less support from the provincial government 

10: Mackintosh, Op. Git ., see Chapter ST, pp. 43-53. 






.. 

* 


. 




» 

t . ... . 1 - J. ■ ■ ••. - . .: • ., re ■ 

! ' ■ ■■ 

•v- *"• r»- 

j . ■■ :] 

. ■ 

t ' ' 


• - ■ - 


t t '' ; 








12 


than its Saskatchewan counterpart. The Alherta group later 
expanded its operations to the supply of livestock and various 
other materials. The Manitoba and Alberta groups amalgamated 
in 1917 to form the United Grain Growers Ltd. Up to 1925 these 
companies proved to be successful; between them they operated 
678 country elevators and handled an estimated one-third of the 
grain sold in the three provinces. Organized on the Rochdale 
plan of cooperative these grain companies provided services to 
the farmer at low cost, and through their competition with 
line companies they improved grain servicing for those farmers 
who did not patronize them."^ But when conditions worsened be¬ 
tween 1921 and 1923 the farmer demanded more direct action to 
reduce his costs and to obtain a higher price. 

Rival organizations to the established cooperatives soon 
arose in the three prairie provinces; in Alberta the Alberta 
Cooperative Wheat Producers Ltd. was formed. This step marked 
the era of the tf wheat pools”. Through a central agency the 
pools acted as sales agents for the farmers. Operating solely 
as a marketing agency the pools made an initial payment to the 
farmer on delivery of his grain, and returned to him the full 
price of his wheat minus the costs of selling and deductions 
for reserves. By the end of 1926, 70$ of the wheat acreage 
on the prairies was under pool contract. 

Establishment of the pools was symbolic of the changing 

11: The UFA govt, in 1929 assisted cooperatives by guarantee¬ 
ing borrowings of such marketing coops, up to $1,000,000. 
In 1946 this was extended to guarantees of cooperative 
rural electrification projects and the guaranteed amount 
was raised to $2,000,000. 



. 














. . 




. . 






. 




» 






, 













. 


. 






















. 




l . : 

* t t 

. 






13 


attitudes of the fanners. Post-war fluctuations in prices 
and high costs increased demands for a complete change in the 
marketing system. Although the pools brought about no radical 
alterations in the marketing system they extended the services 
previously given by the cooperatives by assisting the weaker 
farmers, improving prices of low grade grains, and reducing 
elevator costs. Until the disastrous events after 1930 the 
wheat pools continued to provide a useful service through 
their marketing facilities. When the pool system proved to 
be ineffective against the collapse in grain prices, the 
farmers had no alternative but to look to the government for 
increasing assistance and provision of services* 

The Role of 
Government 

20th centuries, carried with it the demands of the settlers for 
modern services and equipment. In the first stages of settlement 

|gk $ , Ir 1 ( r * 

the provincial governments of the west and the Dominion govern¬ 
ment subsidized or directly provided railway facilities. As 
settlement progressed demand increased for varying types of 
services, and in many instances these urgent requirements were 
met by the municipal or provincial governments directly. 

Along with this demand for essential services was the 
recurrent pressure on the government to take over or alleviate 
some of the uncontrollable conditions faced by the farmer. The 
response to these demands is shown in the early history of 


1 Settlement of western Canada, coinciding 

ft with the material developments of the 19th and 







* 

* 

' 

, • ■ ‘ • i v .'' • : 



■ 

■ i r 

, 




J Vi > 0 s£o <[ 


- 






■ 


. -• t ■ ■ ■ w . • ■ .. 

. : • 

. 

. . ■ .. .. * :: 




14 


Albertao Within the first seven years after the formation 
of the province in 1905 the government had established public 
creameries for the marketing of dairy products, a line of 
government elevators, a rural telephone system, and it had 
subsidized railways in the province to the amount of $39,634,000 
up to 1920. During this period various proposals were also 
made for the expansion of government ownership and services, 
including demands for a government system of packing plants, 
and a short-lived experience in hail insurance. 

Characterized by a heavy demand during periods of unfavor¬ 
able market conditions, and a fall in demand once prosperity 
returned, the government-sponsored services constituted a 
somewhat unstable and expensive item in the provincial budgets. 
Difficulties in western provincial finances have been based on 
the problem of providing costly services and relief measures 
while their revenues were dependent on the unstable income 
conditions within the region. Even during good times these 
governments have had to provide large per capita expenditures 
with revenue sources limited by a sparse population. 

Provincial governments were at first financed by Dominion 
subsidies. When the provinces expanded the subsidies became 
only a small part of annual expenses. To provide the services 
and facilities required by a sparsely settled area the govern¬ 
ments had to incur a heavy burden of debt with resultirig high 
fixed obligations. The inability of the many municipalities 
to supply the services originally conferred on them, increased 
the burden of the provinces still further. Provincial revenues 


. ■ 

. 


e . 

• , 

- 


■ 




' 

. • 

i 

■ 
















15 


were at first derived from railway taxes, succession duties 
and corporation taxes. Later when the burden increased, they 
came to rely on real estate or property taxes. Although prov¬ 
incial coffers were later bolstered by all the derived revenue 
from the automobile era, and provincial control of the liquor 
business, plus increased Dominion subsidies, the western govern¬ 
ments still had to operate on narrow margins. 

As a result of their responsibilities to facilitate settle¬ 
ment and to provide for the needs of settlers the prairie gover¬ 
nments have had to incur large bonded debts, both during the 
periods of prosperity and periods of depression. The issuance 
of a large proportion of bonded debt increased the fixed 
liabilities of these governments to a large extent. Furthermore, 
because of the narrow margins on which they operated, and the 
general economic instability of the region, the western 
provinces had to pay high interest rates on their bonded 
indebtedness. 

When Alberta had to borrow in the face of inflated wartime 
interest rates in 1917, a scheme was devised to finance the 
debt within the province by means of "savings certificates". 

The certificates, sold by the govt, to the public in the 
province, as well as outside the province, were redeemable on 
demand and yielded 5 % compound interest. When war-inflated 
rates fell in the 1920 ! s the certificates became less profitable 
to the government and interest rates on them were successively 
reduced to 5 % simple interest in 1921 'and to 4$ in 1927. This 
internal method of financing government proved to be fairly 





; \ . ■ ;J -m: 


■. ■.! - ■. ' ;* ■ ■ ■■ 

■ j. ■■ . . . . od -I','.: 

, .. ■ JL« , 

* . - ■ 

. «' 

t . ■ 

T> ' ■ ; 

* 




. ■ 


. J. . 






. 

. . _ . . n .*uq 






0 >• ->i.j y, U-ir 


' 





16 


popular as a means of individual saving, chiefly because of 

the relatively high yields. By 1951 $10,976,000 in the 

12 

certificates was outstanding* This amount payable on demand 
represented a potentially heavy drain on the government»s cash 
reserves• 

On the eve of the depression in 1930 the net bonded debt 

of Alberta (excluding savings certificates) was $102,406,000, 

or $144 per capita. That year the revenue of the province 

amounted to $15,830,000. Out of that revenue the province had 

fixed obligations of nearly $5,000,000 on the debt, leaving 

only some $10,000,000 plus whatever funds were obtained from 

bond issues that year to meet the costs of government, other 

obligations, relief payments, or a possible run on the savings 
13 

certificates. 

The Burden of In conjunction with the problem of 

Long-Term Credit public debt was the question of private 

u> 

debts of individuals in the form of long-term obligations, 
usually mortgage payments, medium or long-term debt to implement 
dealers, and seasonal or short-term debts to suppliers, retailers, 
and chartered banks* 

During periods of high crop yields and high prices farmers 
have tended to increase their purchases of farm land, machinery, 
livestock and buildings. By far the most important of these 
components is the extension of land holdings financed by long 

12: Case for Alberta , p. 350* 

13 : Mackintosh, W. A., Op. Pit* , p. 74* 






















. , • 

« 

. . . 

. 

. '■ * ■ • 










t ■ •• • • . '' ■' ■ ' • . . ■■ 






, - 

* . 


_ 

' 

■ 

. 

■ 

* 


; :c'i : 

- ...... .... 









17 


mortgages or agreements of sale. According to a survey con- 

ducted by a Canadian Pioneer Problems Committee in 1930 and 

1931, mortgage debt, mostly on land purchases, amounted to 75$ 

14 

of the total farm debt of the prairie provinces. Granting 

of long-term credit on land sales has been characterized by two 

peculiar conditions: (1) the large number of transactions 

enacted with private individuals through agreements of sale, 

rather than with mortgage companies, and (2) the small initial 

down payments made by the buyers in times of prosperity. At 

the same time a substantial amount of prairie farm mortgages 

are held by life insurance, trust and loan companies. In 1931 

about 99$ ($76,000,000) of the farm mortgages held by life 

15 

insurance companies In Canada were on prairie lands. 

Similarly large holdings were In the hands of trust and loan 
organizations. 

Even during the comparatively prosperous times after World 
War I defaults on farm mortgages were highs f, between 1921 and 
1928 Canadian life Insurance companies wrote off as losses 
$7,627,000 from their farm loans in the prairie provinces 
(about 10$ of the amounts outstanding at the end of 1928) ft . 

This proportion of default Is the main reason for the high 
interest rates charged on farm mortgage loans in the western 
provinces. For example, in the 1920 r s western farmers were 
paying 8$ and 9$ compared to 7% on eastern farm loans. Private 

14: Mackintosh, W. A. Op. Clt. , p. 260. 

15: Ibid , p. 265. 


16 : Ibid, p. 266 














- 







• • . d 


■ . <• i 'i * .as J ' • 


, . . ■ • 

... .. o ' J - ;ti ol xO 

. 


■ * , • • „ . ' < ■ v ■ . ' - •; ■ •. . ■ j , / ,j • \. 


} 

££ ; - r ' • • ■ ; '- 

, : , e 

, 




: 

- 

’ 5 ■' „ 


- 







18 


lenders, not subject to regulations on down payments and 
interest rates have extended mortgage credit on a more risky 
scale than the big companies♦ The high rate of default on 
mortgages based on agreements of sal© has increased the 
cumulative effect of depressions on the prairies. Usually the 
mortgager was another farmer who sold land, a small-scale real 
estate operator, or other type of businessman. Default on 
these mortgages affected the mortgager as well as the farmer; 
default meant that the mortgager lost a source of income, and 
when land values were low foreclosure did not cover the invest¬ 
ment. 

Short-Term Credit Short-term credit required by the 

And the Banks western farmer to cover his operating 

costs and seasonal needs has been supplied partially by the 
chartered banks and partially by direct means from dealers and 
companies* In the latter group are included credit advances 
from implement, lumber, gasoline, and oil firms, and country or 
small town retailers* Table IV indicates the breakdown of 
estimated farm debts outstanding on the three prairie provinces 
in 1931. The amount of debt outstanding in the hands of the 
banks is considerably larger than the figures show; under 
mortgages are included those taken out by banks on renewal of 
loans or as additional security during the term of a loan* 









* 

■ , ' ;.K v.': 

. 

> 

- t . 










' 




. 

, . , 

* 1 • 








. 



19 


Table 

IV: Estimated Farm Indebtedness of 
Prairie Provinces, 1931 17 

the 



Amount in 




Type $ 

Percentage 

Mortgages 
Implement 
Banks ..., 

and agreements of sale .. $488,000,000 

companies . 49,000,000 

..... 48.OOO.000 

75.2 

7.6 

7.4 

Stores ,1 


... 10,000,000 

1,6 

Other ..., 



8. Z 



$650,000,000 

100.0 


Although a large proportion of the long-term debt has been 
beyond the scope of the chartered banks they have played an 
important role in the development of western Canada,, chiefly by 
financing operational and seasonal costs of farmers and business¬ 
men. Because it is based on a branch organization the Canadian 
system of banking expanded rapidly into new areas of settlement 
in the west. The increase in bank branches was so rapid on the 
prairies, chiefly as a result of inter-bank competition, that 
the area was often referred to as being n overbanked ,f . For 

example, within the five years 1915 to 1920, 166 new branches 

18 

were opened in Alberta alone. The Canadian branch banking 
system assisted rapid development on the prairies through the 
mobility of transfer of funds from the stationary regions of 
east, particularly the Maritimes, and a resultant decrease in 
the possibility of insolvency because of this diversification. 

17: Mackintosh, W. A., On, Git., p. 266. The Case for Alberta 

estimates outstanding debt in Alberta, 1951, at $319,800,000. 
For 1936 the Alberta Debt Adjustment Board in a detailed 
statement estimated #395,000,000. p.118-119. 

182 Alberta Facts and Figures. 1950, p. 545. 

















t 




; qv-- 


: i. : 












d 


. t' : 

















20 


Much of the criticism against the operations of banks in 
western Canada has originated in the difficulties of the banks 
in adjusting their methods to the peculiar economic structure 
of the prairies. These difficulties of adjustment have 
centred mainly around the adaptability of short-term bank 
advances to seasonal needs of the farmers and other businesses, 
the types of security available for loans, the security 
restrictions of the Bank Act, and lastly, the problem of 
interest charges* 

Because the banks primarily deal in short-term credit, 
preferably outstanding for less than a year, they have had 
difficulty in adjusting their advances to the seasonal fortunes 
and misfortunes of the farmer. Repayment of loans by both 
farmers and those who are dependent upon them rests essentially 
on the success of the annual crop. Besides fluctuations in 
prices the farmer is often faced with a poor yield when prices 
are high. During such periods existing farm advances have 
tended to become long-term loans carried at no profit to the 
banks and remaining outstanding until a return to prosperity. 
These long-term risks are offset partially by the banks® 
authority to take out mortgages as additional security on 
extension of loans* 

Although they could not take mortgages or hypothecation 
of title at the time of an advance, banks were authorized under 
Section 88 of the Bank Act to issue loans on security of 
threshed grain, livestock and on the security of the crop for 
the purchase of seed grain. Section 88 has proven particularly 





















♦ 




. 






















* 

* 

. 





' 

. 

* 


























21 


useful to the farmer and businessman in the west; Its provisions, 
by giving the bank a claim on future crops or goods, has 
facilitated the operations of the prairie economy from season to 
season. 

Because of general bank attitudes towards the opening of a 
new country, the high demand for loans in the west, and the 
heavy risks involved in the western economy, borrowers have had 
to pay higher rates of interest on advances compared to rates 
paid in other sections of the country. Rates on the prairies 
have varied between 8 and 10$ compared to 6 or 7$ in the east. 
During times of depression the tendency has been for the banks 
to cut off new advances entirely. While these rates were 
higher than those in the east, under the Canadian branch system 
interest rates in the west have generally been lower than their 
counterparts in the western U* S. According to one banker, 
during the 1920*s lf farmers in the Dakotas, directly across the 
Canadian border would be glad to obtain loans at 12$ interest. 1 ^ 9 
Again, the chief reason for this discrepancy, in spite of the 
fact that the American west was a relatively older area than 
the Canadian prairies, is attributable to the amount, diversity 
and mobility of funds available to the Canadian banks. 

To compensate for these seasonal and regional difficulties 
the banks at various times have attempted to adjust their system 
to the peculiar needs of the west. As early as 1908 the Bank 


19: Beckhart, B. H. # The Banking System of Canada. New York, 

1929, p. 453o 





. 

... . .• . 

: : :t 1 .•• ■-/ \.. • in. “ .3 • 

. 

, . r: .;>■ . ■ : >; ' ... . !■; V . ’ r T /. ■ 

...... ■ " ‘ -l ' •' ' 


/ . 

... • .■ . . v . . '> ., .. , ’ O.., ■■ ' 

. • . .. : • f ' 

. 

t . ..' : . • ' . .. , 

■ r . 








t - ... „ , ' , .. t .-; 

. ■ . f . 














22 - 


Act was amended to allow the banks to increase their circulation 

of notes during the crop-moving period between October to January 

every year. In 1912 the period was extended to include the 

months of September and February. Under these amendments the 

banks were permitted to issue notes "by an amount not to exceed 

20 

15$ of the issuing bank’s paid-up surplus and capital”. " In 
1913 the seed grain and livestock provisions were added to 
Section 88* further amendments were made in 1923, to be dealt 
with below, and there has been such Dominion legislation as the 
Farm Loan and Farm Improvement Loan Acts of 1926 and 1945. 

An explanation of the significance of the authorized 
additional issue of notes was given by an official of the Bank 
of Toronto as follows? 

From September up to the end of November when the 
movement of the harvest...takes place there is put out 
over the counters of the bank every day very large sums 
of money for the purpose of paying for the amount of 
grain brought in and then delivered at the elevators and 
warehouses.That money is paid out so that the circulation 
increases from $20,000,000 to $30,000,000. The banks are 
permitted to exceed the limits of their circulation upon 
condition that they redeem It absolutely at the time fixed 
by the Act, (i.e. February). The way that works out is 
that the circulation goes up day by day, month by month, 
until it reaches its maximum about the middle of November, 
and immediately it commences to return as the money finds 
its way back as payment on land, implements. Interest on 
mortgages, the settling of store accounts...and it goes 
back again to its normal as a rule by the end of the time 
fixed in the Act. 1 

In spite of the relatively low interest rates charged on 
western loans, and attempts by the banks to adapt their 
practices to the agricultural economy of the prairies, a social 


20: Beckhart, B. H. Qp. Git. . p 9 306. 

21: As quoted in Beckhart, B. H., Ibid , p. 384. 




i, ’ • 

- 

. 

- • 






. 

; . ' .. ; : ■ ■ : 

* * , 


, ■ , * 






, J 


t ' •- 




* 






. 


5 




. 


, . : 


- ■: 


$ ■: . '•.! ;- .j . ■ 




25 


antipathy towards established financial and marketing 

institutions soon developed among the inhabitants. This 

antipathy was directed towards the banks, life insurance or 

trust companies probably for two reasons: firstly, it was 

difficult to concentrate opposition against the varied private 

individuals who held the bulk of western mortgages but it was 

easier to focus antagonism on the established financial 

institutions. Secondly, the people who extended credit 

directly to the farmers, such as retailers, implement dealers, 

fuel oil distributors, lumberyards, and even individual 

mortgagers were in turn dependent on the banks for their credit 

requirements and the inter-relation between these groups and 

farmers placed a larger emphasis of attention on the banks* 

During the early days of expansion the banks also undertook 

various practices which increased the traditional opposition of 

the debtor community towards them. According to data received 

by a Commons committee the average length of agricultural loans 
22 

was 3-g- months, a relatively short period for the farming 

business which has only one crop a year. An additional burden 
on the farmer was the custom of deducting interest in advance. 
And, as a result of these short-term loans the banks were able 
to accumulate a large amount of mortgage security on renewals. 
Another practice opposed by the farmers was the compounding of 
interest on renewals of such loans. Other criticism was 
directed towards the final powers of branch managers to accept 
or to reject requests for loans within certain limits, the 

22 : Beckhart, B. H., Op. Git ., p. 452. 




, ■ '> V ‘ *' • " f ' ’) - ' 

•: ... . ' J . • *T v ‘ 

* t 

. 

, ; • . ■/J. ,» 

' 

r». r• ‘.m:- -v *>' 7 Vi* > ... ;r -7"' • 


... 


* 

- 

* ‘ .... 

. 








* 


- • .. . 

. . <. . : ■ . 



24 


frequency of changes In personnel who were not acquainted with 
the particular problems of certain districts, and the 
"monopolistic nature" of the Canadian banking system. 

This opposition to financial institutions, and to the 
banking system in particular, was based on the conventional 
attitudes of a debtor pioneer community towards those areas 
which supplied its capital— at a price. During periods of 
prosperity the antipathy of debtors was likely to be diluted 
and confined to those Individuals who had personal failures or 
bad luck. When recessions struck, however, the opposition 
became more concentrated and organised. When prices fell 
during the early 1920 ? s the agrarian Progressive Party reflect¬ 
ing in its members the western attitude that the banks were 
partly responsible for the misery of the farmers, forced an 
inquiry into the banking system. Following a report prepared 

by a Select Standing Committee on Banking and Commerce of the 
23 

House of Commons, certain amendments were made to the Bank 
Act. 

Essentially, the amendments of 1923 were of a technical 
nature, but they did represent a recognition of western 
financial problems. The chief concession to western public 
opinion was a change in the classification of over-due debts 
and the registration of loans under Section 88 was also 

23: Among those who testified before the Committee was C. H. 
Douglas. Douglas says he met "with a good deal of 
hostile... cross-examination, by members of the committee 
with orthodox views." Douglas, 0. H., The Alberta 
Experiment--An Interim Survey . London, 1937, p. 15. 









■ 















• 







1 



, ' .< 











« 
















« 


• 








■ 




















- 





, 











♦ 









, 










:■ . . : ' 





■ 


• 










■ 






. 

. 

■ 

* • • • ; 

. t 

• • *• . . . • • 






25 


authorized at this time. Under previous interpretations of 
the Bank Act "overdue” loans had been classified as those that 
had been in interest-default for one year* In the opinion of 
the banks this classification was unduly severe on the western 

farmers, and as one banker stated, "it cover(ed) 50$ and upwards 

24 

of farm loans in certain sections of the prairie provinces". 

In effect the carrying out of the overdue debts provisions 
would have meant that the banks could foreclose on a large 
number of their customers in the west. Instead, it was 
decided to adopt a category of "non-current loans" which would 
include default for a period of two years and other provisions 
to extend a loan. Enactment of this provision extended the 
time and the conditions under which a bank would actually 
foreclose, or take action to obtain a loan. It also meant 
that banks would have greater leeway in extending and renewing 
advances. 

Registration of loans under Section 88 was established to 
prevent a double use of security. A farmer, for example, might 
obtain his livestock on credit from a dealer, then use the live¬ 
stock as security to borrow under Section 88. The object of 
this provision w a s to protect the bank’s claim and also the 
debtor; the chief disadvantage of the requirement was the time 
lag that ensued between registration of the intent and receiving 
of the loan. 

Antagonism of the western groups to the banking system 
during the debates on these amendments is worth noticing. 

24; As quoted in Beckhart, B. H., Op. Git. , p. 312. 





«■ 

. 

• • t 


„ ' 










• .. 












I hi " 


n ; ■ lo ' ’ : i ' . 

' , ■■ •: . ■■ ' • ' 3 v:. '• ; 3 I 

' v ■ ' : ... : o ; : . .*> .■ 

' . . , r. ■' r'.-v ' 

. 

/ 




. • ■ ........;.. . 3, : 




- 26 


Proposals were offered at different times which would allow 
for the establishment of provincial banks, unit or local 
banks, or a central bank (realized in 1935). Demands were 
also renewed for the availability of additional credit to 
western farmers, lower interest rates, and a federal guarantee 
of all deposits. A movement sponsored by the Progressive 
Party and the Alberta and Manitoba governments demanded that 
existing bank charters be subject to renewal at the end of 
each year. 

Movements of western farmers and businessmen in opposition 
to the banks and the finance companies took the form of 
provincial loan associations to provide long-term credit, and 
credit unions to fulfill short-term credit needs. By 1917 the 
three western provinces had passed acts forming government 
institutions to issue long-term farm credit. The Alberta 
association was never formed, but in Manitoba the Farm Loans 
Association maintained operations until 1929 when it was 
absorbed by the Canadian Farm Loan Board. Its Saskatchewan 
counterpart did not come under the Farm Loans Act. The Manitoba 
Farm Loan Association was capitalized at $1,000,000 (later 
reduced to $550,000) of which not more than 50^ was to be 
subscribed by the provincial govt®; the remainder of its funds 
were obtained by the Association through the issue of 6 % bonds 
guaranteed by the province. Mortgage loans varying from 6 to 
7 % were made to farmers to acquire land, clear and drain land, 
erect farm buildings and to buy livestock and machinery® 
Activities of the Association after 1926 proved to be less 






' 

• , 




. 













*■ 


- 














. 






» 




■ ' 

. • 




* 


27 


successful when numerous mortgages fell into arrears, and even 

during the relatively prosperous years of 1928 and 1929 the 

25 

Association foreclosed on 337 farms 0 

Attempts to inaugurate short-term credit institutions of 

their own were undertaken by western farmers under statutes 

passed in 1917 in Alberta and Manitoba. Cooperative credit 

societies, to be formed in each district, were financed by 

issuing shares to members and to municipal and provincial 

governments. Credit unions were to issue credit in the same 

sphere as the banks, to buy seed, feed, machinery, livestock 

and to cover seasonal operating expenses, loans were limited 

to a maximum interest rate of 1 % plus one percent for costs of 

administration. The weak point in the credit union organization 

was that they were dependent on the banks for their loanable 

funds, usually supplied at a rate of 6 %, 

Refusal by the banks in 1920 to issue funds at 6 % to the 

Manitoba credit unions resulted in the provincial government 

taking over the supply of funds. That year the Manitoba govt. 

organized a group of branches of the provincial treasury to 

operate primarily as savings banks. The savings deposits 

received by the four or five treasury branches were to be used 

26 

as funds for credit unions in the province. in Alberta the 

25; Mackintosh, W. A., Op. Git. , p. 268. 

26* Ontario also had a system of 15 sub-treasury offices 

operating as savings banks. They were located principally 
in western parts of the province. An example of a private 
bank operating on a provincial scale was the Weyburn Secur¬ 
ity Bank in Saskatchewan. It was absorbed into the Imperial 
Bank in 1930. 




2 

>:S. 


' 



* 







: 



• 








, 


' 

f ■ 


... J , 



„ 







• 

■■ : ■■>. ' ■: Ci' 





• 








• 

* 



;■! • < - . v;d iBBirtoJ 

‘ 

o ■ ■ 1 ■ : 

. 

. 


* . ... » t * A ; 

. 

- ' 

* 

, 


28 


credit unions charged interest at 7 \% and retained \ of 1 % for 

operating expenses. The Alberta societies, then, were able to 

pay 7 % to the banks for their funds, avoiding the difficulties 

of the Manitoba unions. By 1929 there were 37 of these unions 

. 27 

in Alberta issuing loans totalling over $1,500,000. 

The Dominion Government entered the field of agricultural 

28 

credit by the Canadian Farm Loan Act of 1926, which authorized 
a Canadian Farm Loan Boards Funds were to be provided by 
federal govt, subscriptions by the provinces. The Farm Loan 
Board could lend amounts up to 50 % of the value of land, 20^ 
on value of permanent insured improvements on the strength of 
the first mortgages. In spite of thessefforts to offset the 
burden of indebtedness to private institutions this combination 
of Dominion, provincial, and cooperative credit organizations 
only accounted for a very small proportion of the estimated 
$650,000,000 in farm indebtedness outstanding by 1931* 


Collapse of the 
Farm Economy, 1930 


Although the western economy was 
subject to varying, and at times severe. 


fluctuations, prior to 1930-31 the precarious economic structure 
was not submitted to a supreme test. The main period of settle¬ 
ment on the prairies had occurred during a general upward trend 
of world prices supplemented by the decade of prosperity during 
and immediately after World War I. A preview of the weaknesses 


27: Mackintosh, W. A., On Cit. , p. 273. In 1938 the Alberta 
govt, assisted credit unions under the provisions of the 
Alberta Credit Union Act. By 1948 there were 190 oper¬ 
ating in Alberta, issuing over $2,000,000 in loans per 
year. Alberta Facts and Figures , p. 354. 


28 


Revised Statutes of .Canada- . 1927, c. 66 









t.' - 

■ , 

* 


* 

* 

* . - 

* 

. 

* , • * t , 

■ ,■ • . t ■ • ■ , 






- 










. 




. . * : ■' 
* . 

* 

- 




29 


of the western economy with its high fixed costs and uncontrol¬ 
lable items, occurred during the sudden cut in wheat prices 
between 1920 and 1923, which brought about general hardships on 
the prairies* A return to prosperity over the following six 
years reduced organized protest, but efforts were continued by 
cooperative groups and the governments to offset the dangers of 
the existing system. In Alberta particularly, the principles 
of cooperation were promoted by an agrarian government of the 
United Farmers of Alberta» 

In 1930 the precarious economic structure of the prairies 

collapsed* In Alberta agricultural net income fell from 

29 

$119,100,000 to $16,600,000 between 1929 and 1932. The com¬ 
pleteness of the collapse is shown in wheat prices after 1930 
compared to the fluctuations of the previous periods. (See 
Table V.) 


Table V; 

Price of Wheat per 
Periods, 

Bushel in Alberta 
1910-36 50 

for Various 


Price 


Price 

1910 .... 


1928 . 


1915 .... 


1929 .. 


1920 .... 

... 1.52 

1930 .. , 

...... .39 

1921 .... 


1931. 


1922 .... 


1932 ........ 


1923 .... 

.. .65 

1933 . 

...... .45 

1924 .... 

.. 1.20 

1934 ...»__ 

...... .58 

1925 .... 

.. 1.09 

1935 .. 

...... .61 

1926 .... 

.......... 1.05 

1936 ........ 

...... .87 

1927 .... 





Although the banks in Alberta remained solvent most of 


29: Mackintosh, W. A., The Economic Background of Dominion- 
Provincial Relations * Ottawa, 1939, p. 65. 

30: Case for Alberta , p. 112. 














































30 


them reduced their loaning activities drastically, and between 

31 

1930 and 1936 they closed down 104 branches in the province. 

With their incomes reduced to practically nothing, with no 

sources of loans to carry them over, the farmers were unable 

to meet their mortgage payments or their obligations to anyone 

else. The crippling extent of the private debt is shown in 

Table IV; in addition to this, the public debt in Alberta rose 

from #117,000,000 in 1931 to #158,000,000 in 1936-»one of the 

32 

highest per capita in Canada. 

Direct measures to ease the impoverishment of the farmers 
were undertaken through relief payments, advances of seed 
grain and other materials, work camps and public works of 
several types. But these measures were not applied on a large 
enough scale to assuage anything like the total misery. The 
provinces alone were unable to meet relief requirements 
because of the sudden drop in revenues, particularly from 
property taxes. The municipalities were severely hit by this 
loss of revenue and the onus for relief measures fell increas¬ 
ingly upon the province. But even the provinces alone were 
unable to meet relief needs, and the public debt legislation 
undertaken at the time only served to reduce sources of funds 
to carry out these measures. As a result the provinces became 
more and more dependent on Dominion subsidies as they had at 
their inception. 

In the face of this catastrophe all governments concentrated 

31; Alberta Facts and Figures , p. 345. 

32; Case for Alberta, p. 350. 







• • 




0 








\ 








• t : ■, , . . ■ ' • : - .. r. • 

, . 

. 

. 


















r 








t . _ ;. . o_ • _ b ^ :k ; rc 


, ' _ ; • 











- 31 


their attention on the enormous private and public debts of 
the prairies. The main object of the private debt legislation 
enacted during this period was to protect the farmer from, 
seizure when he could not meet his mortgage or bank payments. 
Generally, the effect of such legislation was to further cut 
off the trickle of private credit to the farmers. 

Dominion legislation in the field of private debt took 

the form of an Act to facilitate arrangements between farmers 

33 

and their creditors, and an amendment to the Farm Loan Act® 

The first Act provided arbitration machinery for the scaling 
down of farm debts according to ability to pay, and for 
reduction of interest rates on existing mortgages. Provisions 
of the Act were to be enforced by a Court of Review. The 
amendment to the Farm Loans Act provided for the taking of 
additional security by the Board in return for limited 
additional advances to enable the farmer to meet his operating 
expenses. In practice this legislation did not prove to be 
very satisfactory. The Court, or Board of Review, was unable 
to handle the number of applications received, and long delays 
ensued before decisions were announced. Another criticism of 
the Dominion legislation was that it did not provide a measure 
of relief for commercial debtors who were also dependent on 
farm incomes. 

Provincial legislation to protect debtors was nothing 
new to Alberta. As early as 1898 an Exemptions Act had been 

33: Bills 92 and 93, House of Commons, 1934. 



* 










* 

. . 

* 

' 

fl 

. 

, 

! 1 n 


„ 




t 





. 





- 32 


brought into force in the territory exempting certain property 

from seizure. With its amendments this Act is still in force. 

During World War I and afterwards other statutes were passed 

extending time for debtors to meet obligations and to establish 

procedure on foreclosure. During the period of low prices in 

34 

1923 a Debt Adjustment Act was passed which gave farmers the 

right to apply to a Debt Adjustment Board for papers which 

would prevent creditors from instituting proceedings. The 

creditors had the right to appeal to district court judges for 

permission to undertake action. After 1930 several amendments 

were passed extending the scope of the Act to include resident 

home owners and merchants. Creditors had to apply for special 

permits to take proceedings by a further amendment* and in 

1937 the Act was enlarged to include all resident debtors. 

35 

A Reduction and Settlement of Debts Act, which would 

have prohibited collection of interest on debts incurred 

before 1932, and a maximum rate of 5$ on all debts after that 

date, was declared ultra vires by the Alberta Supreme Court in 

1936. The Lieutenant Governor-in-Council was given authority 

to declare a moratorium on certain specified debts by the Post- 

36 

ponement of Debts Act in 1937.^ The continuation of poverty 
and depression throughout the 1930*s resulted in more 
intensified attempts by the Alberta government to alleviate 
the burdens of the debtor community. In 1938 a Debt Proceedings 

34* Statutes of Alberta . 1923, c. 43, and amendments. 

35: Ibid . 1936 (2nd session), c. 2. 

4 


36: Ibid , 1937, c 







. 

» 




' 

. ■ 

■ 



. 


■ 
















: :v ;• ' .; • i ; o 


«4 






: : .. “ ... ■ ‘, 0; . • . 

’. ■, .. ■ ■. .... ... . .... .. . b . .. ...; . 

" .. L"„ ■ . . ■. ' : •: ■ . . .. • ■; , 0 


. ■ t •- > ' . - 

• ' - ; 


' 




t ... , ; . • _ . : ■ 

. . ■ . .1 . ; 

•. 






53 


Suspension Act in effect declared a three year moratorium 

on debts in Alberta: ,? from the time of this act until March 

1, 1939, no action is to be brought in any court for the 

purpose of enforcing the payment of any debt created after 

July 1, 1936.” (s. 3) A Home Owners* Security Act ° also 

passed in 1938, forbade foreclosure on any mortgage taken out 

before March 1, 1938. As late as 1941 the Orderly Payment of 
39 

Land Debts Act restricted the definition of default on 
mortgages only to those farmers who had greater yields than 
10 bushels an acre from their crops, and to other debtors who 
had received $1,000 or more over the past year. 

With the burden of relief payments and reduced sources 
of revenue, the Alberta govt® undertook measures to reduce its 
fixed obligations on bond interest and redemptions. In 1956 
the Dominion government offered to assist payment of bond 
obligations on the condition that Alberta would agree to super™ 
vision of a Loan Council to control the issue of bonds offered 
outside the province* The Alberta government refused these 
conditions and had to default on the principal of a bond 
maturity of $3,200,000 which fell due that year* 40 Fixed 

37* Statutes of Alberta, 1938, c. 25. 

38: Ibid a 1938, c. 29. 

39: Ibid ; 1941, c. 47. 

40: McGoun, A. F., Social Credit Legislation: A Survey. 
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science . 

November 1936, p. 519® The actual default was over 
$2,800,000, the province having met the interest 
payment. 














n 


„ 














* 









- *. t. 










:*>£ 



t 









: 









- 34 - 


obligations were arbitrarily reduced through a Provincial 

41 

Loans Refunding Act which halved interest payments on 
liabilities of the province, and outstanding issues were to 
be retired on a compulsory basis by paying bondholders a 
perpetual stock. 

With all these efforts of the Dominion and provincial 
governments to provide relief, stimulate production, and to 
reduce private and public debt, the prairies found that it 
was virtually impossible to lift themselves to recovery by 
their own bootstraps. Instead, true to form, they had to 
wait until prices were restored on the world markets and the 
employment curves began to rise again. 

The Economic Background It will be noted in the discus- 

And Western Politics sion on debt legislation that no 

distinction has been made between the tenures of the UFA gov¬ 
ernment and the Social Credit government after 1935. Although 
the Social Credit government sponsored more vigorous debt 
adjustment policies than its predecessor, these were, like 
other direct relief measures, merely an extension of the 
traditional legislation undertaken by prairie governments in 
time of depression. The vigor of the debt and relief legis¬ 
lation in the 1930’s compared to that of previous periods was 
attributable chiefly to the severity of the depression rather 
than to isolated party aims or platforms. 


41: Statutes of Alberta. 1936, c. 6. 











4 : ■ ; = ■ ' 

' t - *' 

* 









4 

■. • C V. ... . 



, ., . , ... , • 


* 



' 

* 





* 

» 

.... 



. 


; 


i 








35 


Although the governments of the prairies reflected 
practically every shade of political partisanship - socialist, 
cooperative, status quo , and monetary reform - their actions 
during periods of low prices were essentially governed by the 
need to relieve the sufferings of a debtor community. All the 
governments of the prairies faced the same problems, and the 
continuity of legislation from province to province and from 
government to government shows the basic nature of the situation 
they had to meet. 

But this is not to say that the particular political 
doctrines and platforms of the various groups were not 
significant. The conventional practices of meeting depression 
on the prairies, as outlined above, were more or less taken for 
granted. It was in the deviations, in the peculiar doctrines 
or platforms of the different groups that the westerners 
established and shifted their political allegiance. The com¬ 
pleteness of political allegiance or rejection on the prairies 
depended on the ability of the parties to produce the goods. 

A party tended to stay in power so long as it looked as though 
it could do something during a depression, or If its term 
coincided with a period of prosperity. 

Prairie political thinking, conditioned partially by the 
extensive ups and downs of the inhabitants* incomes, gravitated 
towards absolute approval or absolute rejection of party 
programs. At the same time the individualistic westerner did 













- 


















* 




* 




. 




. 














. 












36 


not take to party discipline and political allegiance was at 
all times a precarious matter. The old-line parties had 
faded away at an early date in Alberta; the Progressives, the 
protest movement of the 1921-23 period of low prices dis¬ 
appeared when prosperity returned in 1926, and the United 
Farmers of Alberta were swept away by the farm vote in 1935. 

True to prairie tradition, the Social Credit Party came 
into power on a platform that appealed to the current spirit 
of protest. And, like the other western Canadian governments 
the Social Credit administration was primarily motivated by 
'"fcke- the need to offset those basic problems which accompanied 
all depressions on the prairies. Their attempt to apply the 
superstructure of their particular doctrines and theories to 
these fundamental economic conditions is outlined below. 

Bibliography - Chapter 1 

I. Dominion government documents; 

Revised Statutes of Canada , 1927, c. 66. 

‘ House of Commons , 1934, Bills 92 and 95. 

Canada Yearbook, passim. 

II. Alberta government documents; 

Statutes of Alberta : 1923 c. 

1936 (2nd session) c. 2 and c. 6. 

1937 c. 

1938 c. 25 and c. 29. 

1941 c. 47. 

Executive Council, The Case for Alberta . Edmonton, 1937, 

445 pp. 

Dept, of Industries and Labor, Bureau of Statistics, 

Alberta Facts and Figures , Edmonton, 1950, 404 pp. 













■ 


- 

. ■ 

, : ; >j.i ■ ; ; ■ - J ' • . : . ■ .Citv 0- i ■ ■ = S 

* 


. . 












; ^^ ^ ; . ' .. 

. 2 

. , .. .. 

* ■■ t 

, ■ . •.;.; -. 






■ . 


* 

■ 





* • 

• - 


t ' 








* 

. 













37 


III* Other sources: 

1> Books; 


Mackintosh, W. A., Economic problems of the 
Prairie Provinces . Toronto, 1935, 308 pp. 

Mackintosh, W. A., The Economic Background of 
Dominion-Provincial Relations , Ottawa, 1939, 

102 pp. 

Beckhart, B. H., The Banking System of Canada , 

New York, 1929, 492 pp. 

Patterson, E. L* S. Canadian Banking; , Toronto, 
1941, pp. 

Douglas, C, H., The Alberta Experiment - An Interim 
Survey, London, 19W,Hd20 u ""ppT~^ ~~ 

2. Articles• 


McGoun, A. P., Social Credit Legislation; A 
Survey, Canadian Journal of Economics and Political 
Science , Nov. "1936, pp. 512-522. 

Stewart, A., A Report of a Special Committee on 
Farm Implement Prices, 1937, Ibid , February 1938, 
pp. 92-99. 























•; ■ i. 'j 


* 










CHAPTER II 


SOCIAL CREDIT MEASURES IK ALBERTA. 1955-1938 






38 


CHAPTER II 

SOCIAL CREDIT MEASURES IN ALBERTA, 1955-1958 1 

When the Social Credit government was voted overwhelming¬ 
ly into power In the summer of 1935 it was faced with the task 
of meeting the Immediate and drastic economic needs of the 
province. For the most part, as outlined In the previous 
chapter, the government undertook direct economic relief 
measures that could only be remotely related to social credit 
theory. The debt legislation was, to a certain extent, a 
reflection of the social credit view of debt, but essentially 
the attempt to relieve Indebtedness was based on the 
traditional needs of a borrowing, quasi-pioneer community. 

In reviewing the attempt to establish a social credit 
economy by means of the statutes passed by the Alberta legis¬ 
lature between 1935 and 1938 one is tempted to speculate on 
the real motives behind this legislation. Was this legislation 
merely a concession by Premier Aberhart to the extremist 
members of the party in an attempt to show them, that an entire 
social credit program could not be adopted at the provincial 
level? Or, was Aberhart gambling on the hope that the 
practically vestigial powers of reservation by the lieutenant 
governor and disallowance by the governor general would remain 
dormant? It is unlikely that the answers to these questions 
will ever be known. 

1: See Appendix A, A Review of Social Credit Theory . 








. 

- 









t *■£ . 

. 

• . , . ': , ' 


yJ. : a* -to. : ' . •' 


- 




. 






• v 
















39 


The purpose here in tracing through the social credit 
legislation is to show how the Alberta government, after 
three years of enacting statutes, retreating in the face of 
disallowance, and healing divisions within the party was finally 
able to launch a social credit system in a modified form, known 
as r, the Interim Program*’. By reviewing the legislation and the 
events surrounding it, it will be possible to trace the 
evolution and development of the machinery that was put into 
operation in 1938 as the Interim Program. 

Before the first session of the newly-elected legislature 

met in February 1936, the government undertook a policy that 

was to affect deeply the carrying-out of subsequent social 

credit measures. Immediately after taking office on September 

3, 1935, the government deemed It necessary to suspend payments 

on the Alberta savings certificates which had been issued 

during the f 20 f s as an internal method of financing debt. The 

election of the Social Credit government with their theories of 

monetary reform and ideas on debt had undermined public 

confidence in the saving certificates; during the summer a run 

began on the treasury to turn the certificates in for cash. 

After redeeming $214,000 worth of these certificates the 

government suspended payment leaving some $9,000,000 of them 

2 

outstanding in the hands of the public. This default on the 
certificates, which were to be payable on demand, undoubtedly 
had a far-reaching effect in influencing general acceptance of 

2 : McGoun, A. F., Social Credit Legislation: A Survey. 

C anadian Journal of Economics and Political Science , 

November 1936, pT 518. " “ ' 








' 

J 






- 


. 

. 


£vs i 


; T ' ? 


* 

. : . ^ -x ' 






* 






40 


such social credit media as the prosperity certificates and 
the non-negotiable transfer vouchers later issued by the govern¬ 
ment. The following year by o/C 734/56 rates of interest on 
outstanding savings certificates were reduced by 50$ on all 
issues with a minimum rate at 2$. That year provision was 

also made to ’’allocate upwards of $60,000 per month for the 

3 

redemption of these certificates in the case of need”. 

Preliminary The initial social credit legislation. 

Measures passed during the first nine-week session in 

1936, was buried in 105 other statutes covering unemployment 

relief, debt, marketing and tax legislation. In effect, the 

4 

Social Credit Measures Act passed in April, merely reiterated 
social credit principles and held out a somewhat vague hop© 
for their realization in the future. The preamble to the Act 
restated Douglas® tenets that ’’modern productive capacity is 
unlimited.(the) present monetary system is obsolete”, and 
the general objectives of social credit were ”to bring about 
the equation of consumption to production and to afford to 
each person a fair share in the cultural heritage of the 
people of the Province”. At the same time, the Act intimated 
that drastic action was in the offing, and extensive powers 
were granted the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council to enforce 
future social credit policy. 

3: Executive Council of Alberta, The Case for Alberta, Edmonton, 
1938, p. 37I. 

4: Statutes of Alberta . 1936, Chapter 5. 


















* 

. t 




- 


* ' ! 

' 




. 




■ 




“ • • .. j. . ' , v .• ; 

t ' •• ... 














. 















41 


In its preamble the Act had stated: "it is essential to 
the well being of the people of the Province that all hindrances 
to the efficient production and distribution of goods be done 
away with..." The powers awarded the Lieutenant Governor-In- 
Council were 2 "to put into operation any measures designed to 
facilitate the exchange of goods and services or any proposal 
which is calculated to bring about the equation of consumption 
to production". In addition the Lieutenant Governor was to 
appoint commissioners to investigate the possibilities of 
undertaking increases in purchasing power "by means of social 
dividends", payment to producers of a Just price, and the 
condition of businesses in the province generally. 

Before the second session began in August 1956, the govern¬ 
ment had undertaken two preliminary steps which were widely 
interpreted as being first moves towards establishing a social 
credit system. Firstly, an issue was made in August of some 
$239,000 in "prosperity certificates", a type of dated stamp 
scrip based on the theories of Silvio Gesell and Irving Fisher 
rather than those of Major Douglas, The extent and result of 
this deviation from social credit principles Is discussed 
below (pp. 59-66)* The second measure undertaken at this time, 
under authority of Order-In-Council 1092/36, was the registering 
of citizens with the government by "covenants" ostensibly for 
interest-free loans, but interpreted by many as being a prelude 
to the issue of the $25 per month dividend. Signees of the 
covenants agreed to cooperate with the government, to accept 


. 

, , .. , : 




* 


- 

• 

... 

• 



. 





- 

, 

. 

. 

rn : 

4 * 

. 

■ 

■ 

, 

, 





42 


“Alberta Credit 1 ’, and not to demand its conversion into Canadian 
currency. Retailers were to give preference to Alberta-made 
goods, and they were to accept Alberta credit in payment for 
them whenever possible. Manufacturers and farmers agreed to 
sell at least 50$ of their marketable products for Alberta 

credit, professional men were to accept at least 20$ of fees 

. 5 

and landlords 10$ of rents in Alberta credit. 

Registration under the covenants proceeded at a rapid 

pace, and during the summer some 370,000 people, out of a 

6 

total population of 772,782 had signed. The idea of the 
covenants or individual contracts, and the provisions contained 
in them as a means of establishing social credit, appeared in 
varying forms throughout this entire experimental period. 

When the modified program was finally adopted in 1938 the 
concept of individual contract still stood as the basis of its 
implementation. 

Both the issuance of prosperity certificates and the 

signing of the covenants were enacted into law by legislation 

7 

passed during the second session in September 1936. The 
Alberta Credit H OUS e Act in its preliminary statement confirmed 
the registration of all persons under 0.C.1092/36 for “Alberta 
credit”, and provided for the further registration of all 

5: McGoun, A. F., Op. Glt» t p. 522. 

6j Alberta Facts and Figures , 1950, p. 19. 

7: Statutes of Alberta , 1936, 2nd session. Chapters 1 and 4 
respectively* 






*x 

■ ... ■ ‘ • ■ . •'■ • • t ■ ' • ■ 

ft 

# 

■ 

v ; ' ■■ - :: 

, t r'.v !'■ 

*• 

’ • 

: ; j, .: ; : . : , . ' ■ . i ■ ■' " • :: 

t . .. ■ . : 1 




r. :' o 0 

■ q. 





- , 









. 

* « * <L 

: 



, 





43 


persons over 21. The Act also required the signing of 
declarations of cooperation by the registrant, subject to 
cancellation by the superintendent of the proposed Credit House 
if the signee defaulted in the agreement. 

The Credit A provincial Credit House was to be established 

House Act under authority of the Act under the management of 

an appointed Board. The Credit House system was to be administer¬ 
ed by a superintendent, and branches were to be established 
throughout the province. According to the Act the function of 
the Credit House was to "furnish to persons entitled to Alberta 
credit facilities for the exchange of goods and services in the 
Province in order to effect the equation of purchasing power... 
and production”. More specifically the Credit House was to 
convert currency into a form of Alberta credit, and it was to 
enforce non-convertibility of Alberta credit to currency; "no 
person whatsoever shall be entitled to demand from the Credit 
House any payment in currency..." (s. 23) Provision was made 
for advances of Alberta credit to any "person engaged in 
agriculture, manufacturing or industry”. These advances were 
to be interest-free subject only to an "administrative charge" 
of 2 % and presentation by the borrower of a form of security. 

As a means of backing its operations the Credit House was to 
retain a fund in the chartered banks to cover operating expenses, 
for conversions of Alberta credit into currency (presumably such 
conversions would be for transactions outside the province), and 
to acquire security issued under the Act. (s. 26) 




. 

. . 

„ 

■ ■ . 

, 

• •- ' . . , . ■ ;i . 

■ 

* * 

■ - ■ 

* 

. . • ’ •. . ' . J. VV a- :.tj 

- . • 




44 


Beyond these few specific measures the Credit House Act 
lapsed again into vague promises for the future. To begin 
with, the Credit House was not to have been established 
immediately, but was to "commence its operations only with the 
approval of the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council". (s. 17) 
Definite regulations governing the activities of the Credit 
House were to be made by future Orders™in-Council, which 
according to section 30 would establish the amount of Alberta 
credit to be issued, to whom it was to be issued, and the 
regulation of the total amount in circulation. Such Orders- 
in-Council would "establish classifications of persons entitled 
to Alberta credit*..having regard to any circumstances relating 
to purchasing power...production...or economic conditions". 

(s. 30-b) The credit was also to be issued "in respect of 
specified products or commodities by way of a bonus", (s. 30-d) 
and to retailers as a "compensatory discount in respect of 
commodities sold at a price authorized by the Board which is 
less than the ordinary price". (s. 30-e) The credit so issued 
was to be subject to an "unearned increment levy". 

Although the Credit House Act remained vague in its 

application of the social credit program its pages contained 

Aberhart f s modifications of Douglasite theory, written into 

the statutes for the first time in clauses relating to the 

0 

unearned increment levy, compensatory discount, and the bonus 

8: The Alberta govt, in 1913 had an unearned increment levy, 
but it was a 5$ tax on appreciation in land values at the 
time of transfer of title. Aberhart f s government later 
increased this tax to 10$. Of. Revised Statutes of 
Alberta . 1922, c. 32, and Statutes of Alberta . 1938, c. 19. 






0 

. 

. 

^ : .' ». ■ " w ’ ' 

. 

■ .: ' 

.. . « * ■ , 


. 






- 








• , . .. 




- 






. 












. 




* 




■ . 

■ 

. 


45 - 


on consumption. The Act also set a precedent for the pattern 
of future social credit legislation through the idea of an 
omnipotent Board, a provincial institution to issue credit, 
the concept of an inconvertible provincial medium of exchange, 
and the signing of contracts of cooperation. 

The generalities of the Credit House Act soon became 

apparent to the rank-and-file members of the Social Credit 

Party. When the session of the legislature opened in 

1937 open rebellion had broken out in the party. With the 

malcontents demanding immediate social credit measures Aberhart 

conceded to their demands. The result was appointment of the 

five-member Social Credit Board and the passage of the Alberta 
9 

Social Credit Act setting forth a detailed social credit 
program. According to section 31 of the Act: 

It is the intent of this Act to control the volume 
of the means of payment for goods and services in harmony 
with the ability of the whole Province to produce and con¬ 
sume them on a rising standard of living, so that excess 
expansion of credit and a consequent and undue advance in 
the price level shall not occur, and that the present 
system of issuing credit through private Initiative for 
profit, resulting in recurrent deflation and inflation 
shall cease. 


Alberta Social Establishment of this social credit 

Credit Act system was to be carried out by the Social 

Credit Board, a Provincial Credit Commission of three to five 
members appointed by the Board, and the Alberta Credit House 
organization authorized the year before. Of these three bodies 


9: Statutes of Alberta, 1937, Chapter 10 






. 

' 

. - . .. :...i : .■ w ,,..C 

, 






- 

. 

* 

■ 

. 


,8 1 . 1 . 

' 














' . ' . 

* 

* 
















, 




: r 






- 46 


the Social Credit Board was the only one to materialize to 
fulfill its purpose of appointing technical experts, examining 
social credit legislation, making recommendations for 
legislative action, and studying the economic conditions o'f the 
province. The Board was authorized to visit "any part of the 
world (to) secure prospective Commissioners or technical 
experts". This the chairman of the Board proceeded to do, and 
he travelled to England to return with two Douglasite advisers, 
an action that temporarily at least healed over the insurgency. 

Under the new Act the Credit House was to have undertaken 

essentially the same role assigned to it previously in admin- 

istering the system of Alberta credits. These credits were to 

be distributed in the form of "Treasury Credit Certificates" 

based on Aberhart 1 s concept of the "non-negotiable 

certificate" - one of his four main tenets of social credit. 

The non-negotiable certificate had been devised by Aberhart 

in 1935, apparently with the object of establishing a medium 

of exchange in the province that would not conflict with the 
. 10 

Bank Act. Aberhart described the certificates as follows: 

These are blank forms issued to each.«.citizen to 
enable him to fill in the amount and signature, also the 
name of the recipient to whom he is transferring the 
credit. As it is non-negotiable the person receiving the 
certificate must of necessity deposit it in the bank or 
Provincial Credit House. When this is done the issuer is 
debited in his account and the recipient is credited in 
his account. The recipient, therefore, is able to issue 
another non-negotiable certificate of his own to pay his 
debts and thus the circulation of credit is possible. 


10: Aberhart, Wm., Social Credit Manual (Social Credit as 
applied to the Province of Alberta), Calgary, 1935, 
pp. 16-17 and p. 25. 










•' 
































- 

































• 



- 




. 






« 








- 



47 


Later in the book he produced an illustration of the 
non-negotiable certificate form: (Exhibit I) 


STATE CREDIT HOUSE BRANCH 
(address) 

This is to certify that I am in debt to 

for the sum of Dollars 

100 

for 

Please credit him and charge to my account* 

No. ______ 

The Treasury Certificates authorized by the Social Credit 

^ Mm ^ m i Mm 4s &« ■ 0'k4t < ! 

Act were to have been issued by the government to provide dis» 
counts on retail prices* payment for govt, services* issuance 
of interest-free loans* debt payments* export subsidies* 
consumers* dividends* and other purposes. Although no mention 
was made of payment of a basic dividend it was assumed by many 
that the issuing of such certificates would merely be a prelude 
to the payment of the dividend in the form of Alberta credit. 

In a description of the treasury credit certificates 
Part IV of the Act went into considerable detail In outlining 
their method of circulation. Each Credit House branch was 

















' 

■ 








. 








I 


.. J 

■ 

. 






t • ... ‘ &'■ ■ ■ ■ ' - ■ 

. 

* 


■ 











- 48 


"directed to open a Treasury Credit Certificates Account, to 
charge this account with the face value of all certificates 
furnished by the Minister through the Credit House, and to 
credit same to its customers". (s. 29) Credit House branches 
were to accept treasury credit certificates from each other in 
settlement of balances between them. Branches receiving 
certificates in settlement for a favourable balance were 
instructed to credit their certificate accounts with that 
amount and to charge their general ledger deposit accounts for 
the same amount. ?f Both the paying and receiving Branches shall 
then distribute the credits or debits to the customers entitled 
to them...and shall charge or credit the Treasury Credit 
Certificates Account with the corresponding total.' 1 (s. 30) 

The above description of the certificates is somewhat of a 
digression from the central theme of the Social Credit Jet. 
Responsibility was to have rested on the shoulders of the 
Provincial Credit Commission to establish and apply social 
credit principles to the province as outlined in the Act. The 
duty of the Commission, which was to be appointed for ten years,^ 
was chiefly "to determine for each year the value of unused 
capacity of industry and people of Alberta for the production 
of wanted goods and services", (s. 5 - italics mine) This 
amount was to be credited to the Provincial Credit Account to be 
distributed in the form of Treasury Credit Certificates as a 

11: Changed to a "Temporary" Credit Commission by the Social 
Credit Act Amendment Act. Statutes of Alberta , 1937, 

2nd session, c, 3. 
















■ 

. 

„ ,, 




. 


. ■ . . . V 'O ” ■, ' . 

* 

j , :• , .U'>0 '■ . 

... 

„ 

. 
























. 





49 


method of closing the purchasing power gap and equating 
production with consumption. The Act then went on to explain 
how this value of unused capacity was to be determined. 

Unused capacity was defined in the Act as the "difference 
between total consumption and productive capacity". (s. 14) 

Consumption was to be calculated by "estimating actual domestic 
consumption of goods and services for the immediate preceding 
three months period...plus the estimate of exports for the 
immediate preceding three months period...plus a fixed 
percentage for capital depreciation to be determined according 
to the estimates of the Commission, The level of values... 
shall conform to the average of prices recorded by.., the 
department of trade and industry or other official source in 
constructing its indices of wholesale prices." (s. 14) Of 
necessity, this calculation of consumption would only be a 
rough figure based, as the Act says, on "estimates", the 
percentage of unrecorded transactions among provinces being 
much higher than those across national boundaries with check 
points. 

♦ 

Productive capacity was to have been ascertained "by 
estimating the total capacity of the industries and people of 
the Province«..for the production of wanted goods and services 
for the immediate preceding three months period...to this shall 
be added an estimate of imports for the immediate preceding 
three months f period..." (s* 14) In practice if an attempt 
had been made to carry out this computation it probably would 



■ .. . ■ • : 

c 

. 



. 















' 











„ ••. 










# t* 9 









' 















. . . 







■*. 













•j ,, , 






« ■ • ' 



t 







’ 

* I • 

. * . 





50 


have amounted to something like the gross value of production 
in Alberta (which is computed by the provincial bureau of 
statistics) for a three months* period, minus the estimated 
value of consumption in the province, with adjustments made 
for calculations of exports and imports* 

On the basis of the above computation something like a 
Just Price was to have been established by a retail discount 
rate defined as "that percentage which unused productive 
capacity bears to total productive capacity". (s* 14) No 
retail discount was to be made available to consumers unless 
the Commission^ calculations showed that productive capacity 
exceeded consumption by 10$, that is presumably, as the ^ 1 

economy approached full production the discount would be dis¬ 
continued, The retail discount rate as decreed by the 
Commission was to apply on all goods and services, and retailers 
were to be compensated by "discount vouchers" issued for the 
difference between the decreed price and their previous price. 
The Credit Houses were to accept all such discount vouchers 
and credit them to the accounts of the merchants. 

At the same time, a "consumers* dividend" was to b© paid 
in the form of treasury credit certificates to persons entitled 
to Alberta credit. The amount of the dividend was to be 
determined by "making it approximate such percentage of the 
Provincial Credit Account as may be available and not otherwise 
appropriated. Therefore said dividends shall in no case 


- . \ ' ' ■' ■' •' 

i : < 

* 

t ' ' ■' ••■■■ ' ' ^ ’ t 1 

- . .... ■ • ... ■' • : .... ' . . 

. 


- 

' 

. 




51 


amount to less than 5$ of said account#” The dividends were 
not subject to tax or levy# 

Essentially, then, this Act was to create prosperity by 
means of subsidizing and stimulating consumption. Lower retail 
prices were to be decreed by the Commission to place more goods 
within the reach of current incomes. Consumers were to be 
issued additional means of buying goods through special 
dividends. Retailers were to be compensated by an issue of 
special credits which would in turn increase their purchasing 
power either to buy larger inventories or to expand their 
consumption. As before, the system was to be legalized by the 
consummation of individual contracts by retailers, wholesalers, 
manufacturers and primary producers with the Commission. Pres¬ 
umably the production end of the economy was to have been 
expanded by means of interest-free loans but this feature is 
not stressed within the Act. In the event that the issue of 
credit started an upward price spiral, the Commission was 
authorized to withdraw certificates from circulation, levy a 
''negative retail discount rate” (sales tax), to undertake open 
market operations and use of the discount rate through the 
certificate Fund, to "maintain a balanced credit structure”# 

(s. 35) 

This Act shows a trend towards reducing the sphere of 
applied social credit from the universal basic dividend, 
stimulation of production through large interest-free loans 




t ' • 

- ’: 






* • . . ■- 


. 

- 

« 

. 

, ;/ ,:.J n::.t !. 'oJj-w v,v 0010 In. Vaeqp.iJ 

, 




er:j' t> .:-<Si v u ! : v J. x^; iiO.i-J > 


■ - 

■ 

* 

v ' J t 0 v 0 i ' - x ' Iw Ou 


■ 


. 


'■V ; frt Z 




















52 


of special credits, and a Just price on all commodities, to 
an emphasis on the retail level only, in the form of a rebate 
to consumers and a discount on retail goods. It is doubtful, 
even if this system had been Initiated, that it could have 
solved the basic problem of restoring farm incomes or 
effectively providing a substitute for real investment in the 
province. 

Revival of At any rate, the Alberta government was not 

Disallowance to have the opportunity of trying out the 

provisions of the Social Credit Act. The Act was declared ultra 

vires by the Supreme Court of Canada on the grounds that "in 

substance...this system of administration, management and 

circulation of credit constitutes in our view a system of 

banking 1 within the intendment of section 91 (of the BNA 
12 

Act)”. it was also the opinion of the judges that the Act 
was a violation of the regulation of trade and commerce clause 
of the BNA Act - section 91 (2) (15). But before the power 
of disallowance was invoked the Alberta government, in the 
second session in 1937, passed three statutes designed to 
enforce the provisions of the Social Credit Act. 

13 

In August 1937 a Credit of Alberta Regulation Act 9 was 
passed declaring it necessary "that the business of banking 
in Alberta shall be controlled". Under this Act banks in the 
province were to be licensed by the government, their operations 

12 : Supreme Court of' Canada, Canada Law Reports . 1938, p. 117. 

13: Statutes of Alberta . 1937, 2nd session, c. 1. 








■ ■ ' ■■ ■ ~ 

. 

< 

' *■ •■■■•' ’ 

. 


•• * • ■ 

. : .j- J 

. . ; ' . ;• . ' .. • 

* ’ " ' 

■ 




























* 


- 

, . . ... .. ;■ . - : 





- 53 


were to be controlled by Local Directorates appointed by the 

Social Credit Board, and the regulation of the credit system 

generally was to be in the hands of the Provincial Credit 

Commissioners. In conjunction with this Act, the legislature 

enacted "An Act to provide for the Restriction of the Civil 

14 

Rights of Certain Persons", which deprived bank employees of 

their civil rights if they did not become licensed under the 

Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, A Judicature Act Amendment 
15 

Act was also passed at this time which prohibited reference 
of any "action or proceeding" of the Alberta legislature ! bon- 
cerning constitutional validity" without the permission of the 
Lieutenant Governor-in-Council. 

The licensing requirements of the Credit of Alberta 
Regulation Act demanded that every banker and bank employee 
within 21 days after the passage of the Act apply to the 
Provincial Credit Commission* Bankers applying for their 
licenses had to be recommended by at least two members of their 
Local Directorate, and they were required to sign an undertaking 
agreeing to "refrain from acting or assisting or encouraging any 
person,••to act in a manner which restricts or interferes with 
the property and civil rights of any person or persons 
within the Province". (s. 3-2) The meaning of this statement 
is, that the banks would not be able to take action against 

14: Statutes of Alberts , 1937, 2nd session, c. 2. 

15: Ibid » 1937, 2nd session, c. 5. 






. 

' ' irt " , • . :r>' .1. • - 0 />■ Ji J j , 

. . ' c 

(r 

. 

j 

■ . ■ .! . ... j 

• . ■.... ■ ■.< •• I 

: - • .t 

. 











. t . 





■ 


















• 













54 


defaulters on loans within the province, because by definition 

in the preamble; T, the extent to which property and civil 

rights...may be enjoyed depends upon the principles governing 

16 

the monetization of credit". The Provincial Credit 

Commission had the power "at any time...without notice (to) 

suspend, revoke or cancel the license of any Banker or any 

employee". (s. 3-5) Bankers who had their licenses revoked 

could appeal to the Social Credit Board; unlicensed bankers 

were denied the use of the courts (s. 7-1) and were subject 

to fines of "not less than $5,000". (s. 5) 

Once bankers had applied for their licenses the Social 

Credit Board was to have appointed Local Directorates of five 

17 

persons to supervise the activities of each bank. Extensive 
powers of credit regulation were accorded the Commissioners to 
be carried out by means of Orders-in-Council. The broad 
controls outlined in the Act were clearly a violation of the 
banking powers outlined in section 91 of the BNA Act, and the 
Supreme Court considered them also to be contrary to the trade 
and commerce regulations of section 91 (2). It was also the 


16; By this statement the Alberta govt, was obviously attempt¬ 
ing to adapt the property and civil rights" clause of the 
BNA Act (section 92 (13)) to its own objectives within 
provincial jurisdiction. 

17; In 1919 a bank official actually suggested to a convention 
of the United Farmers at Edmonton that local committees be 
appointed to hear farmers 1 complaints on banking policies. 
The committees would then submit their complaints to the 
banks for study. Cf. Beckhart, Op. Cit. , p. 472. Prof. 

A. D. Mac Gibbon before the Select Committee in 1923 recom¬ 
mended that a credit commissioner be appointed to hear 
farmers* complaints against the banks. 





- 

* 





• 


* 

_ 


: 


3 

. 


* . ; 





. 

. 




■ 

. 

■ -, v .- ' ~ . .. • • ■ 


_ 

,:,/ ■ 0 vO '.o ,:v,.,o . I-./.. Vi ^ wCv) 

„ 


„ • 

' 

. . „ . - „ 

.* 

. ' " •; ' * • • : . U^' • 1 

5 







55 


opinion of the court that as the Act w a s based on the Social 

Credit Act, and as the latter had been declared ultra vires , 

the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act fell with it. The two 

companion acts were also declared ultra vires . 

In response to this revival of disallowance the Alberta 

legislature regrouped its social credit statutes into three 

new bills in October 1937. Through the provisions of two of 

the bills they attacked the banks from two directions. Firstly, 

■18 

the Bank Taxation Act was to have levied a n tax of on© per 
cent on paid up capital (of a bank)...(plus) 1 % on reserve 
funds and divided profits". (s. 3) In the event of default 
banks were to be subject to a penalty of 5 % added to the tax 
plus a further penalty of 1 % per month until they paid their 
taxes. The banks were required to submit certain returns to 
the provincial secretary periodically! failure to do this 
made them subject to a fine of $20 a day per person (i.e., 
the bank employees responsible for submitting the returns) 
and twice the amount of the previous tax until the returns 
were made. 

Secondly, the legislators redrafted the Credit of Alberta 

Regulation Act in an "Act to Amend and Consolidate the Credit 

19 

of Alberta Regulation Act”. Reworded in more general terms 
than its parent, the amendment omitted all reference to civil 
liberties and stated its provisions in terms of "credit 

IB; Statutes of Alberta , 1937, 2nd session. Bill 1. 


19; Ibid , Bill 8 
















. . . - 

, 

. • • • : i 




■ 

. 


° 

■ 

. » - 












. 


T 






. 


, 

. 












- 56 


institutions” rather than banks. The same licensing require¬ 
ments stood; the penalty for operating without a license was 
increased to $10,000 a day , but its enforcement was to take 
place through the courts, instead of the Social Credit Board. 

(s. 5) Section 7 of the amendment stated: ”No provisions of 
this Act shall be so construed as to authorize the doing of 
any action or thing which is not within the legislative 
competence of the Legislature”. 

20 

A third statute, the Accurate News and Information Act 
was designed to bring the press under control of the Social 
Credit Board. Editors were required to submit ”names, 
addresses, and occupations of all persons by whom...information 
was furnished to the newspaper” and names of writers of all 
news stories and editorials in the paper. (s. 6) The 
Lieutenant Governor-in-Council was given power to suspend 
publication if the stipulations of the Act were not carried 
out. These three bills were reserved by the Lieutenant 
Governor, and they were subsequently declared ultra vires by 
the Supreme Court. The Amendment to the Credit of Alberta 
Regulation Act fell with its predecessor, and the press bill 
was described as being beyond the sphere of provincial 
jurisdiction. The Bank Taxation Act was squelched by the 
Supreme Court on the grounds that it was directed to frustration 
of the system of banking and the "rate of taxation®..must be 

20: Statutes of Alberta . 1957, Bill 9. 






„ 

■ - -l .. .... t ' 

t 

. 

. 








~ 






. 



. ; 


t' 

- 

, 


* : 











57 


21 

known to the Alberta legislature to be prohibitive”. 

An attempt to regulate the banks was renewed in the first 

session in 1938 by the "Banking Corporations Temporary 

22 

Additional Taxation Act” which was to have increased bank 

taxes in the province by 50^. This Act fell on the same 

grounds as its predecessor. With their efforts to establish 

social credit frustrated by the senior govt, the Alberta 

legislature took the whole issue of disallowance to the 

Supreme Court. The upholding of the power of disallowance 

by the judges marked the high-water level of attempts to 

establish a semi-autonomous social credit state in the province. 

23 

A subdued Alberta Social Credit Realization Act enacted 
during the 1938 session gave somewhat vague powers to the 
Social Credit Board to "devise ways and means for evaluation, 
conservation, enhancement, advancement and realization of«». 
social credit”. (s. 5) The Board was to formulate and carry 
out such measures ”as appear to the Board to be advisable 
for.,.counteracting any action or influence likely to impair 
or jeopardize the social credit of the province”. (s, 5-e) 

In November 1938 the legislature passed the Treasury 
Branches Ac^inaugurating an interim Program which retained 
the central features of the previous legislation, including a 

21: Supreme Court of Canada, Qp. Cit. , p, 101. 

22; Statutes of Alberta , 1938, 1st session, c. 8. 

23: Ibid , c. 3. 

24: Ibid , 1938, 2nd session, c 0 3. 




. 





1 

















V,:\ • 





, 



. 

■ 

. it.! •. . 



• 







- 


Cv 



..... ... 





- 










, 

„ . ' : 












» 






. 


* . . * • : 

. 

. , , *. : -. 








. . „ • ■ . . - 
















58 


provincial Credit House (the Treasury Branches), non-negotiable 
certificates, and a consumers 1 dividend. The new system, 
shorn of the former compulsory features was based on voluntary 
contract in which the signee agreed to certain conditions of 
cooperation within the framework. No attempt was made to 
reserve the Act by the lieutenant governor, nor was it dis¬ 
allowed by the governor general or referred to the Supreme 
Court. 

The Bill of Before commencing a survey of the Interim 

Bights - 1946 Program, two other events connected with 

social credit policies in Alberta should be mentioned. The 

25 

first of these was the passage of an AUerta Bill of Rights 
in March 1946 which reiterated and paraphrased the disallowed 
Social Credit and Credit of Alberta Regulation Acts. 

Apparently under pressure from the Social Credit League, the 
provincial government enacted this legislation to fulfill the 
original social credit platform in post-war Alberta. Imbued 
with the lessons of the past decade the government left a 
loophole in clause 28 of the Act stating that the Act would 
not come into force until ”after the question of the validity 
of this Act has been referred to the Supreme Court of Alberta”. 
The resultant negative decision came as a surprise to no one; 
the Interim Program had virtually been discontinued three 
years previously, and to all intents and purposes the 1946 Act 
wrote finis to attempts at social credit legislation in Alberta 
for the time being. 


25; Statutes of Alberta . 1946, c. 1. 







' 

1 

. 




- 


. 


. 




, 

, 











59 


Prosperity Besides the Interim Program the Social 

Certificates Credit governments only other attempt to put 

its principles of monetary reform into practice was a deviation 

from Douglasism in the form of dated stamp scrip* Dated stamp 

scrip may be defined as "money which is made expensive to hold 

by the requirement that a stamp, costing a definite sum, has 

„ 26 

to be placed on it at regular intervals or dates . The scrip 

was apparently issued by the Social Credit administration as a 

stop-gap measure, either to appease demands from the public or 

within the party for immediate implementation of social credit, 

or until a workable social credit scheme could be devised* 

The original idea of the scrip, as adopted by some of the 

Social Credit members In 1936, was to enable the Alberta govt.- it* 

make immediate payment of the basic dividend. Under this 

27 

scheme, proposed at an early caucus, the government was to 

pay monthly dividends to each eligible person by Issuing five 

wH h. jjiMr A ^ t HI 

"provincial bonds" of $5 each, bearing no interest, and payable 
after one year G The back of the bond would contain spaces for 
the placing of weekly ten-cent stamps throughout the year* Such 
bonds would be used by consumers for their transactions; at the 
end of one year bonds would be fully redeemed at their face value 

26: Coe, V. F., Dated Stamp Scrip in Alberta, Canadian Journal 

of Economics and Political Science . February 1938, 
pp. 60-91. 

Cf. also, Gesell, S., The Natural Economic Order , 

English translation, 1934 0 


27; Coe, V. F., Op. Git. , p• 63, and Edmonton Journal , 
June 16, 1936. 










■ » ; 

, 

1 

■ . . .. • . : • • " ? ' ' ' 

t 


: c , * • 


■ 


. 






, 






* 

* 

. ■ 

. 

. 














. 








t • . 

. 

, ' * v ._ ' * . - . , ■ : ■ 

. 















60 


in cash or Alberta credit. Thus, it would be possible to issue 
the basic dividends, while automatically providing for a 
redemption fund through sales of stamps, all at a profit to the 
government of 20/ a bond per year. 

On June 11, 1936, the government approved an Order-in- 
Council (815/36) which authorized an issue of 2,000,000 
"prosperity certificates" (scrip) in denominations of $1 and 
$5 to those who would accept them for payment on public works, 
relief or other government expenditures. Stamps to the value 
of 1 % per week were to be fixed to them, and certificates were 
to be redeemed within two years. The redemption clause was 
altered by O.C. 1085/36 in July, which made provision for 
payment from the General Revenue Fund of the province for 
certificates presented by anyone on the Thursday, Friday, and 
Saturday following the second Wednesday of each month, commenc¬ 
ing with the month of September. Proceeds from stamp sales 
were to be kept in a trust fund for redemption and other 
expenses incurred in issuing the certificates. 

While the public speculated on the practability and 
acceptability of the scrip, an interlude of two months ensued 
before the first issue was made in August to finance road 
projects. After the first issue, the government announced that 
no further issues would be made after August 6 until they had 
observed the effects of its circulation. According to state¬ 
ments made later in August, $175,000 worth of roadwork in 
July would be paid for by scrip and some $75,000 in roadwork 


- 

... t . . 

.. ...... . t 

. 

. - 






, . V- /. . ' ■■ . • 




■ ' 


» . " 

c ' • . . ‘ W ' £. r Sl 




61 


would be covered by scrip in August. By the end of August 

a total of $239,381 had actually been issued to some 5,000 

or 10,000 workers on road projects in payments between $20 

and $25. By the second week in August retailers began to 

receive scrip from the first recipients. In September the 

legislature passed the Prosperity Certificates Act reaffirming 

28 

the provisions of the Orders-in-Council. 

At the retail level the scrip was apparently fairly 
extensively circulated in the small towns in areas where the 
roadwork was carried out. Generally, the larger towns and 
cities handled a smaller proportion of the issue. In 
districts where the scrip was used merchants often organized 
their own clearing houses for exchanging scrip balances among 
themselves; in August some twenty clearing houses were said to 
have been established in the province. On the circulation of 
the scrip Professor Coe says; 

The most significant economic effect in Alberta of 
dated stamp money had nothing to do with the fact that the 
scrip was of the dated stamp variety. This was the diver¬ 
sion of business from one retailer to another, from those 
who would not accept the scrip to those who would...Since 
the money was later redeemed freely, those who accepted 
early enjoyed a short period of prosperity. This diversion 
of custom was probably partly responsible for the opinion 
of many merchants that the scrip helped business for a 
short time 

Until the province undertook to redeem the scrip in 
September for currency or government cheques the weight of the 


28: Statutes of Alberta , 1936, 2nd session, c. 4. 

29: Coe, V. F., Op. Git. , p. 84. 





* 

c 

* 

. 

. 

■ 


• C • • 

• t : 

- 

- 

. v • l : •: ■ 

e 

- 


' 


- 


. ■ . . • , , ; ; 




62 


whole experiment fell upon the retailers, particularly in the 
small towns. Recipients of scrip on provincial projects 
quickly unloaded their issue onto retail merchants who would 
accept them for goods and services. These small retailers were 
faced with somewhat of a dilemma: if they did not accept the 
scrip they were likely to lose business; if they did accept 
the scrip they were likely to run short of cash to buy their 
inventories. Most wholesalers in the province were in 
opposition to the scheme and merchants could not pass their 
scrip on to the next level. At the same time, merchants* 
employees were reluctant to take them in wages, and local 
farmers would not accept them in payment for produce. 


According to Professor Goe 


Scrip accumulated unequally with merchants, depending 
upon the size and kind of their business, known faithful¬ 
ness to social credit, and quantity of hired help. The 
scrip was redistributed by purchases of retailers from 
other retailers and payment of debts, but this did not 
solve the problem. Campaigns then developed, informal in 
most places, to relieve the hard-pressed merchants and 
force some channel of acceptance in the neighborhood. In 
the larger centres this activity took the form of estab¬ 
lishing a clearing house. These efforts helped individual 
merchants but did not appreciably diminish collective 
holdings 


Between September 10 and 12 the first redemptions, amount¬ 
ing to 60$ of the outstanding certificates, were made by the 
government. Following this initial redemption it was announced 
that no further roadwork financed by scrip would be undertaken 
for the remainder of the year. From November until March 
reissues of scrip were made at the rate of between $11,000 to 


30: Coe, V. F., Op. Pit. , p. 83 






, 








■ 








• : 


. 


f : < 


, V 

; : . v, • o ‘ 


. 


■ 






, 

t .... • 

* 

. 




. 
















* 














. 


, 



■ 




63 


$19,000 monthly as part of the salaries of provincial govt* 
employees. The issuance of the scrip through the civil 
servants failed to increase its popularity, and on April 7, 

1937, the provincial treasurer announced abandonment of the 
scheme. The reasons for its discontinuance were given as 

(1) the small amount of the certificates in circulation, and 

(2) the falling-off in circulation from month to month. After 

April 1937 the amount outstanding remained at more than 

$19,000 believed to have been retained in the hands of the 

public as souvenirs. Comparing the expenses of the experiment 

to the revenue derived from the sale of stamps, plus the 

$19,000 in souvenir certificates which were never redeemed. 

Professor Coe estimates that the scheme netted the provincial 

31 

government a profit of n roughly $32,300”. 

The chief characteristic of the scrip experiment in 
Alberta was that prosperity certificates did not, as far as can 
be determined, realize their original, theoretical purpose in 
increasing the velocity of circulation. According to the main 
argument of the government at the time, the scrip was to have 
increased purchasing power and employment, although with a 100$ 
redemption fund behind the issue it was difficult to see how it 
would either increase purchasing power or employment any more 
than the standard relief payments. The reason why an increase 
in velocity of circulation did not occur is that the stamp 
requirements were not effective in increasing circulation when 


31: Coe, V. P., Op. Cit. t p. 91 











* '■ < 

* 

- 

. ■ 




» 

V ■ =■ ■ ■ ■ " : ■ ' ' ■ ' ■ ' * ' L 










. 

; . ■■ ' • • ■■■■ ’ i: 

' J • ’ ’ •• 

T 
















■ 













64 


the scrip was not generally acceptable by the public. The 
fact was, that once the scrip was unloaded onto the nearest 
retailer he was usually stuck with it until the issue was 
finally redeemed in currency by the government. 

There were many factors influencing general acceptability 
of the scrip, mostly resulting from lack of organization and 
indecision by the government. In the first place, the idea of 
a scrip issue had been referred to by some spokesmen as a stop¬ 
gap measure before true social credit was initiated while other 
government representatives had regarded it as the best method 
of paying dividends. The stop-gap concept appeared to be the 
most prevalent version and the idea that scrip was merely a 
temporary issue, together with the other conflicting statements, 
helped to undermine confidence in the scheme before it was 
started. It is doubtful if newspaper opposition to the proposal 
was significant in view of the impotence of the press against 
the Social Credit administration generally, but hints and 
disputes as to the constitutional legality of scrip appearing 
in the papers probably contributed to lack of confidence. The 
fact that little publicity, either through news stories or 
editorials, was given by the press when the scrip was being 
issued, may have contributed to its later decline. The delay 
of two months ensuing between announcement and Inauguration of 
the plan indicated to many that the government was not sure of 
the success of the scrip issue Itself. 

When the first relatively small issue was made in August, 
the management of the scheme was instrumental In undermining 








‘ 

„ 




















‘ 









- 

* • 






. ’Ui • 1 l*L - - 



I 

. 







* 

■ $ ?,t a: 

* 

<L ■ 

„ ■ • . ■■ *■ ' • • % ■ ' 









. 


' 





- 65 


general acceptability. In spite of the Order-in-Council 
authorizing redemption in September members of the government 
had issued conflicting statements on redemption, generally 
implying that only certificates in the hands of businessmen 
would be redeemed at that time. Failure of the government to 
state a definite policy on redemption of the scrip drastically 

reduced its liquidity .bearing out Keynes’ criticism of Gesell’s 

52 l 

stamp money. Outside of political reasons, the lack of a 

clear redemption policy made it impossible for wholesalers or 

manufacturers to accept the prosperity certificates. As the 

last link in the circuit of transactions they would have been 

saddled with large numbers of the stamped money which they were 

unable to use to purchase supplies from outside the province. 

Reluctance of the government to accept scrip In payment for 
33 

taxes, licenses, etc., the physical deficiency of the scrip 


32; Keynes, J. M., The General Theory ., 1936, London, pp 0 257-258. 

33; Scrip has been used in the United States with varying 

degrees of success to overcome certain problems of finance 
at the municipal level. During a depression local tax 
revenue falls because of the fall in Incomes, this con¬ 
traction of revenue makes it difficult for the local gov¬ 
ernment to meet its payments, in turn affecting the 
purchasing power of Its employees and the community. A 
scrip issue to overcome this situation was particularly 
successful in a New Jersey county, where scrip was paid 
to civic employees. This scrip usually went through an 
average of three transactions before it returned to the 
country in tax payments. Lutz outlines four conditions 
necessary for success of scrip at the local level: (1) 
issue must be limited, (2) its use by the debtor govern¬ 
ment must be limited to settlement of taxes, (3) the 
community must accept it at par, (4) the scrip cannot be 
used as the sole medium of exchange. In this way the 
scrip served, as Lutz says. Ho ’defrost’ the frozen local 
accounts and payment transactions M • Lutz, H. L., Public 
Finance, New York, 1947, pp. 615-615. On this basis the 







- „ 





■:k ! ' ,t ■. 4 % • ;j 

, r ■ ■. ; , ' ■ o 0 O'-. , . : O • 





• 





■ 




• 









.;: ■ ? : o •. • 






. 

. 








■ v ' '. ; t'■ o i .... 




, , •/ . vi ;. .. . - • •' 




. 




. 

" 

, .' , ’ t r • 

• .. _ ■ . V . . . • t 

\ ■ 3 

■ .' ■ • ■ 

t . : f 

■ f ; o lot 

. 

* ... ■ 

■ • ■ . !•■■•; - o ■ "to • . 

. 

■ •; I'; L 'hu 

, > 

. 

T • . ■ , . ■ :■ , ■■ v -’O - & 

* . . . 

. , 






66 


(i.e., it fell apart), the failure of the government to 
establish clearing facilities, and the smallness of the issue 
were other factors that helped to offset general acceptability. 

With the power of disallowance revived, with lack of 
public confidence in new money schemes emanating from the 
savings certificates default, and from unpopularity of the 
scrip plan, the Alberta government had many factors to take 
into consideration before initiating even a modified social 
credit system in the Interim Program. To implement a new 
scheme the government had to draft its legislation in a form 
that would not leave it open to disallowance. In establishing 
a system of provincial exchange it had to base it on voluntary 
participation and at the same time bind people to its use* 

If it was based on a voluntary system, the medium of exchange 
would have to be provided with facilities for conversion into 
currency for transactions outside the province, or for other 
reasons. If it was on a voluntary basis, some sort of 
incentive would have to be given to people to deal in the 
provincial form of credit rather than currency. Steps would 
have to be taken to ensure that all phases of the economy 
participated in the plan. And lastly, the scheme, to be 
politically feasible, would have to favorably influence the 
provincial economy. 

33: (continued) Alberta government committed two cardinal 

errors in its scrip plan: (1) failure to state a 
definite policy as to its purpose, redemption, etc., 
and (2) reluctance to accept scrip for payment of taxes, 
licenses, ejb al . 





■ t ' ' 

, 

t 

■ 

. 

. 

' 

' 

- 

■ 

. 

t • ; ' -i- 

. 







v:;’ t ■■■• 




- 

t ' - ' 

' 

. 







66 


How the Alberta government attempted to overcome these 
problems in establishing and administering the Interim 
Program will be described below. 


Bibliography - Chapter II 

I. _ Dominion government documents « 

Supreme Court of Canada* Canada Law Reports, 1958 , 
p. 100 et seq. 


II. Alberta government documents; 


Statutes of Alberta: 


Orders-in-Council: 


1936 (1st session) 

1936 (2nd session) 

1937 (1st session) 
1937 (2nd session) 

1937 (3rd session) 

1938 (1st session) 
1946* c. 11. 

734/36 

815/36 

1085/36 

1092/36 


c . 5 * 

c. 1 and 4. 
c. 10. 

c. 1* 2* and 3. 
Bills 1* 8* and 9. 
c. 3* 4 and 8, 


Bureau of Statistics* Department of Industries and Labor, 
Alberta Facts and Figures , 1950* Edmonton* 404 pp. 

Executive Council* The Case for Alberta* 1937* 

Edmonton, 445 pp. 


III. Other publications : 

I. Books i 

Aberhart* Vfeu * Social Credit Manual . Calgary* 1935* 
64 pp. 

Douglas* C. H., The Alberta Experiment - An Interim 
Survey , London* 1937* 220 pp. 

Gesell, 3.* The Natural Economic Order , 1934. 


Fisher* I., Stamp Scrip , New York* 1933 


































« • : • 

. . 

- 

* 








b‘: ■ 











* 1 ■ V ' 4..V . . 










t. 













67 


III# Other Publications (continued): 

1* Books (continued): 

Keynes, J. M., General Theory , London, 1936, 
Chapter 23« 

Lutz, H. L., Public Finance / New York, 1947, 
pp. 613-615. 

2# Articles: 


McGoun, A. F., Social Credit Legislation: A Survey, 
Canadian Journal Economics and Political Science , 
November 1936, pp. 512-523* 

Coe, V. F., Dated Stamp Scrip in Alberta, Ibid , 
February 1938, pp. 60-91. 

Mallory, J. R., Disallowance and the National 
Interest: The Alberta Social Credit Legislation of 

1937, Ibid , August 1948, pp. 342-357. 

Irving, J. A., The Evolution of the Social Credit 
Movement, Ibid , August 1948, pp. 321-341. 













CHAPTER Til 


THE INTERIM PROGRAM: FIRST PHASE (1958-1941) 










68 


CHAPTER III 

THE INTERIM PROGRAM: FIRST PHASE (1958-1941) 

Equipped with the lessons of the previous three years the 
Social Credit government in 1938 drafted a modified version of 
the schemes contained in their earlier legislation. This 
modified version, entitled the if Interim Program”, could be 
considered as ’’Interim” in two respects; (1) it would be an 
intermediate step towards establishing a complete social credit 
system within the province, and (2) success in the Alberta 
program would probably eventually mean an extension of social 
credit to the Dominion level. 

A doctrinaire explanation of the initiation of the Interim 
Program is given in a booklet entitled ’’Alberta^ Treasury 
Branches” published by the Social Credit Board* Following 
disallowance, according to this account, the Alberta government 
faced two alternatives; (1) ”Xt could have referred the matter 
to the people by calling an election in which the issues would 
have been acceptance or rejection of the interpretation of the 
constitution.” The result of this step would have meant a 
consideration of secession and therefore was not adopted* 

(2) ”The alternative course of action was to continue with the 
legal battles for the purpose of clarifying the issues involved 
and mobilizing public support... for the reforms* And, concur¬ 
rently, to place at the disposal of the people in the province 
the means for enabling them to systematically gain control of 









- ,v - 


~ . ' .. : .1 1 




■ 














ei:- ■■■ 










. 

- v 'lo I- : t i 

. ' . ' : ■ . - > 1 ; 

„ • r 

, .-V : • • * '• ' : - ' * ' 

. 

* 

, 














69 


their real credit." 1 The method by which tie latter objective 
was to be achieved through the Interim Program was "first, to 
provide the people of Alberta with alternative facilities for 
gaining access to their credit resources; and, second, placing 
at their disposal an institution under their own control so 

that they could...release themselves from the domination of 

2 

the private money monopoly". 

The Interim Program was to substitute a regional system 
of bookkeeping which would eventually be expanded to all 
transactions in the province replacing standard currency and 
chartered bank facilities. Carrying out of this system would 
be accomplished on a voluntary basis, the intrinsic advantages 
of the provincial credit system ensuring its increased circula¬ 
tion. To be based on Aberhart ? s concept of the non-negotiable 
certificate this medium of provincial exchange would readily 
achieve public acceptance because of (1) bonuses conferred on 
users of the medium, (2) no exchange charges on the use of the 
credit, and (3) general support for the Social Credit movement. 
At the same time it would be possible to set up safeguards 
to promote general use of the provincial system, such as an 
overlapping system of payments, compulsory issue of bookkeeping 
credits to people dealing with the government, acceptance by 
the government of payments in provincial credit, penalties for 

1: Social Credit Board, Alberta y s Treasury Branches , Edmonton, 

(no date) mimeo., p. 9. 

2: Ibid , p. 11. 



















^ <1 : : ■ 






J 




- 

, / 

- 

.... . ,. . ■- . ■ ? •' • - ' 1 i'! O : ' ! 

■ 

; ■ ' . . ■ " : . ■ ■ *■ ■ 


■ 


. ' , 


... .... 





70 


those who wanted to take cash out of the system on the one 
hand, and bonuses to those who cooperated, on the other. 

In the long run if this system was established in the 
province and it obtained general acceptance on its own merits, 
the Social Credit government could consider issuing the basic 
dividend. Under this method the basic dividend would be a 
special bookkeeping credit to each individual as Douglas had 
envisaged it, rather than a cash payment as many of his 
followers had regarded it. But in 1938 the province was still 
in the midst of the depression, and for all immediate purposes 
the Interim Program would also have to be directed towards 
promoting recovery within Alberta. The method by which the 
Interim Program hit a compromise between the basic dividend 
and stimulation of the provincial economy was through the 
"consumers 1 bonus". This bonus, based on the original on© 
mentioned in the Social Credit Act, would give a rebate to 
consumers who purchased Alberta goods through the provincial 
credit system. At the same time, the granting of the bonus 
would ostensibly increase incentives to use the provincial 
system, it would represent a dividend on a small scale, and 
the government could encourage its expansion by linking its 
circulation with a return to prosperity. 

In setting up their mechanism on a narrow provincial 
scale the government found that they would be facing several 
obstacles and difficulties. To begin with, there was the 
lack of confidence among many people in new "funny money" 


... • 


: , .■ , 1 . ' " •' 














-V"' ' 


























» 






























- 


1 










i 














t d 

*. 




„ 


■ 

. 













71 


schemes as a result of the recent scrip experiment and the 
default on the savings certificates in 1935* Furthermore the 
acceptance and strength of the existing credit system meant 
that in its first stages an alternative system would have to 
operate in a secondary role, and that this factor would tend 
to restrict the future expansion of the program. Because of 
public conditioning to the existing system, the authorities 
would not only have to undertake a vigorous promotional cam- 
paign; they would also have to provide detailed information 
on how to use the new facilities. Then, in organizing the 
program there was the task of making the system work, of 
finding suitable personnel, of predicting possible flaws, and 
so on. Finally, the plan would have to operate under the 
assumption that the commercial banks, and possibly national 
manufacturers or other groups, would tend to oppose the 
scheme either for business or political reasons. 

As it was first organized, the administration of the 
Interim Program was to be in the hands of the Provincial 
Treasurer and the Minister of Trade and Industry; the former 
carried out the formation of the Treasury Branches on the 
lines of the State Credit House of the disallowed statutes, and 
the latter subsequently administered the Provincial Marketing 
Board and its subsidiaries. Although the Provincial Marketing 
Board played an important role in the Interim Program, the 
Treasury Branches were at the core of the scheme and carried on 
the main operations in connection with it. 


- . 

, 

■ 

v..'j ; <t t 

















. 


■ 





■ 

‘ ; .1/ J ■' l1 





. 




* • • 

. .. .. . 






■ 




" ' • 






<1 




■ 




. 

. 


■ 














72 


The principle behind the provincial system of exchange 
wgs that a transaction of goods or services was to be carried 
out without the use of money by transferring claims on them 
from one account to another account in the books of the 
Treasury Branches. However, persons wishing to partake in the 
Program had to make an initial deposit of currency, or claims 
on currency, into a Treasury Branch account. Transfers of 
claims on goods from one personas account to another were to 
be carried out by means of ^non-ne go triable transfer vouchers 
These vouchers, based on Aberhart f s idea, could be used only 
by those who had accounts within the system. The original 
deposit of money was to remain as a reserve to meet demands 
for cash in transactions with people not having accounts with 
the Treasury Branches* 

To realize the immediate objectives of stimulating the 
provincial economy, of providing additional "purchasing power”, 
and of encouraging people to take part in the system, a bonus 
of up to 5 % was paid to consumers on goods obtained from 
merchants for transfer vouchers 0 The bonus was issued in 
voucher credit - not in cash - according to the proportion of 
Alberta-made goods making up a transaction, and the maximum 
amount of 3 % was paid when one third of the goods were Alberta- 
made* In addition the Treasury Branches were to carry out 
traditional banking practices with the exception that they were 
not permitted to make loans* 


, 


t 

. . 

* 

. ’ i. ; ■ : • ■- , »V," 

. 

* ' : 

* 











73 


Prior to the drafting of legislation to set up the Interim 
Program, a four-month survey of Alberta centres was undertaken 
to determine public reaction to the proposals outlined above. 

In the summer of 1938 seven members of the Department of Trade 
and Industry travelled throughout the province to hold public 
meetings and to canvass individual merchants for support of 
the plan. In some instances where opposition to the scheme 
was evident, the group held meetings of merchants or chambers 
of commerce to convince them of the advantages of the Program. 

No attempt was made to sign merchants under the scheme until 
legislation had been passed later in the year. Further steps 
in the organization of the Interim Program may be traced 
through a study of the legislation behind it. 

The Legal The essential components of the Interim Program 

Framework were outlined in two Orders-in-Council and the 
Treasury Branches Act itself. The first steps in setting up 
the Treasury Branches were outlined in Order-in-Council 1069/38 
drawn up on the basis of a report to the Executive Council by 
the Provincial Treasurer on August 29, 1938. In his report the 
Provincial Treasurer (who was at that time the Hon. Solon E. 

Low) "deemed it essential and in the interest of the people of 
the Province that provision be made for the establishment of 
branches of the Provincial Treasury”. These branches of the 
Provincial Treasury were to "receive deposits of money repayable 
to the depositor in accordance with contracts to be entered 





* 

. 

* 

* • . 

. ' • . ■: . . 












••• 


I' -j: . I ' ■■■■.!.■ 

; 




. . 










. 











74 


into between the Treasury and the depositor * 1 , (Italics mine) 

Under this first Order-in-Council the provincial Treasurer 
was authorized to "establish and operate" the branches through” 
out the province, to employ personnel to staff the branches, 
to receive from the public deposits of "money, bank cheques, 
legal tender, currency or coinage, subject to (certain) terms 
of repayment", and to receive deposits "of orders drawn by 
depositors upon their accounts". The fourth clause of the 
Order-in-Council authorized the contracts mentioned above, 
with depositors and provided for the payment of interest on 
those deposits that would be eligible to receive it; a 3$ 
bonus was to be credited to the account of depositors who used 
their deposits to make purchases by means of "orders drawn by 
the depositor in favor of the merchant(s)" who had entered into 
contract with the Treasury, Clause 4 also provided for the 
levying of service charges for the operation of the accounts* 
Provision was made in Clause 5 for the Provincial Treasurer to 
enter into contracts or "other arrangements" with merchants 
"for the purpose of implementing the contracts entered into 
with depositors". Spending of funds "not in excess of $200,000" 
was allowed the Treasurer to provide for liabilities, "financial 
commitment", and cost of administration "arising out of the 
exercise.*.of the foregoing powers". 

A second Order-in-Council, 1296/38, passed on October 18, 
1938, mentioned the use of transfer vouchers for the first 
time. By this Order-in-Council the Treasurer was authorized 



• , . . 

... ' .... . 








c . ■ : ■ • 






■ ' • • 


: ■ * ' 


„ 

• ■ ■ . ■ 


.... . . ^'■ ■ '■ ■ : 


\ i 


' ■ : " 


HO O .. 








. 


.. ■ ' • • • : ' 


O' o i v . 


* ■ 


- r- - 


v. * , ■ • • ■' 

. ... 


. 


















; 




, ' ; - ■■■■■■■ 








~ 









75 


to accept transfer vouchers "for moneys owing to the government", 
and he was authorized to deposit them in the Treasury Branches 0 
Transfer vouchers could then be accepted for "payment of taxes, 
license fees, debts or any moneys due to the Province"* The 
Order-in-Council also provided for the issue of transfer 
vouchers by the treasurer, under authority of the previous 
Order* C. C* 1296 also, by reference to the Treasury Department 
Act and its amendments, outlined the procedure that would be 
used by Treasury officials for the management of government 
deposits in "other institutions" (i.e. the Treasury Branches). 

On the basis of these Orders-in-Gouncil, the first six 

Treasury Branches were opened in September, 1938* It was not 

3 

until November 22 of that year that the Treasury BrancbesAct 
was passed In a second session of the Alberta legislature. The 
Act, consisting of only 16 clauses, generally confirmed the 
framework outlined in the Orders-in-Council. 

Besides a reiteration of the clauses contained in the 
Orders-in-Gouncil the Act authorized the minister to "invest 
any deposits received...in such securities as he may prescribe 
and may from time to time vary and transpose any Investments so 
made". (s. 6-4a) The Act also established the financing of 
the Treasury Branches out of the provinces general revenue 
fund, and stipulated that "all earnings and profits" would be 
paid back into the fund. Provision was made for an annual 
audit, and the Act was declared to have prevalence over the 

3: Statutes of Albe rta, 1938 (2nd session) c. 3* 




' 


. . v ■ ■, . ' ■ : ■ ' <•' -V ' ' 

. 

' 

, 

■; ", ■; J 

■ . ■ 


■ 


! t 


, : : " 


■ 




... 

- 


? 




■ • ' '. r : 1 ' ’ t 

- 

. : ■ - ’ ; ■ 




.. „ ; .. . _ : -. : -v 1 : 





76 


Treasury Department Act in the event of a conflict between 
them* 

The outstanding characteristic of the Treasury Branch 
system as it is outlined in the Orders-in-Council and the 
Treasury BranchesAct is its dependency on individual contract 
as the basis for its operations* Throughout the Act are such 
statements as, "the Minister may receive from depositors 
deposits of money*..(etc*) subject to such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed in the contract entered into*,. 11 
(s. 5) or, f, the Minister may authorize any person(s )*.*to enter 
into a contract*..with a merchant (to) implement contracts 
entered into with depositors"(s* 7), and so on* This principle 
of personal contract between the Provincial Treasurer and 
merchants, consumers or other depositors was, and is, India- 
pensible to the system and in effect makes its existence 
possible * 

Under federal banking legislation, chartered banks are 
authorized to engage in certain operations with the funds 
received from their depositors. In turn the depositors are 
protected by legislation restricting the operations of the 
banks in certain directions, and by giving the depositors 
priority as creditors in the event of bank failure. In the 
Treasury Branch system the individual contract was a device to 
provide an additional legal safeguard for the "banking" 
activities of the institution, and at the same time to provide 
the individual customer with adequate legal protection. 




- ' 




■ . ■■■■ -■ ■ - j ! 

* ’ * 

... 

... ... - ' 

t .* t ■ - ; * • - — ■ ' ■ ■ * : * '■ 

* ■ 

, 




■ 








•• 

. 





77 


Every account entered with a Treasury Branch, whether it 
was a merchant account, a consumer’s account, term savings, or 
merely a cash deposit was, and is, consummated by an individual 
contract. The individual has then made a private, personal 
contract with the Provincial Treasurer to deal with the 
Treasury Branches under certain stated conditions. Any 
operations that may affect the depositors account, such as the 
changes in the system in February 1941, must be approved by each 
depositor individually. However, depositors are seldom consult¬ 
ed except in the event of a major change in policy which would 
affect their accounts; and if they are consulted it is usually 
by form letter and the signing by each depositor of a printed 
statement authorizing the changes in his account. 

An outline of the basic conditions to be included in 
these contracts was given in the Act. rf Every such contract 
shall provide as to the time, manner and other conditions under 
which any sum deposited...may be dealt with by the Minister." 

(s. 6-2) Section 6 (3) stated that each contract would 
provide for "the payment .of such interest.as may be agreed 
upon between the Minister and depositor...or that in lieu of 
interest there shall be credited to the ...depositor such 
amount as may be fixed...by the lieutenant Governor-in-Council 
on such portion.,,of his deposit used in the purchase of 
specified goods from merchants who have entered into contracts 


with the Minister" 











t 


• - 

, 








: , " 

... 

. 

■ 

■ 

J l: ; . t : ' ; ' ' - J "• ''' ; 

, 

4 
















. • • * 








. • 









78 


Typical of these individual contracts drawn up under the 

general authority of the Treasury Branches Act were the 

merchant agreements made by the Provincial Treasurer with 

those merchants who wished to take part in the program. Under 

the contract a merchant agreed to f, accept in payment for goods 

sold, transfer vouchers drawn by the purchaser upon the 

account of the purchaser lf in a Treasury Branch, and he also 

agreed to open an account in a Treasury Branch and "utilize as 

4 

far as possible the services of the said Branch 11 . The 

implication of the latter phrase was that the merchant would 

not be able to conduct all of his business through Treasury 

Branches particularly in the first stages. Accordingly, 

special arrangements were made for merchants to withdraw cash 

from voucher accounts under certain conditions. 

The merchant was also required to furnish certain state* 

ments, issue receipts or sales slips, and make all entries on 

the transfer vouchers, if requested in the first two instances, 

and automatically in the case of the vouchers. Provision was 

made for the levying of service charges for these services but 

5 

this was not instituted in the first years. The merchant 
agreed to display f? some sign or mark" showing that he was 
taking part in the program and he promised to ’’advance the sale 
of Alberta-made goods" by advertising and other means. The 
Alberta-made trademark (see inside front cover) was used in 
the former instance. 

4j Merchants* Agreement, passim . 

Later the levying of service charges was begun on a 

lenient scale. A new scale of service charges was 
adopted in September 1950. 


5 














.. ■ t 



■ 

■ 







■ 

. 

' ' '• ' 




■ ■' , : ■■■■ ■ : ■ 










■ 






a 

















. • 

: 

- 

J 







79 


Other clauses in the agreement provided for the paying 
of the 3 % bonus to consumers on total purchases provided one- 
third was Alberta-made goods. Referring back to the Treasury 
Branches Act, it will be noted that the clause relating to 
payment of a consumers * bonus was altered from its original 
form in O.C. 1069/38 to read: "There shall be credited to the 
amount of the depositor such amount as may be fixed from time 
to time by the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council. 11 (s. 6-3b) 

The amount of the bonus was confirmed in the Order-in-Council 
which still stood (they were reaffirmed in Section 9 of the 
Act) while the provisions of the Act left the amount open to 
alteration by subsequent Orders-in-Council. 

Consumer agreements followed essentially the same principles 
as the merchant contracts. When provision was made for the 
participation of manufacturers in the program in 1939, individual 
contracts were drawn up between the manufacturer and the 
Minister of Trade and Industries. The reason for this change 
will be considered below. The main thing to note regarding 
these contracts is that the signees agreed to use transfer 
vouchers and forego claims on currency whenever it was possible 
to do so. 

Before passing on to a detailed discussion of the first 
stages of the Interim Program, two other sections in the 
Treasury Branches Act will be considered. The first of these. 
Section 11, authorizes the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council to 
"make rules and regulations as may be necessary not inconsistent 













■ 

' 




: ■ 


. .. 

■■ w ... . W ' ; . 

. ... - 

. ■ • .... 




■ 


, J -lo • • 






- .. 












80 


with this Act for the purpose of carrying out the provisions 
of the Act tf . Changes in rules and regulations, then, could 
be brought about by Orders-in-Council, as stated above, or by 
changes in the clauses of individual contracts, all within the 
framework of the Act. For example, in 1941 changes in payment 
of the bonus were authorized by Orders-in-Council while other 
changes were brought about by drawing up new contracts with 
depositors• 

Major changes in general policy are usually brought about 
by formal amendment to the Act, e.g., the amendment of 1940 
which authorized loaning activities. There are three central 
methods, then, by which the Treasury Branches can alter their 
operations; (1) by Order-in-Council, (2) by changes in the 
provisions of contracts, and (3) by formal amendments to the 
Act. There is no rigid procedure governing changes in 
Treasury Branch activities. Changes in policy may be suggested 
on the basis of experience from the superintendent f s office. 

These suggestions are forwarded to the Provincial Treasurer or 
his deputy and a series of conferences are held to discuss them. 
Such a proposal might be approved by the Minister orally or by 
directive letter, or if it is considered sufficiently important 
it might be forwarded to the executive council for approval as 
an Qrder-in-Gouncil. If the proposal was not considered 
consistent with the Act it would then be redrafted and implement¬ 
ed by formal amendment. 




81 - 


Relations between the Treasury Branches and the municip¬ 
alities are discussed in Section 15 of the Act, which states; 

Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Act any 
city, town, village, municipal district, school district, 
irrigation district, drainage district, hospital district, 
or any Board or Commission created by an Act of the Legis¬ 
lature may receive orders upon a treasury branch in payment 
of taxes, fees, debts, or other liability, may make deposits 
in any branches of the treasury.,.and enter into a contract 
with the Minister as a depositor. 

Prior to the establishment of the Treasury Branches all 
such bodies were required to handle their financial affairs 
through the chartered banks, the effect of such legislation 
being to prohibit these groups from dealing with the Treasury 
Branches. Section 15 was included in the Act to permit these 
bodies to deal with the Treasury Branches if they wished to do 
so; it did not imply any obligation on their part to do so. 


The First One month after the authorization of the first 

Branches Order-in-Couneil providing for the establishment of 

a Treasury Branch system, the first six branches were opened at 
Rocky Mountain House (on September 29) and at Edmonton, Andrew, 
Grande Prairie, Killam, and $t. Paul on the 30th. The selection 
of these centres for the first branches appears to have been 
based on the combination of political and business motives that 
were in the background of all major policies governing the 
Treasury Branches’ activities. 

Successful operation of the Treasury Branches depended on 
the confidence of the people in the Interim Program as if had 
been advertised in the previous months, and obviously the chief 




' 












< 



• 




, •; . 1 





















. t : 











• ... 

' 




. 


' : > j. . ■ ~ • 


■ 


, 








adherents to such a program would be found in those districts 
supporting the Social Credit government. The decision to 
establish the first six branches at these centres (with 
Edmonton as headquarters) was made by the Provincial Treasurer 
following the receipt of petitions from supporters in various 
districts asking for the Treasury Branch services. 

By the end of 1938 three more branches had been set up, 
and during 1939 Treasury Branches were established in 22 more 
centres. During the war (until 1945) six more branches were 
set up and ten more were organized between 1946 and 1948. In 
September 1950 there were 45 Treasury Branches open in the 
province, with six sub-branches and 110 agencies. Only two 
instances are recorded of the shifting around of Treasury 
Branches to locations in districts where they were likely to 
have more support. In 1939 the branch at Bowden was transferred 
to Olds, and in 1945 the Blairmore office was moved to Pincher 
Creek, a sub-branch, being set up at Bowden and an agency at 
Blairmore. 

The'first staff members of the Treasury Branches consisted 
of a nucleus of provincial civil servants with banking experience 
chiefly from the Sales Tax Branch that had closed up following 
discontinuance of a 2 % provincial sales tax. Other staff 
members were obtained by Interviewing people with banking 
experience who had previously applied for Civil Service 
positions. The difficulty of obtaining bank-trained personnel 
for the managerial and administrative positions has been a 




t . 






. • ■■■■ ■ ' 

. - ■ 















. 






• 













• - ' 

- 





- 85 


chronic practical problem for the Treasury Branch authorities. 
Salaries and promotional opportunities have not been sufficient 
to draw numbers of trained people away from the chartered 
banks. By September 1942 some 223 persons were employed by the 
Treasury Branches, and in September 1950 there were 331 on the 
staff. 

At first the Treasury Branches attempted to.provide daily 
service to the public from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. and from. 9 a.m. to 
noon on Saturdays. This practice was discontinued through a 
series of changes for service according to standard "bankers ! 
hours", i.e., from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. daily and from 9 a.m. to 
11 a.m. on Saturdays. The hours were contracted to provide for 
the daily closing out of the accounts. 

Besides administering the voucher and bonus system the 
Treasury Branches furnished such services as foreign exchange 
transfers, transactions in bills of exchange, a term 
savings plan, demand savings facilities, simple cash deposit 
and withdrawal accounts, safety deposit boxes, safekeeping 
services, mail and telegraph transfers, money orders, drafts, 
travellers 1 cheques, and collection services. Trade drafts 
were used by the Treasury Branches to carry out collection 
services in the usual banking procedure. The only difference 
from ordinary trade drafts emerged after February 1941 when 
provision was made for payment in voucher credit for Alberta 
trade-marked goods, and cash for other goods. 


■ 






. 

- d- :*X.n ’1 

, ' • 


' , - *. t 


I • ' ' . . ' •: 

. 

■ ‘ 

. 

. 



















84 


Treasury Branch deposits took three main forms: (1) 
current accounts, (2) term savings accounts, and (3) demand 
savings accounts. Current accounts were non-interest bearing 
demand accounts similar to those in chartered banks, the only 
difference being the provision made for use of vouchers and 
payment of the consumers 1 bonus. Term savings accounts were 
offered to provide the public with the means of using Treasury 
Branch facilities for the saving of funds not required by the 
depositor for immediate use. Provision was also made for demand 
savings accounts with few changes from the normal chartered 
bank type. Before discussing these accounts it is first 
necessary to consider the voucher and consumer bonus system, 
the raison d f etre for the Treasury Branch organization in the 
first place. 

Forms of There were (and still are) two forms of 

Withdrawal withdrawal from a Treasury Branch account: (1) 

——- — ■ 

the cash order, and (2) the non-negotiable transfer voucher. 

The cash order, a form corresponding to a chartered bank cheque, 
fulfils the requirements of a bill of exchange and is therefore 
negotiable. It is accordingly used to draw on Treasury Branch 
accounts in the same manner that cheques are used to draw 
against bank accounts. Gash orders are subject to the same 
excise tax requirements as other bills of exchange and this 
rate is the same as that levied on chartered bank cheques. 

A non-negotiable transfer voucher Is an order issued by a 





- 

* 






. 


■ 


- 

■ • 








. 


. 












85 


Treasury Branch depositor instructing the branch on which it 

is drawn to transfer a certain claim on goods and services, 

expressed in terms of money, from the issuer*s account to the 

6 

account of another person* Vouchers do not conform to the 
requirements of the Bills of Exchange Act and are not negotiable 
instruments. They can only be deposited in an account in the 
name of the transferee in a Treasury Branch and cannot be 
endorsed to a third party. They do not entitle the holder to 
legal tender or currency. 

In accordance with an "understanding" with the federal 
Department of National Revenue, non-negotiable transfer vouchers 
are not subject to federal excise tax. The basis for this 
ruling appears to have been that with the adoption of the 
vouchers, and their related activities, existing sources of 
excise tax revenue would either be maintained or expanded. That 
is, since cash orders as well as vouchers could be drawn 
against these accounts, the use of cash orders throughout the 
province would probably increase excise tax revenues. 

Certified Non-negotiable In the adoption of the voucher 

Transfer Vouchers system it was recognized that the 

credit standing of a great many persons operating accounts 
would be unknown to retail merchants dealing in the vouchers# 

As a result, there was the possibility that merchants would not 
be willing to accept vouchers from unknown parties for fear that 

6; In a discussion of vouchers the term !, issuer f! denotes the 
consumer or drawer, "transferee" refers to the merchant 
or payee, and the "drawee" refers to the Treasury Branch 
itself. 





■ 


. 




. 


■ 

■ 

■ •’ • 

■■ - «■ 

. 

■J;J - ■ 

■ ,. ’: 

; .t 

„ 






- 




, 

f . l * •• 


, • 

* 









86 


their vouchers would not be valid 0 

A form of certified voucher was at first adopted to offset 
this possibility. Certified vouchers were made out in the 
same way as ordinary vouchers except for a printed clause which 
stated: "This voucher may be used to authorize the transfer 

of not more than (a stated sum) on the books of the Provincial 
Treasury Department but does not entitle the holder to legal 
tender or currency," These vouchers were obtainable for 
amounts of $2, $3, $4, $5, $10, $20, $50, and $100. A 
certified voucher then had two safeguards: (1) it was guaran¬ 
teed by the Provincial Treasurer up to the amount shown on it, 
that is, the obligation to meet the certified vouchers on 
presentation for payment was transferred from the individual 
consumer-depositor to the Provincial Treasurer; (2) a method 
of countersigning by a specimen signature, similar to that 
used on travellers 1 cheques, verified the issuer*s identity. 

Under this principle a consumer-depositor who had funds on 
hand in his account would obtain from his Treasury Branch 
certified vouchers in whatever denominations he required to 
make his purchases. These vouchers would then be charged 
against his account at the time of purchase, for their full 
face value. When a depositor wished to use a certified 
voucher to make a purchase he would select one equal to, or 
greater than, the amount of the purchase, and he would make it 
out to the merchant, showing the exact amount of the purchase. 















- ■ 

, '' . 

. ,w : : a ■' a 'av-a . . o' a? -aa ' a-.'■ ; ,fr aeacta 






:■ ■ i , - t ■ s:> ’ Saa a v ■ a ' 

- ■ ■: ■_ 










* 


t ' • 

, 


















87 


The merchant would deposit the certified voucher to his 
account in a Treasury Branch for its "transaction” value 
(not necessarily its face value). The account of the issuer 
would then be credited with the difference between the trans¬ 
action value and the face value. That is, if a consumer used 
a $10 certified voucher to make a $6 purchase, the $4 change 
would be credited to his account in the Treasury Branch when 
the voucher was turned in by the merchant. The merchant ! s 
account would thus be credited with the $6. 

The certified vouchers had two main advantages: firstly, 
they guaranteed the merchant against loss in dealings with 
vouchers; and secondly, they did make possible the original 
purpose of undergoing complete transactions without the us© 
of money beyond the initial deposit. The disadvantages of the 
certified vouchers were more apparent. First, they were cumber¬ 
some, partly because of their characteristic of being in fixed 
denominations, and partly from the countersigning requirement. 
The chief disadvantage, however, was that the issuer 1 s funds 
were frequently tied up far in excess of his purchases. To 
illustrate this point, suppose that a depositor put $100 to 
his account and took out ten certified vouchers for $10 each, 
he would then "lose control" over the difference between his 
purchases and the face value of the vouchers for an indetermin¬ 
able time until the merchant deposited them in his account and 
a refund was credited to the issuer f s account. In other words, 
the Issuer might have to wait an indeterminable time for his 


. 

, 

’ 

■ ! . . 

, 

' 


i 

. 

, • 

' ^ ‘ ' ' ' * ' ■ 

' «. t ' 

. 

- 

’ 


. 

' 





87a 



u 

<D 



,.Q 

«3 

•H 

•P 

O 

hi 

§ 

i 

S 

a 

cjl 

P3 


Offl 

M 

M 


•P 



(Form used up to February 15 , 1941. A smaller form was used 
in first few months after establishment of the Treasury 
Branches). 

































- 88 


"change”, and of course, it would be in the form of voucher 
credit, not cash* This indicates the third disadvantage of 
certified vouchers. The merchants were under no obligation to 
turn the vouchers in within a minimum period. Theoretically, at 
any rate, merchants could keep the vouchers indefinitely, 
although they would not be likely to do so. Prom the merchants 
point of view the certified vouchers were preferable to another 
type* But from the standpoint of the consumers and the Treasury 
Branches themselves, the certified vouchers were, for the above 
reasons, unsatisfactory. 

As the use of ordinary non-negotiable transfer vouchers 
was expanded, merchants generally became willing to accept them, 
on the same terms of identification accorded to customers who 
paid for their goods in chartered bank cheques* Confidence in 
the use of the non-certified vouchers appeared to be sufficient 
to discard the certified voucher for the more flexible type* 

As a result, the use of certified transfer vouchers was discon¬ 
tinued within a year after the Treasury Branches began 
operations * 

The Non-negotiable To use non-negotiable transfer 

Transfer Vouchers vouchers (hereafter referred to as 

"transfer vouchers" or "vouchers"), the depositor placed his 
funds in current account with a Treasury Branch and issued 
vouchers, by filling in blank forms, to the amount required* 

The main differences between vouchers on a Treasury Branch 






' 

: * ’ "■ < 1 

,, . ..... . . : ■ . .'■■■" '■ 




- 

■ j r X 






•. . ... > j .... ^‘..1 




. - Oa. . v :■ > • ^ • 






0 -J. - . 0 >. -V. 




, ... :' :• 


;v:; i: .'. . ; - 

* 


, , , v, ol .J::i ...^ 

• • : 


. 

. 

..' ■; ■ .. v ;.•- •••• •• 






89 


current account and a cheque on a chartered bank demand 
deposit or current account was that the use of the transfer 
vouchers required no excise tax, and the persons to whom they 
were payable had to deposit them in their accounts in a 
Treasury Branch. 

An individual wishing to use the transfer voucher system 
first opened an account with a Treasury Branch (usually a 
current account) in which he would deposit any claim on money, 
such as cheques, other transfer vouchers, grain tickets, 
interest coupons or currency itself, just as he would in an 
ordinary bank account. Each account with a Treasury Branch 
made provision for two balances; one a total balance, which 
included the entire amount of each deposit (including vouchers 
of other depositors received by the depositor in question), 
while the other balance known as the '’cash balance”, was made 
up of all items deposited, except transfer vouchers. The 
operation of this system from the Treasury Branches* point of 
view may be best illustrated by an example of a consumer's 
account; 


■ 

■ 

. 

. • 


* 

# 


t 

l 





90 


Table VI: Transactions on a Consumers Account 


3a te 

Nature of Transaction 

Dr. 

Cr. 

Total 

Balance 

Cash 

Balance 

1 

Consumer deposits $125 
cash and $30 in vouchers 

T“ 

T~ 

155.00 

HF“ 

155.00 

$ 

125.00 

2 

A cash order of $50 is 
drawn on the consumer’s 
account 

50.00 


105.00 

75.00 

3 

A transfer voucher of 
$10 is drawn on 
consumer 

10.00 


95.00 

75.00 

4 

A voucher of $40 is 
drawn on the consumer 

40.00 


55.00 

55.00 

5 

Consumer deposits vouch¬ 
ers worth $50 


50.00 

105.00 

55.00 

6 

Consumer draws a cash 
order of $100 

100.00 


5.00 

0.00 

7 

Penalty of 2f 0 is levied 
on amount of cash 
drawn in excess of cash 
balance, i.e. $45 

.90 


4.10 

0.00 


In the above example a depositor makes an initial deposit 


of $125 cash and $30 in vouchers which he has obtained from 
other depositors ( line 1 ); his total balance now consists of 
$155, while only $125 is added to his cash balance* Vouchers 
may be issued to the full extent of the total balance; a cash 
order affects both the total balance and the cash balance to 
the full extent. 

For example, in line 2 above, a cash order of $50 drawn 
against the consumer reduces his total balance to $105 and the 
cash balance to $75, Now, a voucher drawn on the depositor 
reduces the total balance only, unless the resulting new total 
















: 


















« 








O’l':' 1 ' , ‘;5 I : M i. -On; t. I : L; '' ' 1 








. ' • 

i; - ?" 












■ 

I 












* 




/ » : ! 

« O 
















t 








- 


n 

' ^ '■ • ; V : - " t 






- 

, 





















91 


balance is less than the former cash balance* In that event, 
the cash balance would be reduced to the same figure as the 
total balance. For example, in line 5 above, where a transfer 
voucher for $10 is issued against the account, it reduces the 
total balance only, i.e. from $105 to $95, and the cash 
balance of $75 stands. Now, If ( line 4 ) a voucher is issued 
in excess of the difference between the total balance and cash 
balance (e.g. a voucher of $40) the result is that the total 
balance is reduced to $55 and the cash balance correspondingly 
to $55. 

In the event that a customer wished to draw a cash order 
in excess of the cash balance (e.g. line 6 ^ he was assessed a 
two percent penalty on the excess of the cash balance over the 
total balance * 

In the previous example, the depositor is charged 90 cents 
on the $45 excess over the $55 cash balance. The minimum 
penalty for drawing cash was set at five cents per cash order. 

The idea of a 2% penalty was to discourage the drawing of 

cash against vouchers, or to encourage the use of vouchers 

rather than cash. The penalty was levied mostly against non- 

7 

cooperating depositors or depositors who needed immediate 
cash. A depositor with a disinclination to partake of the 
Interim Program, for instance, might receive vouchers from 

The term ^depositor ,f here may Include a merchant who 
did not sign a merchants contract. From the Treasury 
Branches 1 point of view he was not considered as a 
merchant depositor. 


7: 






, 












' t 








♦ 

; . 

* 

» * 

: ■ 1 • <■' 

• ■■ 


. 


■ 

. 


. 





















92 


other depositors* The recipient would have to deposit the 
voucher in a Treasury Branch account; then if he withdrew the 
amount of the resulting balance as cash, he would be charged 
with the 2 The effectiveness of the 2% penalty as an 
isolated factor in stimulating the use of vouchers is 
difficult to assess. The combination of the penalty and the 
fact that a person receiving vouchers had to open a Treasury 
Branch account, even if he withdrew cash immediately, were 
two quasi-compulsory devices to consolidate the system. 

Merchants 1 However, it was evident that provision for 

Accounts retailers 1 cash needs would have to be made in 

the merchant current accounts. The chief difference between 
merchants* accounts and those of consumers was that the former 
were provided with the means of drawing cash orders against 
their voucher balances. Until wholesalers were brought into 
the Interim Program, or unless they were willing to accept 
vouchers, allowance had to be made to enable the merchant to 
replace without penalty the stocks of goods he had sold for 
vouchers. 

To provide this means of drawing cash without penalty, it 
was ascertained from each merchant ? s annual statement the 
percentage of his gross profit. The remaining percentage was 
designated as his 7f goods replacement cost' 1 . The latter 
percentage was then used in determining the proportion of 
voucher credit that could be drawn against in cash without the 
2% penalty. That is, if the merchant’s gross profit was found 




■* 

■ 

* 

. 

■ 

. ■ r ■ : 

t ’ 

T ' i > 

, 









• 









. ■ /; . ■ 




. 























... .r:: . o ■. X. ■ ■ , - ^ 




, 


. 

’ d - 

-. , .... .. . •It: ,sf i i® .V ' 




93 


to be 25$, Ibfo of each voucher deposited was added to his 
"available" (cash) balance. 

The method by which the merchant could draw cash without 

penalty against the voucher credit in his account was first 

8 

outlined in a superintendent's circular which stipulated 
that instead of a cash balance entry on the merchant account 
ledger sheets, a column known as "available balance" was to 
be used. This column would indicate the amount against which 
cash orders could be drawn without penalty, and it would 
include the ordinary cash balance plus the percentage of the 
voucher credit that could be drawn against. 

The "Basic At first the percentage of his voucher 

Rate" balance against which the merchant could draw 

cash without penalty, i.e. the "basic rate", was computed for 
each merchant by taking his selling price over cost price as 

a percentage markup, based on the previous year's business. 

- 

For example, if a merchant had a selling price of §11,000 for 
a certain period, and a cost price of §10,000, his markup 
would be 10$ and his basic rate would be computed as 90$ to 
cover his replacement cost. The mechanics of this scheme may 
be shown by referring to the example on p. 90 again. Supposing 
these figures represented a merchant's account instead of a 

8; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent's Circular #48 , 
November 8, 1938. (Unpublished.) *. ” " ~ 










' 



5 











■ 



. 

« 

















.. J : .. 








■ 


■ ’ • 


■ 







, 




. 

. * 





• ! . ' _ , - 





. ' ' . . ; 









94 


consumers ledger. If his basic rate was established at 66$, 

in line 1 the merchant could draw for goods replacement 

purposes his $125 cash plus 66 of $30: i.e,, $20. His avail- 

100 

able balance would then be $145. 

By February 1941 this cumbersomemethod of computing each 
merchants basic rate had been replaced by standard classif¬ 
ications for various trades. Under this system each retail 
merchant was given his basic rate in keeping with the classif¬ 
ication of his business, and each Treasury Branch was furnished 
with a list of retail classifications showing the basic rate 
applicable to each class. 

These basic rates, averaged from statistics obtained by 

the department of trade and industry (presently the department 

of industries and labor) were calculated to allow the retailer 

the full replacement cost of goods computed as before, plus an 

additional 5% of the selling price. The classifications and 

the rates were established after a survey of retail merchants 

by the department of trade and industry, A basic rate for each 

classification was allotted for the term of the merchant’s 

agreement with the Treasury Branches and it was found to vary 

0 

from 60$ to 95$ among different classifications. 

Under the previous individual method of determining basic 
rates the merchants were consulted at the time that their 
accounts were opened as to what their basic rate should be. 

9: Examples of basic rates; retail grocery, 85$; gas and 

oil, 90$; clothing, 65-75$. The latter rate was lower 
because of the small proportion of clothing supplies 
made up of Alberta-made goods. 








< 













' 










■ ' 'j ■■ ■ ■ 






: 

' 

., . I ■ ; ’ 

' 

I 

. . ,.0 1 ■ 

, . . • ■ . ■ 




\tcr a > ' 














* 


t 


■ 




* 

* ■ ■ 


: 












- 95 


Unless this was considered to be out of reason the merchants 
word was accepted as correct. When general classifications 
were adopted the original rate for previous merchant depositors 
was adhered to provided it was within range of the established 
classification. In instances of new merchant accounts if the 
classification rate was not acceptable the merchant had the 
right to produce the accounts of his operations over the past 
year. Establishment of basic rates, then, was generally left 
to the discretion of the merchants; at the same time the rates 
suggested by the department of trade and industry proved to be 
lenient. The leniency of the rates was probably to ensure 
cooperation of merchants on a voluntary basis, and secondly, 
to avoid contesting of the rates. 

The object of the provision to draw cash penalty-free 
against voucher balances was to allow merchants to replace 
goods manufactured outside Alberta, or ^oods purchased from 
wholesalers and manufacturers who were not registered under the 
Interim Program at this stage. Because the Program was at first 
confined only to consumer and retail transactions, it was 
particularly essential that the merchant should have free 
access to cash orders to buy his inventories. For this reason, 
no distinction was at first ma.de between the Alberta-made goods 
listed on the vouchers and the other goods for replacement 
purposes. That is, the merchant was allowed to draw against 
a full replacement cost of his goods regardless of their 
origin. 




-• 





„ 











. ' . v.1 ‘ ! • " 


1 

* 


, ’ ■ 


. 

, 

■ 










96 - 


In 1941, when Alberta manufacturers and wholesalers were 
brought into the voucher system, it was possible for all 
retailers to replace Alberta-made goods by the issuance of 
vouchers without drawing cash orders against their account. 
Therefore the amount of other goods formed the basis for 
determining the amount that could be drawn on by cash orders. 
No cash, then, could be drawn against that portion of vouchers 
representing Alberta-made goods. This stipulation was 
intended to further reduce the use of conventional currency 
as the Program was extended to all sectors of the economy# 

The process of withdrawing cash against consumer or 
merchant accounts should not cause confusion as to the avail¬ 
ability of cash to meet these withdrawals. The Treasury 
Branches use approximately the same methods of estimating 
requirements of cash on hand for day-to-day business as do the 
banks. Although each voucher was originally issued against a 
cash deposit, or other claim on currency, the cash is not kept 
on hand against every account. If a voucher is drawn against 
a Treasury Branch it does not necessarily cause a reduction 
in that branch 1 s cash holdings. The voucher is charged to the 
issuing depositor's account, thereby reducing the Treasury 
Branch liability to the issuer by the same amount that the 
Treasury Branch liability to the other depositor is increased. 
Exactly the same concept applies to a cash order that is 
deposited* 




- 



















■ 




'■* 

• • , •• : ; - ■' ' *’• . ’ 

* 

. 


j ■ 





■ 







97 


Results of the Prior to a consideration of the workings 

Voucher System of the consumers 1 bonus, it might be useful 
at this point to review the extent to which the vouchers were 
used. Actually, the voucher and bonus systems were closely 
interrelated and each one was largely dependent on the success 
of its counterpart. For the purposes of analysis here, the 
consumers* bonus will be considered in a separate section, but 
the connection between these two elements of the Program must 
always be kept in mind 0 

In theory merchants within the province were to share in 
the general prosperity resulting from an increased demand for 
Alberta-made goods, and to a lesser extent from the increased 
purchasing power resulting from payment of the bonus to con¬ 
sumers. In fact, depending upon the district, the immediate 
benefits of the program to many merchants came in the form of 
increased business because they would accept vouchers, while 
other merchants would not take them. This form of voluntary 
discrimination probably served as a lever to bring more 
merchants into the Program to avoid losing business. In many 
of the rural areas the vouchers were used on a sufficient 
scale to make it worthwhile for merchants to join the Program. 

Some advantages also fell to city retailers who were 
willing to deal in the vouchers. Cooperating storekeepers, 
in Edmonton, increased their business from provincial civil 
servants and people working on government contracts, who 
received a certain proportion of their salaries and wages in 




J . ■ . O; 



- 




: - • ■■ ' ' ' 

. 

, > ■ ,.'\K j . ■/ ■ ■ ■ j : .. 


. ■ ■ ■ ' : ■ 1 t 


- 

i 

* 














, 






















98 


vouchers. It should be pointed out, however, that the 2,500 
civil servants, and other provincial workers receiving 
vouchers as part of their salaries, were only a small 
proportion of the people dealing in vouchers. By December 
1942, more than 34,000 current consumer and merchant accounts 
were held by the Treasury Branches * 

Payment of a certain proportion of civil servants* salaries 
in vouchers was authorized by an Order-*In-Council and put into 
operation in February 1939. Partial payment of workers on 
public works projects by voucher was authorized by 0.0*1241/39. 
Under the system set up in February 1939, government employees 
were to receive payment in vouchers on the following basis: 
single employees, widows and widowers would receive 15$ of 
their salary in vouchers regardless of the total amount. 

Married employees earning up to $2,000 received 25$ in 
vouchers, married employees earning $2,000-$3,000 received 
20$ in vouchers, and those on salaries over $3,000 were paid 
in 15$ vouchers. The rate of payment was determined by gross 
salary, but the actual calculation of the amount to be paid 
by voucher was made at net salary. (I.e., a married person 
earning $2,100 would receive 20$ in vouchers, but the 20$ 
would be calculated on the basis of his salary after all 
deductions had been made for pension fund, health insurance, 
etc. In this instance, if $1,900 remained after deductions, 

$380 would be paid in vouchers.) The computation on net 
salary ma.de the percentage issued in vouchers a fraction lower 



1 


. 


■ 


. . ■ g • . t ■ • .i 


















. 







. 













, 








■ 





% ■ 


: 

# 


, 1 , ■■ ■' - 








' . 

- 






99 


than if they had been issued on gross salary* The employee 
was subject to the 2$ penalty if he wanted to convert the 
vouchers into cash, but generally he could find merchants who 
would accept the vouchers* 

The turnover in vouchers was fairly extensive in the first 
stages: for example, in the month of December 1942 the number 

of vouchers issued on all branches amounted to 73,578, compared 
to 57,513 cash orders issued during the same period. These 
figures seem to indicate that at that time confidence was 
growing in the voucher system, and secondly, the attempts by 
the government to encourage their use through salary payments, 
by government departments accepting vouchers for payments, 
through penalizing cash withdrawals, and the condition that 
all recipients of vouchers had to open an account with a 
Treasury Branch, created an overlapping system of voucher 
exchanges which increased their circulation. 

Besides the problem of obtaining general acceptance, the 
vouchers at this stage had certain other disadvantages* Even 
after discontinuance of the certified type, transactions in 
vouchers sometimes proved to be a cumbersome operation, 
particularly in large retail stores. In these large stores 
the computing of Alberta-made goods on each voucher, and the 
verification of the identity of the issuer of each voucher, 
tended to take up too much time. The bottleneck of dealing in 
vouchers at the large stores was partially overcome by encour¬ 
aging customers using vouchers to set up monthly charge 
accounts with the stores. In this way, computing of the bonus 






i , 






, 












- 

• 




„ 

■ 









• 




t 












. 




t 







' 













1 • v ■ - 


• :>i- ’ U ■ * • 







. 


. 

• , ' i 






• 



: ; •/l.\ jyj'rw.j. 




•, i ' J 





. 










li 





100 


could be done from receipts in one calculation per month and 
the verification of the individuals identity would never be 
in doubt. If the voucher was kept by the merchant for more 
than six months after date of issue, the consumer did not 
receive his bonus, but this was not likely to happen often. 

A rough comparison of the 34,000 accounts and the 73,000 
vouchers exchanged among these accounts in one month shows 
that an average of only two vouchers per account were issued 
during the month. However, the extensive use of voucher 
credit in charge accounts, both in cities and towns, made it 
necessary to issue only one voucher per month, and the above 
estimate cannot be used as an indication of the extent to 
which the "system of bookkeeping" was used. It seems likely 
that consumers who signed contracts used their voucher 
facilities fairly extensively. The main problem was to get 
more people to use the vouchers, and to overcome the 
difficulties restricting the use of vouchers by merchants. 

It is estimated that approximately 90 %> of all deposits 
made by consumers were In cash and that about 90 % of all vouch¬ 
ers issued by consumers (against original cash balances) were 
in favor of merchants. Retailers issued relatively few 
vouchers preferring or finding it necessary to make most 
payments to wholesalers or manufacturers by cash orders. This 
was one of the chief weaknesses of the system. Consumers who 
signed contracts were willing to deposit their cash and turn 
it into voucher credit. But once the merchants received the 


; ;' ' 'f'l '< 

■ 

■ • 

■ 

' 

■ 














* ■ ' • 




, v ■ : i ’ : - ' 

. 

. . , • • ■ . " : ■ • ■ : r: ' ' . v: ■ 

j ; , :> r ■ ’ ' ' ’ ' ' ' ; : 

. ' ' - ' 1 '^i r ' 1 ' 




. 

. 

„ 

■ 




101 


vouchers they had to turn a large proportion into cash to 
restock their goods from wholesalers who were not in the 
Program. 

Transfer vouchers remained in operation after the changes 
in the interim. Program in February 1941. The main difference 
after the change was that cash could not be drawn without 
permission of a Trade Claims Control Board, but there was no 
2 % penalty levied on authorized conversions. The use of the 
term. ft trade claims’* should be noted here, prior to February 
1941 balances resulting from deposits of vouchers were 
referred to as "voucher credit". After that date funds 
transferred by means of vouchers were called "trade claims". 

The 3 % Consumer There were three main objectives of the 

Bonus System consumer bonus system; (1) to stimulate the 

demand for Alberta-made goods by giving consumers a percentage 
bonus on their total purchases, the maximum amount of the bonus 
being paid if one-third of the purchase consisted of Alberta 
'goods, (2) to increase the purchasing power of consumers by a 
limited extent, through distribution of the bonus, and (3) 
indirectly to expand the usage of the Alberta medium of 
exchange, i.e., the only way consumers could receive the 
bonus was through the issue of vouchers. 

In the first stages of the program the bonus was paid at 
the rate of 3$ on all goods purchased by voucher provided 
Alberta goods formed at least one-third of the total transaction. 








, 
















. 


, 




- 








.r- <j i. O 




. J ' . .. ■■ ! 




t * • t 













102 


The calculations made if Alberta goods did not form one- 

third of the total purchases will be shown below. The bonus 

was only allowed on goods paid for by voucher within one 

month of the date of purchase and it was issued under the 

condition that the goods purchased were not for resale. It 

10 

was not given on vouchers issued in payment for services. 

Alberta-made goods were defined as; 

(1) The products of agriculture... the forest and 
lakes...the mines ... crude petroleum produced...or any 
product...manufactured or processed in the...province, 
or 


(2) Goods, wares, or merchandise manufactured or 
processed in Alberta wherein the raw material content, 
not processed in Alberta does not exceed 50^ of the 
wholesale selling price of the finished article, or 

(5) Such goods, wares and merchandise whether 
falling within the foregoing classifications or not, 
as are from time to time approved for listing as 
"Alberta-made goods" by the Minister of Trade and 
Indus try. ^ 

A detailed list of Alberta-made goods and products was 
attached the above definition. It will be seen that the 
delimiting of this broad category of goods made it relatively 
simple to obtain the one-third proportion necessary to 
receive the full 3/ bonus. 

According to the consumers 1 contracts; "if less than 
33 1/3 of total purchases were Alberta-made goods the bonus 


10; On instalment purchases, as each instalment was presented 
that amount was included in the payment of the month’s 
total bonus, 

11; Government of Alberta, Retail Merchants and the Treasury 
Branch Interim Program , Edmonton, 1938, pp.9-11'.' 





: .■ 



... .... J. ’ v. i 1 '.i 

„ . ■ ... 

‘ -V - • 


.. • , ■ q . :::: ■ :;j. C ll.y \ : 1 ) 'c ■ W 



, 


»... 

■ ; ■ ; • V :i ■ ■ : : C • .. 


» ' ■ , ■■ 'j ... ; . : so ; . d I ' 


t - ' j 

. ■■ • < d' -I) 

„ . . . - - 

• . • 

^ -... 

? :. ‘ - L " 

< 

-'I'' * \ • 1 ; 

.j t:■ 1 u'w . < aId n 1' p«c rr a o 0"Iq. i. 

' 

•' ‘! . ;.<v ! ; ... ■ •• r ■-<'V: 






• 

. 





: •.}■ • . j J ' '■ ■: 1 

„ 


..... r’o ‘1:J : iij 

0 .. •. ■ "■ V! V...'... v ; 

. , . - .... ... it j i 

* 

1 ;; >->t -.-J • r f ; .‘ r : ■ 


,. '. 1 . ■ ; •. ■ i J 'i< ■ • 





„ 

, : 

. . :y i ■ ■ ■ 










105 


credited is 3$ of total Alberta-made goods, together with 3$ 

„ 12 

of twice the purchase price of other goods". To summarize, 
then, the bonus was paid on the basis of (1) total purchases 
during each month by transfer voucher, (2) at the maximum 
rate of 3$ of total Alberta goods purchased if the latter 
formed one-third of the transaction, (3) at the rate of on 
Alberta-made goods plus 3$ on total of other goods purchased 
up to twice the amount of Alberta-made goods if the latter 
formed less than one-third of the purchase. 

This method of awarding the bonus may be shown more 
clearly by an illustration. The example below represents 
purchases made with vouchers over the period of the month of 
November: 


Date 

Total 

Transaction 

Proportion of 
Alberta goods 

Proportion of 
Other goods 

November 3 


$12.50 

$ 4.00 

$ 8.50 

November 6 


3.25 

3.25 

---- 

November 10 


34.00 

-- — 

34.00 

November 15 


16.72 

8.30 

8.42 

November 20 


7.50 

7.50 


November 29 


8.46 

2.70 

5.76 

Totals 


182.43 

#25.75 

#56.68 


Firstly, it is found that the total of Alberta-made 
goods ($25.75) is less than one-third of the total purchases, 
($82.43). The bonus was then computed at 3$ on the total 
Alberta goods; 3^ of $25.75 is $0.77. Then, it was computed 
on other goods up to twice the amount of Alberta goods. Twice 
the amount of Alberta goods is two times $25.75, or $51.50; 


12; Consumers 1 Agreements, passim 













I 


.... .... .„ •; - • , , • . . i;?U C'U J j ; i 

# 

' J' , 

V .J.t noli:- -nl-Vlb 

' 



■ 






















.. •• r"i 






. C'inod 





.. 




i 








104 


3$ of $51.50 is $1.54. Therefore the total bonus paid on 
this month’s purchases would be $0.77 plus $1.54, or $2.31. 

If his total Alberta-made goods had added up to $27.48, 
or one-third of his total purchases, the consumer would 
receive 3$ of $82.43 or $2.47, the maximum, bonus which he 
could obtain on the above total purchases. The relatively 
small range between $2.31 and the maximum $2.47 is probably 
attributable to the fact that the government was somewhat 
reluctant to let itself open to charges of discrimination 
against goods other than those made in Alberta. 

Administration of the consumer bonus system was based on 
the honesty of merchants. Usually it was relatively easy for 
customers to obtain one-third of their total purchases in 
Alberta-made goods. This factor, as it will be seen, turned 
out to be an important one in the revision of the voucher 
system in 1941. The ease of meeting the one-third requirement 
made it unnecessary for merchants, if so inclined, to record 
the proportion of Alberta-made goods on the voucher higher 
than it actually was. If a merchant was suspected of falsely 
recording the proportion of Alberta-made goods, or in the 
instance of certain purchases, provision was made for the 
production of itemized sales slips with the vouchers. 

However, some safeguard had to be provided against the 
resale of goods or paying of a bonus for interpersonal 
transactions among consumers. The safeguard adopted was that 


. 

■ 

. •. 

. 









- 

' 

:■ - - . * - 


■ 












„ 








* ,:.,v . 

. 
















105 


bonuses were granted only on vouchers deposited to merchant 
accounts. Treasury Branch tellers were able to recognize 
deposits from merchants by a series of account numbers, i.e., 
merchant account numbers were all above 1,000, and consumer 
accounts were all numbered below 1,000 and subdivided under 
the letters of the alphabet. The teller would check the 
account number on the deposit slip; if it was a merchant's 
account all the vouchers listed would be credited with the 
appropriate bonus. If the deposit slip showed a consumer 
account number the issuer would not be credited with the bonus,, 
Payment of the bonus was to be made monthly at the discretion 
of the manager; in practice It was always calculated on the 
28th of each month. The consumer bonus was not issued in 
cash; it was credited to the total balance of the consumer 
and could be used only in transactions involving the issue of 
vouchers. Provision was made for the withdrawal of cash against 
the bonus credit, along with other voucher credit, for the 2 % 
penalty. 

In the books of the Treasury Branches, the consumer 
bonus was charged as a liability of the government and was 
entered In a general ledger account entitled ^consumers' 
bonus". This account carried forward on a cumulative basis 
was not Intended ever to be liquidated. The principle 
apparently was that the bonus was only payable in voucher 
credit, and when voucher credit became the chief medium of 
exchange in the province the government would not be called 
on to liquidate the account. 













- 





■ m 



1 . ; 


' 

■ 






. 


* 



. ; 















« 

: ■'> 








. 















, 

.. 


.! 
















„ 

i ' ' 

. . . 










106 


As long as Treasury Branches remain in existence the total 
of the bonus account represents only a small proportion of 
total deposits. Only if the Treasury Branch system ceased 
operating would they ever be obliged to meet the bonus outstand¬ 
ing by cash payments. In the long run, it is perhaps conceiv¬ 
able that the accumulated total of the bonus could reach a 
figure comparable to the amount of total deposits, especially 
if there had been a long period of heavy cash withdrawals from 
deposit accounts. 

According to the public accounts of 1950 the total amount 

of bonus paid out until its discontinuation in 1945 amounted 
u 13 

to $480,738. In April 1945 an amount equal to the cumulative 
total of consumers 1 bonus was appropriated out of the General 
Revenue Fund of the province and set up as a reserve fund for 
contingent liabilities against the outstanding bonus. When 
the bonus was credited to a consumer’s account there was no 
distinction made between the resulting balance and the balance 
of other deposits. Therefore it is impossible to determine 
the amount of the total bonus that has been withdrawn in cash 
to date. It is reasonable to assume that at least some of the 
accounts that were credited with the bonus have since been 
closed, and of course. In the closing out of an account the 
bonus would be withdrawn, along with the remainder of the 
voucher balance, in cash. 

13j Public Accounts of Alberta , 1950, p. 223. 




; -i 

••t ; : 1 : . t-a* a:< . . 

» 

■: t . .j ■)* a ; * t ! 1 . xiaso ;cj gal 

, • .. . • / • , •:! 

■ 

* 

..." V • ‘ ■ ; • 




o ’• » 

■ 

t .. 




. 


‘ 

•■•10 , f '0 










- 

* 

, 






107 


Merchants who received vouchers from their customers, 
but who were reluctant to enter into a merchant agreement 
with the Provincial Treasurer, could use Treasury Branch 
facilities as ordinary depositors. Not only were such merchants 
not given the special concession for withdrawing cash against 
their voucher credit, their customers were not eligible for 
the consumers* bonus. To retain his customers that were 
dealing in vouchers and to save himself the bother of contin¬ 
ually paying the 2 % penalty, the merchant usually found it 
advisable to enter into a contract. This was another instance 
in which the "rule and regulations" helped to extend the 
system. 

In its first stages at the 3%' rate the bonus system was 
found to be virtually ineffectual in promoting Increased 
consumption of Alberta-made goods. The immediate reason was 
that the consumer found.it relatively easy to obtain one- 
third, or more than a third, of his total purchases in Alberta- 
made goods. That is, regardless of what types of goods he 
demanded, the consumer usually was able to obtain a high enough 
percentage of Alberta-made goods to earn the maximum bonus on 
his entire purchases. For example, if his total purchases for 
a month amounted to $60 all the consumer had to buy was $20 
in Alberta-made goods to receive a 3 % bonus on the $60, 
because the bonus was paid on total purchases provided one- 


third of the total was Alberta-made. In this example if a 





■ 

; •; : ' * 

- , . . ■ i ' • • '■ *. 


' 

. : ■ ' v 

. ' * : ■ 

- 

, r « 

- 

’ 

... • 

: '.vr x h-J 


*• 






. 

e « 

... 

* 











108 


person bought $40 or $50 worth of Alberta goods out of a 
total of $60, he would still only receive his $1.80 bonus. 
However, because the bonus was calculated on aggregate monthly 
purchases it was usually advisable for a consumer to buy more 
than one-third Alberta goods in a single transaction. By 
purchasing more than one-third on some transactions he would 
be able to offset other sales when he was not able to obtain 
one-third in Alberta goods; thus, his aggregate purchases for 
the month would be more likely to meet the maximum bonus. 

At any rate, both on separate transactions and on 
aggregate monthly amounts, consumers were able to obtain a 
maximum bonus without making a particular effort to increase 
the proportion of Alberta goods over that portion of Alberta 
goods which they were accustomed to buying. To offset this 
situation the Treasury Branch authorities decided to increase 
the required ratio of Alberta-made goods from one-third to 
one-half. By raising the quota it w a s thought incentives to 
buy Alberta products would be stimulated by the payment of a 
higher bonus, and at the same time the consumer would have to 
buy more Alberta goods to meet the requirements for that 
bonus. This principle was applied in the Interim Program 
retrenchment policies inaugurated in February 1941. 

Savings Term savings plans offered by the Treasury 

Accounts Branches were also intended to encourage the use 
of vouchers through the payment of higher interest on voucher 
savings accounts. There were three basic types of savings 
accounts: (1) term accounts of cash deposits, (2) term 




, 

' ' •' •• ■ • V' 

. 

. . • -■ -j. • 

" 


. 

t • . 

: : ' v : :• 0 * 

, 


■ 


. 


■ ■ 

> . 






» 
















■ ' Cil'J '’>■ ■ o-'. ,V “'O 

* 

. . : ' : ,1 nili >i ■ B 





109 


accounts of non-negotiable transfer voucher deposits, and 
(3) demand savings accounts* 

j^he term cash accounts were available for persons wishing 
to make systematic savings of cash for definite periods of 
time* Term savings also made it possible for the Treasury 
Branches to undertake short or longer term investments in the 
knowledge that certain liabilities would not be due within a 
certain period. Depositors accordingly contracted by individual 
agreement to leave their cash savings on deposit for six months 
or one year. Interest was paid on six months 1 deposits at the 
rate of 2% per annum, and on twelve months’ deposits at 2\% 9 
Unless the depositor entered into a new agreement at the end 
of the contract period the amount deposited, together with 
the added interest, was transferred to a suspense account and 
was available on demand. 

If a person wished to convert his cash into vouchers for 
a voucher term account, to earn the higher interest rate, he 
would first deposit the cash into a current account. The cash 
in the current account would then be converted into vouchers 
by the depositor, who would draw a voucher for deposit in his 
term savings account. Voucher deposits were also of the six 
months and twelve months variety, the former earning 2bf 0 
interest, while the latter received an increment of 3^. At 
the expiration of the contract period the full amount of the 
voucher credit, plus the accrued interest, at the request of 
a depositor could be transferred to a current account and the 




t . x• , 'X . . w v ; -n : - To jS|tf 

* . 

. 





. 

. ' ' ■' '■ 


. ■ ‘ 






] . • . ' t 


, 


^ • ' ' '■ 

* 


. t ' 



110 


depositor could then draw vouchers against it. Withdrawals 
of cash against the final current account was, of course, 
subject to the 2% penalty. Unless a person was willing to 
deal exclusively in transfer vouchers it was still to his 
advantage to open a cash term account rather than a voucher 
term account. That is, the 2% penalty tended to offset the 
effects of the higher interest rate on the voucher account, 
and furthermore the interest on that account w a s not available 
in cash. 

Under all types of term savings accounts no withdrawals 
could be made, either by cash order or transfer voucher, 
until the expiring date. If the depositor wished to withdraw 
the amount before the expiring date he had to write a letter 
to his Treasury Branch, which was forwarded by the Branch 
manager to the head office, explaining his reasons for the 
withdrawal and waiving all claim to interest. No interest was 
paid if the sum was withdrawn before the expiring date. 

Demand savings accounts were similar to the standard 
chartered bank type and were acceptable on a cash basis only; 
no vouchers were accepted on deposit but withdrawals could be 
made by voucher. Demand savings accounts paid (and they still 
do) interest per annum on minimum monthly balance instead 

of the customary minimum quarterly balance. By March 1942 
term savings of both types amounted to $351,489, and demand 
savings to $289,119. 


















. 


.. 






« 




. , 


' 










t . 






















■ - . ■ ; ... 








- 
















, 

’ 

. 






Ill 


Treasury Branch Before attempting an evaluation of the 

Financing Interim Program in Its first three years of 

operation, it may be advisable to consider three other aspects 
of Treasury Branch activities: the method of financing the 
Branches and their relations with the Provincial Treasurer, the 
use of the Imperial Bank as a "clearing bank", and lastly, the 
Treasury Branches and the Provincial Marketing Board in their 
first stages. Firstly, a consideration of the financing of 
the Treasury Branch system: 

Under O.C. 1069/38 the powers given to the Provincial 
Treasurer to organize a Treasury Branch system were subject 
"to the condition that the liability of or financial commitment 
by the province in any way arising out of the exercise by the 
Provincial Treasurer of the foregoing powers, and including the 
cost of administration between the date hereof 
the date of the commencement of the next session of the 
Legislature, be not in excess of the sum of $200,000". 

For the first fiscal yea.r ! s operation, from September 30, 
1938 to March 31, 1939, the Treasury Branches, under a special 
warrant that provided a non-continuous appropriation, spent 
some $69,327. The special warrant was provided for after the 
regular appropriations for other departments had been passed 
in the legislature earlier in the year. Organization of the 
Treasury Branches late in the year made the special warrant 
necessary under authority of the Order-in-Council. 






- !.ii: - 










. 








* 1 ■ • ■ 

■ 






.. 

, - ■ • ■ ■ vt .■ •:?< « ■ 

, ' - • J .. , •; t v: J - 

... * ■ 

■ 










. 








112 


Financing of the Treasury Branches, after the original 
appropriation, was administered according to the same procedure 
used in all Alberta government departments. In December each 
year the Treasury Branches estimate their expenditures for the 
next fiscal year together with an estimate of possible revenues* 
The estimates are then submitted to the Provincial Treasurer who 
includes them in his budget and presents it to the House * The 
figures quoted by the Provincial Treasurer denote the 
estimated maximum expenditure of the departments* 

Expenditures are made by the Treasury Branches by 
submitting f, Vouchers for Payment’’ (not to be confused with 
non-negotiable transfer vouchers) to the deputy of the depart¬ 
ment concerned, who passes them on to the audit department* 

There the expenditures are pre-audited (checked and approved) 
and the vouchers go to the Treasury department. The Treasury 
department then issues cheques on the authority of these 
vouchers to creditors; the cheques are issued by the central 
Treasury department and a charge of that amount is made 
against the Treasury Branch appropriation with the department* 
The cheques or cash orders paid out by the Treasury department 
are drawn on either the Treasury Branches or the Imperial 
Bank of Canada, but those drawn on Treasury Branches are 
recorded in Treasury Branch accounts just like those of any 
other depositor* 

Since the Treasury department issues all the cheques 
itself, they represent debts by the Treasury Branches to the 






. 




. 
















. ' 


















■ 


4 

, t ‘V 










113 


Provincial Treasurer, and accordingly are charged against 
their appropriation. The revenue received by the Treasury 
Branches is sent to the Treasury Department and is then 
deposited into the general revenue fund of the province along 
with the revenues from all the other departments. 

The amount owed by the Treasury Branches to the Provincial 
Treasurer at the end of each fiscal, year is reduced by the 
amount of revenue earned by the Treasury Branches, which is 
then credited to their account. For example, in 1938-39 a 
sum of $129,894 owed by the Treasury Branches to the provincial 
Treasurer, was made up of $80,440 operating costs, and $50,957 
capital appreciation, minus a revenue of $1,504. 

Imperial Bank As In Its transactions of business the 

A "Clearing Bank" Treasury Branches receive cheques and 
claims drawn on chartered banks, and In turn the banks receive 
claims on Treasury Branches. The Treasury Branches not being 
recognized as "banks" cannot under the Clearing House 
Regulations of Canada become actual members of the clearing 
houses. 

Instead, the Imperial Bank as official banker of the 
provincial government acts as a "clearing bank" between the 
Treasury Branches and the chartered banks. Under the former*s 
sponsorship the Treasury Branches are admitted as "associate 
members" to the Clearing House at Edmonton and other points in 
the province. 




■ , . • • ' ■ •' - rt : v -j. . 

, , • • ' -'I.:' 

* 


* . . . 

. t . , ■ ..<■ • . ■ ■■ 




- 


. ■ 


■ 







i 









114 


The claims on chartered banks received by Treasury 
Branches are deposited in an account carried with the Imperial 
Bank under the title of ’’The Provincial Treasurers 
Depositors 1 Trust Account”, and claims received by the banks 
against the Treasury Branches are charged against this account,, 
Settlement in the larger centres is made daily. Before the 
banks can obtain their claims the Treasury Branches must first 
obtain claims on banks in the form of cash or cheque, that is, 
deposits in the Treasury Branches represent either cash or 
claims on other banks, or claims on other Treasury Branch 
depositors. Before lending policies were adopted by the 
Treasury Branches in 1940, it was virtually impossible for the 
banks to have more claims against the Treasury Branches than 
those held against the banks. 

When a Treasury Branch, office is situated in a town where 
there is one or more banks, the Imperial Bank if represented 
or some other bank is used for clearing. In the first few 
weeks that the Treasury Branches were set up all claims on 
chartered banks were forwarded to the Treasury department and 
then cleared through their banking connections. Since then 
claims on banks received by Treasury Branches offices are 
deposited in some local bank; these balances are transferred 
periodically by the bank to the Depositors * Trust Account in 
the Imperial Bank, Edmonton. 

The frequency of transfers depending on the amount is 
at least four times a month, or more often if the balance is 
in excess of $5,000. Claims on the Treasury Branches received 


' : ' !' • .i! O 

• ' ■: ; ■ ; •' : - ;• ■ ■ ’ 


. 

t : 








t 








. 








* 




















, 


• ■ '■ ■JOivt':. ■- '. 

. 










: < 




115 


by banks in various towns are presented to the local Treasury 
Branch for a settlement drawn against the Depositors 1 Trust 
Account at Edmonton, 

In the chartered bank system each bank carries an 
account for the other local banks; every bank deposits its 
claims on other banks and charges their accounts with claims 
that other banks have against it. The net difference is 
settled weekly by a settlement being drawn on the debtor bank 
in Winnipeg (for Western Canada), 

The Treasury Branches on the other hand do not carry 
accounts with each of the chartered banks. All funds are con¬ 
solidated through the Depositors 1 Trust Account and the 
balance carried in that account is generally sufficient to meet 
the claims received by banks on Treasury Branches, In the 
event that claims held by banks exceed the balance in the 
Depositors 1 Trust Account* additional deposits are made in that 
Account of funds derived from surplus cash held In the Treasury 
Branches or by the sale of bonds and securities held as 
reserves. If such shortages are of a temporary nature the 
balance on Depositors* Trust Account could be temporarily 
increased by transfers of funds from the general revenue fund 
of the province held in the Imperial Bank* to the Trust 
Depositors* Account. 

It will be noted that no clearing facilities were organized 
for the transfer of vouchers or claims on voucher credit. 
Throughout the Interim Program the Treasury Branches refused 








- 




. 

, , 

* ■ . <: • . . ■ 






■ 








. - ' '.o ' ; ; 






















»;• . 1 . ; v 










> 










. 




■ 










116 


to establish clearing facilities with the banks for vouchers 
that might be brought to the banks by their own customers. 
Anyone receiving vouchers had to deal directly with a Treasury 
Branch. The object of this provision was, of course, in 
keeping with the main objectives of the Program to establish 
an autonomous provincial system of exchange. 

First Loans to the Under the Interim Program the 

Marketing Board Provincial Marketing Board, instituted 

in 1939, (see Chapter VII) attempted to help small manufactur¬ 
ers obtain economies of large-scale purchases of raw 
materials. Under this system the Marketing Board would 
contract to supply a manufacturer whose scale of operations 
were too small for him to buy his raw materials in bulk. The 
Marketing Board would then purchase raw materials or manufac¬ 
tured supplies and hold them in bond until they were required 
by the manufacturer. The funds used by the Marketing Board 
for purchases of supplies for resale were obtained from the 
Treasury Branches by loans, the loans being secured by the 
warehouse receipts obtained by the Marketing Board. 

These loans to the Marketing Board were granted before 
the Treasury Branches were legally authorized by an amendment 
in 1940, to undertake loaning activities on a general scale. 
Prior to the passing of this amendment the Treasury Branches 
Act (s. 6-4) authorized the Provincial Treasurer to invest 
funds received from depositors. In addition to this provision 




__ 














a 


.. 








, 




















■ . * 

« : 




= 












* 


■i 








* 


•' . . ,j , HI 




f. 

•• 

. ' ' 










117 


the loans to the Provincial Marketing Board were made by 
Orders-in-Council under which they were guaranteed by the 
government. An example of such an Order-in-Council is O.C. 
344/41 which authorized the Marketing Board to borrow 
$24,500 for a three-month term. 

Conclusions On The Interim Program attempted to 

The First Phase carry out the residue of the previous 
Social Credit legislation on a scale and in such a manner 
that it would not run into the barrier of disallowance again. 
In its implementation the spirit of the Interim Pro.gram was 
strictly voluntary; there was no Provincial Credit Commission 
to make arbitrary calculations, the Social Credit Board had no 
say in its operation, and the Program was to be carried out by 
civil servants who adjusted the mechanism from time to time in 
response to its reception by the public* 

As an outgrowth of the Social Credit Act and previous 
statutes, the Interim Program retained three of its 
predecessors ! elements adapted to the scope of the modified 
scheme. Firstly, the Treasury Branches were organized on the 
lines described in the Credit House and Social Credit Acts, 
the chief difference being that the Treasury Branches were 
under the control of the Provincial Treasurer rather than a 
Board of Provincial Credit Commissioners. Secondly, the non- 
negotiable transfer voucher was a carryover of the treasury 
credit certificates of the Social Credit Act, in turn an 



















, 1 . 




•; it :■ . . . 




. 

„ • ' 

t ■ 

t « 

. . i ' . i' ■ . ■ • 

















t 1 

• t ■ 







118 


outgrowth of Aberhart»s non-negotiable certificate* The 
main difference between the transfer voucher and the other 
proposed certificates is probably that the latter would not 
have been covered by an original deposit of legal tender* That 
is, the original Treasury credit certificates or variations of 
them would probably have been a provincial type of currency in 
a real sense; they would have been issued directly as govern¬ 
ment payments, covered only by an adjustment fund of legal 
tender to cover transactions outside the province* 

A third carryover from previous legislation w a s the 
consumers* dividend or bonus. Under the Social Credit Act 
the consumers* dividend was merely a residual payment tacked 
on to the end of all the other measures included in the Act. 

It is worth noticing that the Interim Program made no attempt 
to apply the "retail discount rate" of the Social Credit Act* 
Such an attempt, if enforced on retail prices, would have 
probably brought about an appeal to the courts or the federal 
government under Section 91 (2) (15) of the BNA Act* It is 
typical of the Interim Program that it took no risks likely 
to arouse organized opposition. It Is also the essence of 
the interim Program that it retained the basic feature of the 
Social Credit Acts stimulating of recovery in the province 
by increasing consumption of domestic goods. 

In comparing the voucher system with the scrip experiment 
it is evident that the government attempted to avoid the 
pitfalls encountered in 1956 and 1937* Clearing facilities 


. 

. 

. ,• . • • ■: ; - ri , ; \.r\W ' 1ZZ*S_ .1 


" - ■ : ■ ■ • • v ;V ■ : o-T '' ■. j 

, ■ : 


. 

» 

* 












* 








119 


were readily available for vouchers through the Treasury 
Branches, a larger incentive was offered to the public to use 
the medium, a vigorous publicity campaign was undertaken, and 
the use of vouchers was more clearly linked to Alberta 
recovery. Obversely, the Interim Program contained some of 
the faults of the scrip experiment, and in attempting to 
overcome these faults it developed flaws in its own organiza* 
tion. 

One psychological Influence inherited from the scrip 
experiment was the temporary nature of the plan. Scrip had 
been interpreted as being a temporary expedient before "real* 1 
social credit. The term "interim Program" also suffers from 
temporary implications, but whether or not this was 
significant in Influencing general acceptability of the 
vouchers is hard to say. The liberal redemption or conversion 
policy of the vouchers at the merchant level was in contrast 
to the lack of redemption facilities provided for the scrip in 
its first stages. But the end result was the same, in that 
their circulation was reduced to a relatively small sphere. 
Failure of a redemption policy with scrip had meant that the 
scrip passed from the consumer to the retailer where it 
stayed; wholesalers who bought supplies outside the province 
could not accept scrip when it was not redeemable. Vouchers 
also passed from consumer to retailers, only instead of being 
stuck with them, the retailers through lenient conversion 

















' 









• 




. 


■ : 

„ 

J :. 1‘3 



- 


























120 


regulations were able to transfer their voucher credit into 
currency* Scrip never did adjust itself to the pattern of 
commercial transactions in the province* The next step in 
the Interim Program was a determined attempt to include the 
wholesale and manufacturing spheres to complete the circuit 
of transactions. Once that had been accomplished the voucher 
system would be established as a medium of exchange within 
the province. 

Another carryover from the previous legislation was the 
emphasis on individual contracts as the basis for the entire 
voucher system. Under the reasoning of individual contract 
the transfer vouchers could not even be considered as an Issue 
of !, illegal currency”, for theoretically the vouchers were not 
issued by the provincial government at all. They were issued 
by individuals on their own account Instructing the Treasury 
Branches to transfer a certain sum of money from the Issuer’s 

a?' 1 

account to the transferee’s account. Furthermore, the 
vouchers could not be considered as currency because (1) they 
did not entitle the holder to legal tender or currency— 
although provision was made for the withdrawal of legal 
tender, subject to penalty, against voucher accounts, and (2) 
they were not accepted by everyone as a medium of exchange. 
Rather than a provincial system of currency, the vouchers 
could only be regarded as a provincial system of cheating 
backed by original deposits of currency on the part of the 
people using them. Scrip had definitely been a type of 







. 





• ' * • 

. 


' 

* 

■ 

■ , ■ 

l 

" „ . ' 

• -.. 

, , • - 

. 

♦ 






121 


"money” with all the characteristics of legal tender* The 

vouchers, like commercial bank cheques, could not be consid- 

14 

ered as legal tender on the basis of their format; the only 
way in which the vouchers could be interpreted as illegal 
would be on the basis that they were being issued through 
the offices of an illegal institution* Perhaps the original 
certified vouchers, in fixed amounts guaranteed by the 
provincial treasurer, could have been regarded more in the 
nature of an illegal currency. 

Of course, the central idea behind the individual 
contracts as the basis for the system was to circumvent the 
provisions of federal banking legislation, by relegating the 
operations of the program to a series of personal transactions 
carried out by individuals under the general supervision of 
the provincial Treasurer* But in its first stages the 
Treasury Branches also avoided the stigma of an "illegal’ 1 bank ^ 
by another factor. If it is agreed that the essence of a 
bank is its power to create credit over and above initial 
deposits, then the Treasury Branchssin this early stage could 
not be considered as a bank. It was only after the amendment 
of 1940 that the Treasury Branches became in effect a provin- 


14; Douglas seems to have foreseen that a provincial medium 
of exchange would have to take this form. In his First 
Interim Report to the UFA government In May 1935, he 
said; "The power of printing legal tender money*..un¬ 
doubtedly belongs to the Dominion and has now been 
delegated to the Bank of Canada. But it cannot be con¬ 
tended that this disposes of the question, since, if it 
did, banks would be prohibited from issuing cheques, 
which quite unquestionably pass as money, and are not 
Dominion or Bank of Canada documents." Douglas, C. H., 
The Alberta Experiment (An Interim Survey) , London, 
1938, p. 112* 







. 


. 

. 

3-O'CT; 






■ t 























, o 














. 







* 


■ 





•. .u f <>! /..• 



.• J .. 




« ’ D ' 9 l o 

- 

- 

t J • ■ . ■; 

* 

























122 


cial banking institution. It might be possible that while 
precedence is not the sole governing factor of Supreme Court 
decisions, that if the Treasury BranchesAct and the 1940 
amendment had been referred to the courts they could have 
been declared ultra vires on the grounds that, like the 
Social Credit Act, they would "constitute in our view a system 
of banking" contrary to section 92 of the BNA Act. 

The chief disadvantage of the vouchers, as they operated 
under the provisions of individual contract, was their indiv¬ 
isible nature through being non-negotiable. Vouchers could 
not be used by a third party. A retailer could not hand a 
voucher received from a consumer to another person to settle 
a debt. The retailer, or person receiving the voucher, had 
to deposit the voucher in his account - or open an account if 
he had not already done so - and pay the third party by making 
out a new voucher. This element of non-negotiability meant 
that the vouchers would not. In many instances, be able to 
replace currency in the matter of convenience and velocity of 
circulation. 

Expansion of this provincial system of exchange through 
voluntary and semi-compulsory methods was, of course, a 
necessity if the vouchers were to gain general acceptability. 
Voluntary methods, such as publicity, the attraction of the 
consumer bonus on the vouchers, and enthusiasm in some 
districts for the idea, combined with semi-compulsory methods, 
such as penalty for cash withdrawal, the fact that voucher 






, 

. 

' ft 

' 1 

- ■ ' n'■ ' .■ . 

- 

. 

: . . ■, • . 'V , ■ O 5 I "jO . ■': / : ..' . - . 

. 

~ -J . ' • : M ^j:j .,tj: it tv,' dC od" :• 

. . • • ;t 

t - ' ■ 

- 

' . ■ ■ l . ■ 

. 

t ‘ - 

, * t.•: '"v- 

< - ' , ■ ' •• 

1 







123 


recipients had to open a Treasury Branch account* the 
partial payment of salaries and wages by the provincial govern¬ 
ment, and their acceptance of vouchers for payments of debts, 
all served to expand their use throughout the province. A 
’’Directory of Made-in-Alberta Goods and Alberta Manufacturers” 
issued by the Provincial Marketing Board early in 1940, 
claimed that 7,125 merchants were enrolled under the Interim 
Program, and we have seen the figures for 1942 showing 34,000 
voucher accounts of all types listed under the program. 

The above measures to consolidate the system and ensure 
its expansion to all phases of the Alberta economy did not 
prove to be sufficient to wean the elements of the economy 
away from the conventional currency and banking system. 

Besides the disadvantages of the instruments Involved the 
Interim Program had in its first stages been confined solely 

to the retail and consumer levels Prior to 1941, under the 

■Hnf H| Hrai III Wm 1 

assumption that control by outside interests would make co¬ 
operation impossible, the government had been reluctant to 
attempt inclusion of wholesalers and manufacturers in the 
Program. In 1939 provision had been made on paper to bring 
in manufacturers situated in Alberta. But experience had 
shown that the ’’bookkeeping system” would continue to play a 
secondary role in Alberta if it was operative In only two 
sectors of the economy. Con|g/§tquentiy, the changes made in 
February 1941 were not only designed to consolidate the system, 
they had as their main purpose the enlisting of wholesalers 
and manufacturers to complete the cycle of monetary transactions. 








■ - t - ; •... f • ' > ,‘,J o'.Oli Co' . V., , c 


I : . 

„ 

. 

* ■ 

- 

? . . . . •. • :■ •• ■. . :■ , / ii ,■ , t>, . ; ;• f MJr: ■ O' r o 

„ 

.. . : , ' . . : f. ■ : . 


t !- 


■ 




































* 


* 




















124 


A double-edged problem that provided one of the 
immediate motives for altering the system was the need to 
initiate loaning policies in order to obtain the full co¬ 
operation of merchants dependent on the chartered banks for 
loans. Because of this dependency on the commercial banks 
the retailers could only cooperate with the Interim Program 
to a limited extent, and as a result of this limited 
cooperation the Treasury Branches were faced with a drainage 
of cash which undermined the building up of reserves for 
loans. The extent of the cooperation of many merchants was 
only that of depositing vouchers in the Treasury Branches 
while they kept their main account with a bank. Merchants 
would then withdraw as much cash as was permitted by their 
basic rate from their Treasury Branch account following each 
deposit, thus transferring the bulk of their funds to a bank. 
This "leakage" to the banks in cash form helped postpone 

M? ■■■■ > 

the adoption of a lending policy by keeping average deposits 
at a relatively low level. Furthermore* lealages would have 
to be stopped when manufacturers and wholesalers were 
brought into the Program. The extensive changes undertaken 
in 1941 to overcome these weaknesses are outlined in the 
next chapter. 


' 
















« 

. 






, 









125 


Bibliography - Chapter III 

I._Alberta government documents; 

Statutes of Alberta , 1938 (2nd session) c, 3. 

Orders-in-Council: 1069/38 

1296/38 

344/41 

Merchants 1 and Consumers ? Agreements with the Provincial 
Treasurer, 1938-1941, 

Departments of Provincial Treasurer and of Trade and 
Industry, Retail Merchants and the Interim Program , 
Edmonton, 1938, 23 pp. 

Provincial Marketing Board, A Directory of Made-in 
Alberta Goods and Alberta Manufacturers , Edmonton, 1940, 
96 pp. 

Public Accounts of Alberta , 1938 to 1941, 


II# Alberta government documents (unpublished); 

Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendents Circular #48 , 
November 8, 1938, 


III, Other sources; 

T<i 

1, Books; 


Douglas, C, H., The Alberta Experiment - An Interim 
, Survey , London, 1937, £20' pp. 

2, Pamphlets: 

Social Credit Board, ,filberta ! s Treasury Branches , 
Edmonton, (no date) mimeo,, 16 pp. 

























TABLE VII: DETAILED TRANSACTIONS ON A TREASURY BRANCH CONSUME R 1 3 .ACCOUNT (.1938-1941 SYSTEM). 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

DATE 

(1939) 

PARTICULARS 

DEBIT 

CREDIT 

TOTAL 

BALANCE 

CASH 

BALANCE 

ALBERTA-MADE 

GOODS 

OTHER 

GOODS 

TOTAL 

GOODS 

BONUS 

June 14 

Deposits $100 cash 
& $50 in vouchers 


$150- 

$150- 

$100- 





June 16 

Draws voucher as 
shown in debit col. 

$4.93: 1.10A. X 
3.830; 


145.07 

100- 

$1.10 

$3.83 



June 25 

Draws voucher 

10- in services 


135.07 

100- 





June 26 

Draws voucher 

14.75: 12- A. 
2.75 0. 


120.32 

100- 

12- 

2.75 



June 30 

Bonus paid 


.59 

120.91 

100- 

13.10 

6.58 

19.68 

.59 

July 4 

Draws voucher 

23.42: 2.20A. 

21.22 0. 


97.49 

97.49 

2.20 

21.22 

6.60 

.20 

July 31 

Bonus paid 


.20 

97.69 

97.49 






x: In 


(1) 

On 

(2) 

On 

(3) 

On 

(4) 

On 

(5) 

On 

(6) 

On 

(7) 

On 


debit column (3) letter A. indicates Alberta-made goods, letter 0. indicates other goods. 

NOTES 


June 14: Consumer deposits $100 cash and $50 in vouchers. Total balance column (5) is $150, while cash balance (6) 
remains at $100. 

June 16: Depositor issues a voucher for $4.93 of which $1.10 consists of Alberta-made goods, and $3.83 is made up of 
other goods. These are recorded in Columns (7) and (8). 


June 2$: Voucher is issued for $10 in services. This affects the total balance column only. 

June 26: Voucher is issued for $14.75 in goods, consisting of $12 Alberta-made and $2.75 other goods. 

June 30: Bonus is calculated for the month of June and credited to the depositor's account. Of the $19.68 total goods (9) 
$13.10 were Alberta-made. C Q nsumer is entitled to full and he receives 3$ of $19.68 or .59# as his bonus. 


July 4: A voucher is issued for $23.42 in goods, consisting of $2.20 Alberta-made goods and $21.22 other goods. 

July 31: Bonus is calculated for that month. Less than one-third of the total goods is Alberta-made. Therefore, the bonus 

is paid at 3% on the Alberta-made goods, plus J>% on twice the amount of Alberta goods, i.e. $2.20 plus $4.40 at yf> t 
(col. 9) or .20#. 















t; " 










. O ' 












■ 






■ 






CHAPTER IV 


THE INTERIM PROGRAM: SECOND PHASE (1941-1945) 







127 


CHAPTER IV 

THE INTERIM PROGRAM; SECOND PHASE (1941-1945) 

The chief objectives of the 1941 reorganization were to 
expand the Interim Program to all sectors of the economy by 
including manufacturers and wholesalers in the system, and 
secondly, to increase the development of the Alberta economy 
and the benefits of cooperation with the scheme* The second 
phase of the program was also marked by the attempt to con¬ 
solidate "leakages" of deposits in order to build up the basis 
for a loaning policy which was finally adopted on a limited 
scale in July 1941, 

In essence the 1941 changes were restrictive in nature* 

The voucher system was to have been strengthened by extending 
restrictions on cash withdrawals against trade claims, the 
severity of the withdrawal regulations declining successively 
for consumers 1 , merchantswholesalers 1 , and manufacturers 1 
accounts. Although the commercial accounts continued to retain 
their basic rates general withdrawal of cash from trade 
claims accounts was not allowed except under authority of a 
Trade Claims Control Board. Payment of the consumers* bonus 
was extended to on total purchases, but the full amount was 
made conditional on one half instead of one third of the sale 
consisting of Alberta-made goods. Under the rate, the bonus 
was paid on the basis of "Alberta trade-marked goods", or goods 
specifically listed as trade-marked goods instead of the 
previous general classification of "Alberta-made goods". 







- 






. 

. ‘i, • J > 

[ • ■ ■ '■ •• •/. * 



t 

* 



. 










* 


. • 





; _ '• V l . 


■ . ii -■.= .: ... asay.no 

t f ■ . , T • , «. 1 "‘1 - 
• .... . . . ■ ; 

» 

' 

. - " /' 0 1/j: 0 j:.:: ■ 

‘q-ij.ja.!:sr.coo 

. 

i". • ■ ■ ' - 

. 









128 


Trade-marked goods were only those of Alberta manufacturers 

1 

who signed contracts with the Provincial Treasurer, 
Manufacturers who failed to sign contracts did not have their 
goods considered as r, Alberta-madealthough in fact they were 
manufactured in Alberta, 

Expansion of the Program to the wholesale and manufactur¬ 
ing spheres was undertaken in the usual manner by the signing 
of individual contracts with the Provincial Treasurer, 
binding the individual to the rules and regulations of the 
system. Early in 1941 preparations were made for these 
proposed changes in the Program. The first step, in keeping 
with the basis of Treasury Branch operations, was the contact¬ 
ing of depositors for permission to alter their accounts. 
Notices by form letter were mailed to all depositors prior to 
January 31, 1941, advising them of alterations in the program 
and notifying them that the total balances credited to their 

j, 

accounts could be withdrawn in cash. Depositors were 
requested to report to their branch to complete the new 
contracts and to receive new pass books. 

At the same time a group of about a dozen "contact men" 
toured the province inducing all wholesalers, manufacturers, 
and as many retailers as possible to sign the new contracts 
before the changes came into effect* The signed contracts 
were forwarded to head office at Edmonton, and then returned 
to the appropriate branch. To speed up the contacting process 

Is Alberta Treasury Branches 1 Form 0-3, Manufacturer f s 

Agreement , clauses 3 and 8. 





. 

<' = ‘ " . ' -V ■ li'-t ? ■ 1 . , . 


v . 

. 

■ t . . i • 








t • : t 

e 

- 

t 1 : 

. 







129 


much of the responsibility of approaching merchants was 
left in the hands of branch managers. Two managers 1 confer¬ 
ences were also held at Edmonton and Calgary to review 
administration of the revised Program. 

Transition Period Because the changes in the Program 

Of One Month involved new procedures and regulations 

that were inconsistent with the terms of existing depositors 1 
contracts (including the use of depositors 1 funds in granting 
loans under the 1940 amendment) it was necessary to obtain 
revised agreements from-all depositors. In keeping with the 
voluntary basis of the Interim Program all voucher balances 
were convertible into cash after February 15, 1941, thus 
enabling depositors who did not wish to sign new contracts 
to withdraw their full balances without penalty. 

Those depositors who wished to leave their balances on 
deposit under the conditions of the revised contracts were 
asked to sign a form n TB-B n authorizing the Treasury Branches 
to employ their existing balances under the new contracts. 

A month-long transition period from February 17 to March 15 
was undertaken to accomplish these adjustments and to permit 
all depositors to sign new contracts and forms TB-B, or to 
otherwise withdraw their balances. As at the close of business 
on February 15, 1941, after balancing the ledgers all voucher 
balances were considered as cash balances. This was done by 
increasing the cash balance in each account to equal total 
balance. No penalization was applied to withdrawal of cash 






- 










- 

■ :. - 









. 






' 













■ 











. 

• 








t ■■■■-' t 








, 
















: ■ . ' y. 








- ~ 

. 

’ 






4 . 














130 - 


from these old accounts and depositors who did not sign new 
contracts were permitted to withdraw their balances in cash 
to the full limito 

The form TB-B signed by depositors had two purposes* 

(1) to obtain authority from the depositor to apply the terms 
of the revised contract to his existing balance* and (2) to 
determine what amount, if any, of his balance he wanted in 
trade claims. The form stated; ’’This will be your authority 
to transfer the balance of the account of the undersigned as 
at close of business this date to operate under Revised 
Contract No. signed by the undersigned (date). This 

will also be your authority to transfer to trade claims from 
the cash balance of the undersigned the sum of .” 

Beside this statement was an accounting entry in the following 
form; 



To t al 
Balance 

Cash 

Balance 

Debit Old Balance 



Credit New Balance 




Upon obtaining these TB-B forms the accountant would 
make cross entries on the basis of the amounts listed on the 
form. This written authority was necessary, not only to 
obtain permission from the depositor to alter his account, 
but it was also used from the Treasury Branch viewpoint to 
indicate the funds which could be used for loans and invest- 









- 

, • r 

: /; u . .... i r r ,o fyen?;!©- £I*^?T w'cl i 

t ‘V;-,T ’ y. 

.... « 

. • . , ■ ; ■ ■ . . r :■.'■■■■> 0 • 

. . . •. • . f. . , 

i JJ.'t'.A - -5 v. • ;o\ ■■ ■■ cel® Li l x 

' : :• ' \ •- ■, .; ,0 ■ • :• •: ^ . 

■ f- v; r\.• ’ j.~ 

. 

i ; } 

. .v.; ■■ ■ . . .. . . r. - ... v. .■.■■■ .■ ? % ■; •. • ■ j A !ci!> :• •:! ■©* ...—* 

:• - ... •' r ! ;t y-J'.n . n. .-. 7 

■ 

. .I . ^ -V 

■ • * ' 

.. V . 

, 

: . . a - i •; .... : 












131 


ments as authorized in the 1940 amendment. The branches had 
to be able to distinguish between previous funds and those 
available for loans when the latter were instituted in July 
1941. 

New contracts were signed by depositors at the same time 

as they completed their TB-B forms. Five different types of 

contracts were employed under the 1941 system, outlining 

conditions applying to consumers, retailers, wholesalers, 

manufacturers and municipalities (the same type of contract 

was used for cities, towns, villages, school districts, etc.)* 

Each category of revised contract contained an investment 

clause which stated: r, ...The Provincial Treasurer may use the 

said moneys or trade claims deposited under this contract in 

the manner set out and prescribed in the Treasury Branches Act 

2 

and Amendments thereto.” The investment clause in the 
contracts issued before 1941 read; H *,.The Provincial 
Treasurer may use the said moneys*..to make purchases either 
in his own name or through agents of goods, wares or merchan- 
dise, for resale.” The investment clause in the 1941 contracts 
provided a blanket authorization by each depositor, of a future 
loaning policy according to the 1940 amendment. 

During the transition period adjustments were made in 
the consumers* bonus on the old-type voucher. Vouchers 
issued prior to the change-over but presented after the ne?<? 

Investment clauses as contained in consumers 1 , whole¬ 
salers*, manufacturers*, merchants*, and municipalities* 
(et al) contracts. Treasury Branch forms: C-l, 0-2, 

C-3, C-4, and 0-5 respectively. 


2 : 





















' . . .J : , i.' !■ ^ .-V 

. - ?. • •: • : J ; ■ ' i ••' :• 


- 

■ 

, ■ . 


. * , 






, 








■ 

“ 
















. 






.. : 



< 1 . i. • ' ' • '-• • ' 

. » , » t ! : ‘ 

• . 


* - . - t. ' 








132 


system had been in effect were allowed bonus at the b% rate* 
Vouchers of the old type issued after the end of the 
transition period in March were not eligible for bonus pay¬ 
ments of any type, the object of this step being to hasten 
the transition from one type of voucher to the other* 

Term savings accounts were continued on the same plan 
as previously but provision had to be made in the reorganiza¬ 
tion for the closing out of term savings accounts in the 
old type of voucher. Term, savings accounts were made up of 
numerous small deposits all maturing at different dates and 
earning interest at different rates* The difficulties of 
transferring these accounts from the old to the new status 
and at the same time still retaining the various maturity 
dates and interest rates of individual deposits are evident* 
To simplify this situation the Treasury Branches waived 
the term requirement and considered the entire savings 
balance as being subject to immediate withdrawal in cash* 

The depositor could then make out a new contract or otherwise 
dispose of his account in three ways; (1) he could withdraw 
all or any part of the balance in cash, (2) he could transfer 
all or any part of the balance to either current or demand 
savings account in cash or trade claims, (3) he could renew 
all or part of the balance for a new term of six or twelve 
months in cash or trade claims. A specific form was issued 
for this purpose. Allowance was made for adjustment of 
possible loss of interest resulting from the transfer of term- 
savings balances to the new status. For example, if a six 



153 


months voucher deposit earning interest to expire May 

17, 1941, under original contract was transferred on February 
17 to demand savings paying 1^%, the interest loss would be 
adjusted^l^ (difference between original rate of and 

for a period of three months - the unexpired time between 
date of transfer and date of maturity. 

No changes were necessary in existing demand savings 
account balances because they were already payable in cash* 
New demand savings contracts (G-6) containing the new invest¬ 
ment clause were issued to all depositors in this category. 


Operation of the 
1941 System: 

1. The Bonus. 


The object of the increased bonus 
was not only to give the consumer greater 
benefit from his subsidy, it was also 


designed so that the consumer would have to make a conscious 
attempt to buy "Alberta trade-marked" goods in order to obtain 
the bonus. These features were to be incorporated into the 
bonus system without increasing aggregate bonus payments to 
consumers. An example of how this was possible is shown as 
follows: on a $9 purchase, of which $3 was Alberta-made 

goods, under the 3$ system the bonus paid would be 27^. 

Under the 5% rate if there were $3 worth of Alberta trade- 
marked goods, the bonus would be 30pf, or 5% on $3 trade- 
marked goods, and $3 of other goods - that is, in the new 
system $3 would not be covered by bonus but the total amount 
would not be appreciably different. Instead of paying the 




■ 


, 

.. 

4 








■ 




■ 


- 




• 
























• ", Gfph; >v:.v‘ 



- 







. . 


. 


- 

t ' - 

. 







■ 

> ' •. G ■' • . 

s'-,'-: 

, 





134 


bonus on twice the amount of other goods (it will be remem¬ 
bered that under the 3% system the bonus was paid on twice 
the amount of other goods when Alberta goods were less than 
one-third of the total), the 5% rate was paid on Alberta 
trade-marked goods plus an equal amount of other goods where 
the Alberta proportion was less than one half. 

These changes in payment of the consumers 1 bonus, which 
came into effect on February 17, 1941, were confirmed by 
Order-in-Council 1483/43. An alternative rate of 5/ on 
Alberta trade-marked goods and 2% on all other goods 
purchased, up to $100 maximum, was adopted soon afterwards 
and became effective on April 1, 1941, That combination 
which was most beneficial to the depositor Was to be used. 

The reason for adoption of an alternative bonus rate was 
based on conditions arising out of the Alberta trade-mark 
requirement. As a result of the new system f s definition of 
Alberta trade-marked goods as those produced only by signees 
of manufacturers* contracts, fewer types of goods were avail¬ 
able than had been included under the wide range of Alberta- 
made goods in the 3% system. In many instances, consumers 
had difficulty in obtaining one half of their purchases in 
Alberta trade-marked goods, particularly in the smaller 
centres throughout the province where there were no local 
manufacturers, 

The flat 5/ rate was retained as an alternative pending 
the possibility of expansion of the system when more trade- 















. ■ , - 







? • * ' 

- 

* 

. ■ •. - -■ 

-• 




t"— ‘ v 








1 - . • . 





















- 














■ 
















... 












135 



H3H3QOA HHdSNViLL 

aiavixooaM-NON 

































136 


marked goods would be available. The 2% alternative w a s 
designed to give consumers the benefits of a bonus even 
though it was not possible to obtain a large proportion of 
Aloerta-trade marked goods, and it also recognized the fact 
that "other goods" included products made in Alberta that 
were not registered under the trade-mark. 

As before, the bonus was paid only on consumers 1 
accounts, with the exception after February 1941 that retail 
purchases made by consumers direct from manufacturers who 
had signed contracts were also eligible for bonus payment. 

The bonus system was continued on the above basis until other 
major changes were made in the Interim Program in September 
1943. 

2. The 1941 The existing non-negotiable transfer 

Voucher System voucher, which could be deposited and drawn 
against in cash for pavment of a 2% penalty, was replaced by 
a new voucher which could not be redeemed in cash except 
under certain limited circumstances authorized by the Trade 
Claims Control Board. As noted above, one of the objects 
of making trade claims irredeemable in cash w$s to check 
transfers of cash from the Treasury Branches to the banks so 
that deposits could be built up for loans and the use of 
vouchers expanded. 

Irredeemability was Included in the definition of trade 
claims in all the new contracts as follows: " 


.. ,a claim on 










< . 

. 

- 





* 




T • -• : - ■ • r 




o 


’ 



V 


: 









' 



' 






' 





, 




. \ ■ • : 

. ' 

. 







137 


goods or services which is recorded in a depositor's account 

at a Treasury Branch and which cannot be redeemed except as 

otherwise provided in agreements with depositors, retailers, 

„ 3 

wholesalers and manufacturers”. Trade claims, then, as 

defined in all agreements meant that depositors, with certain 

exceptions, agreed to forfeit claim to legal tender except 

by permission of the Trade Claims Control Board. 

In conjunction with the irredeemable feature a service 

charge was devised to encourage conversion of cash to trade 

claims whenever cash was deposited. A service charge of five 

cents was to have been levied on each voucher drawn against 

a cash balance; apparently this provision, intended for use 

only in extreme cases, was seldom applied. 

There were three ways in which a depositor could acquire 

trade claims; (1) by depositing vouchers received from other 

depositors, (2) by depositing cash and requesting its 

conversion into trade claims at the time of the deposit or 

afterwards, and (3) by automatic conversion of cash to trade 

claims by drawing vouchers in excess of trade claims in his 

account. Such vouchers were charged to account by reducing 

cash balance to equal total balance. These conversions were 

4 

authorized under the contracts which stated; H ...any 
transfer of trade claims made by the depositor in excess of 

3: Cf, contracts, passim . Although vouchers were also a 

claim on services, no bonus was paid on services. 

4; For example; Clause 2 of the Consumer's Agreement. 




■ 

f •• . r • .1' 

■ 

. 

. 




■ 








t 




V/. 










■ - ' • • 

: •} 

: - :■ ' ' i • : T ■= : 

: 

» 

* 


■ :.... ,lr •. - . . 














' 




.. 


, . :: • 

. 














Account No 


158 





























139 


his deposit of trade claims shall be deemed to authorize 
the Provincial Treasurer to charge against the depositor^ 
cash account a sufficient amount to make up the deficiency 
of the trade claims account". For example, if an account had 
a total balance of $110 with a cash balance of $100, and a 
voucher for $20 was issued, then total balance would be 
reduced to $90 and cash balance would be reduced accordingly 
to $90. If a $20 voucher was then deposited, total balance 
would be increased to $110 but the cash balance would still 
remain at $90, 


3. Goods 
Replacement 
Cash Orders 


With manufacturers and wholesalers included 
in the Interim Program it was possible for 
retailers to replace their stocks of Alberta 


trade-marked goods by issuing transfer vouchers. In setting 
up the accounts of retail merchants a third balance column 
was added in which to maintain a "goods replacement control". 
Only that proportion of transfer vouchers representing the 
purchase price of other than Alberta-made goods was used as 
the basis for determining the amount to be credited to goods 
replacement control* 

"Goods replacement cash orders" were defined in the 

5 

agreements as "an instrument whereby a retailer may transfer 
trade claims to the vendor of goods which are designated as 
other than Alberta trade-marked goods, and which may be 


5 : 


Cf. contracts, passim 









■ 

•• 

.7.t ... ' • • ;;c 3 ! i v ro 0 $ ai;-.e*xT Xsi'Dn. 

■ ? ; • v ■ • o & r 

■ 


. 


* 










.. - . 


. 

; :• .v.; ; m ' 


» 

• •-I 

, 











■ 













140 


redeemed for cash in a Treasury Branch" 0 Formerly when a 
retail merchant deposited a voucher a certain percentage 
representing replacement cost of goods sold (i.e. his basic 
rate) was calculated and added to his cash balance,. Under 
the new policy the retail merchant was not permitted to draw 
cash against any part of a transfer voucher deposited. He 
was permitted to draw "goods replacement cash orders" up to 
the replacement cost of other than trade-marked goods sold 
for transfer vouchers. These cash orders were issued by 
retailers only to wholesalers, jobbers and manufacturers for 
replacement of other than Alberta trade-marked goods. 

In the Treasury Branch accounts goods replacement control 
was credited with all amounts of cash deposited by a merchant 
in addition to that proportion of the other goods amount on 
transfer vouchers, determined by his basic rate. The basic 
rates were computed as previously plus 5% of the selling 
price as before. 

As each merchant’s deposit was received the teller listed 
on the back of the deposit slip the amount of other goods 
shown on each voucher deposited. A stamp containing the 
following information was then impressed on the back of the 
deposit slip and the goods replacement amount computed 
accordingly: 





. „ ' 

e 


„ 



■ 




■ ■ ~ ■- 






, 








, - . ...... - - 



Jlc-rJ : . c 





; . . . ’ 




. 










141 


Other goods: $ 


Replacement cost at 
basic rate of _ 1 %: 

Plus credit to 

cash balance: f 

Goods replacement 6 

control (total); $ 

The percentage of total other goods at the basic rate was 
then determined and to this was added the amount of cash 
included, if any, in the deposit* The resulting figure was 
the amount credited to goods rep]a cement control* 

In spite of increased restrictions on cash withdrawals 
the merchants were able to take advantage of the characteris¬ 
tics of the goods replacement cash orders to withdraw funds 
from the system. The characteristics of goods replacement 
cash orders were (1) they were negotiable and payable in cash, 
and (2) they could be deposited in banks and were therefore 
readily accepted by wholesalers and manufacturers. For this 
reason there was no effective method of determining when 
replacement cash orders were only Issued in favor of whole¬ 
salers or manufacturers, leaving a loophole for retailers to 
withdraw cash under the guise of replacing other goods. 

4, Trade Claims Administration of the restrictive and 

Control Board control devices of the 1941 system was 

carried out by the Trade Claims Control Board, consisting of 


At larger branches it was necessary to relieve the 
counter teller of the duty of calculating goods replace¬ 
ment control figures* This was done by a '‘cheque teller 1 ' 
who does not deal with the public directly. 


6 : 













; 

: 

$ i- ;;r • s £q . ;oo :■ . 

. 

... ., c ■ ■ ' ■ : v- :■ .. ■ . - - ‘ 1 '■ 

* ? 

. 

- 

. 


* 

l l t -V v; qmjjS.'X? 


. 






142 


the assistant superintendent of the Treasury Branches as 

chairman, the manager of the main Treasury Branch at Edmonton, 

and the provincial auditor. Prior to the organization of this 

Board provisions were made for conversions of trade claims to 

7 

cash through authority of the superintendent’s office. 

The primary object of the three-man Board appointed by 

the Provincial Treasurer was to consider applications from 

depositors for conversion of accumulated trade claims to cash. 

Its other activities included drafting of rules and regulations 

governing conversions of trade claims, consideration of 

requests for changes in basic rates by merchants, informing 

the Provincial Treasurer regularly of the state of the revised 

program, and In specific cases, changes in the percentage of 

salaries paid in trade claims to individual civil servants. 

To facilitate its actions certain discretionary powers 

were granted to the chairman of the Board and to Treasury 

Branch managers to deal with applications for conversions 

without reference to the Board, These powers referred to 

specific instances that obviously required conversion and they 

were not general powers authorizing wholesale conversions of 

trade claims whenever depositors felt inclined to use cash. 

Upon recommendation of the superintendent the chairman of the 

8 

Board had authority to approve or reject without reference to 

7; First meeting of the Trade Claims Control Board was held 
June 10, 1941. After this first organizational meeting 
its activities were carried by correspondence or telephone 
among the members. 

8; These powers are outlined in Treasury Branches’ Superin - 
tegoent’g Circular T2-1 , dated June io, 1941, (Unpublish- 

IdTT 










. ' 

„ 












•• , 

■ 

e 


. 


: . . ... ■ 







' • . . - t --- • ■' 

. 


. 

t . , - _ _ , ... 5 . 








143 


the Board all applications from (1) consumer-depositors up to 
$100 per applicant at any one time, and (2) all other 
depositors up to $1,000 at any one time. All applications 
approved had to be submitted to other Board members periodic¬ 
ally for confirmation. Unanimous approval of the Board was 
required on applications exceeding the above amounts. 

Conversions into cash were classified into three groups: 
(1) permanent conversions to be ma.de at the discretion of 
branch managers without reference to the Board, (2) temporary 
conversions to be made at the discretion of branch managers 
also without reference to the Board, and (3) both temporary 
and permanent conversions to be made only with the approval 
of the Board, No charge was made for either type of conversion 
A temporary conversion occurred when cash orders were 
presented for payment in excess of cash balance, but within 
the amount of the total balance, when the depositor was able 
and willing to cover the deficiency by placing credits to his 
cash balance in the future. Such conversions were similar in 
principle to bank overdrafts 0 If a depositor did not provide 
'’cover 1 ' for a temporary conversion within one month he could 
not be granted further conversions without approval of the 
Board, In specific instances where a dejoosltor had been 
granted a temporary conversion which was not likely to be 
covered by a subsequent cash deposit the manager could apply 
to the Board for authority to consider the temporary conversion 
as a permanent one, and in effect write the amount off the 
books. Here again this applied only to specific cases. 








. 

- ■ 'J'■. O': . ... ; ?. ea . d* ,'ozd I^vo^(p 

. . : . . ' * ■ ' - ‘ '• . 

V 

. < . o 

. 

■ 

t ' ' • • 

, .• 1 












. 

* . . 

. 

■ 

- 










144 


Permanent conversions were granted by managers when 
(1) a depositor was leaving the province permanently, (2) in 
cases of emergency, i.e. illness or death of applicant or 
close relative which necessitated travel or medical funds, 

(3) in instances where the applicant had acquired more trade 
claims than he could dispose of because of a r, mi sunder stand¬ 
ing" of the working of the voucher system, and (4) permanent 
conversions authorized for travel outside the province. There 
was no limit on the amount of conversions in the first two 
categories. Number (3) was allowed up to a maximum of $100 
without reference to the Board, and it also applied to 
instances where the depositor had previously converted cash 
to trade claims in excess of his requirements. Temporary 
conversions, as defined above, were allowed up to $500 in any 
one account at any one time. Temporary conversions were 
recorded by showing them as debit balances in the cash column. 

Although it had wide restrictive powers and could have 
kept depositors to their word in their agreements the Trade 
Claims Control Board’s powers generally proved to be potential 
rather than actual. The difficulties of enforcing the voucher 
system without overall public support meant that restrictions 
applied under such conditions would tend to drive people away 
from using vouchers and the Treasury Branches, firstly, 
because the apparent advantages (i.e. the bonus) of dealing in 
a provincial system of exchange would not be sufficient to 
offset the disadvantages of trying to contract business through 


: .. ' . . . - .. C . • , 


: ; j .. U bo l 

, , ' t ■ 


~ o • : .. . ■ I r e '. "• 

. 

. 

‘ 


, 










. ■ - -i 

. 










e 

- 


c . 




145 


the restricted vouchers. Secondly, the limitations of the 
trade-marked class of goods made restrictions on the use of 
vouchers impracticable. In effect the Trade Claims Control 
Board was lenient in the granting of conversions from 
provincial exchange to legal tender. On the other hand its 
existence, together with its potential powers, appeared to be 
instrumental in giving the Treasury Branch officials enough 
confidence to undertake the granting of loans. 

5. Operation of With the extension of the Interim 

the Accounts program to include manufacturers and 

wholesalers two new classifications of accounts came into 
being, and with the adoption of the restrictive system the 
existing accounts were operative under different conditions» 

The working of the merchants 1 accounts, with their goods 
replacement cash orders and basic rates has been outlined 
above. Consumers 1 accounts, as before, were the only 
recipients of the consumers 1 bonus. In the consumer accounts 
no part of voucher deposits was credited to cash balances, 
and cash could not be withdrawn in excess of the cash balance 
except under instances authorized by the Trade Claims Control 
Board machinery. 

As early in the Interim Program as November 1939 provision 

was made for the Treasury Branches to accept business from 

9 

manufacturers in the province under provisions of contracts 


9; 


Manufacturers’ contracts were Form MB-1-639, the letters 
"MB” denoting the Provincial Marketing Board. 





: .V ■ - 

, 

„ 

t o, " d ' .:i < < 

. 

. 

. - 

«* ' . 

# 

t 

; 

, 

- * - • • • *?. o : a-£ : jo - :; a 

, 



146 


to be drawn up between the minister of trade and industry 
and the manufacturers. Under the original contracts the 
government was to promote the ''purchase of Alberta-made 
products from the manufacturer by wholesale and retail 
merchants" through the 3 % bonus payments and an extensive 
publicity program. Presumably the Alberta manufacturers who 
signed contracts were also to have been aided by the Marketing 
Board’s mass buying program to provide them with the economies 
of large-scale purchases. 

In the original contracts the manufacturer was allowed 
to withdraw cash from his account without restriction. 

Clause 9 states that the manufacturer was permitted to make 
cash withdrawals "in excess of the balance of cash standing 
to the credit of the manufacturer’s account at the time of 
said withdrawal without the imposition of any discount..." 

In return the manufacturer was to accept vouchers for 
payment of goods sold, to promote the sale of Alberta-made 
goods, and to use vouchers for making payment "for raw 
materials, salaries, wages and other expenses” whenever 
possible. He was also required to ”on...the 10th day of each 
month forward to the government a statement of the total 

selling price of all goods sold by him during the preceding... 

10 

month”. Provision was also made for the levying of a ser¬ 
vice charge. 

10: Op. Cit. , Clause 17. The amount of the service charge 

was not stated. 




• . S'i .■ J 

- 


■:«VK-C -v • : ■ , 

* 

■ 

■ 

; 

■ .. . :,j c . -j li'ji, - . .. . 









* : 
















r 

' , . * 


X ; " 




- 














, , 


, c 












• - 




. 




147 


Although the manufacturers were not extensively canvassed 
to enter the program until 1941 the above contract provided 
the basis for the new manufacturers 1 agreements that were then 
drawn up. The chief difference between the old and the new 
manufacturers* contracts was that the latter were made 
between the Provincial Treasurer and the signee instead of 
with the minister of trade and industry. Although the can¬ 
vassing of manufacturers and much of the promotional 
activities had been carried out by the Marketing Board, the 
administration of the plan rested with the Treasury Branches 
and the contracts were thus made with the Provincial Treasurer. 

Under the new contracts manufacturers agreed to accept 
vouchers in payment for goods, to pay part of their employees* 
salaries in vouchers, and they were expected to use vouchers 
for replacement of raw materials bought in the province. 

Instead of the unlimited withdrawal provision of the former 
contract manufacturers were given a basic rate for cash with¬ 
drawals to replace raw materials purchased outside the 
province, together with salaries and overhead expenses that 
could not be paid in vouchers. For example, a manufacturer *s 
basic rate would be lower in the dairying industry where he 
had access to raw materials within the province, as compared 
with a clothing manufacturer whose materials had to be 
imported. The manufacturer, then under the 1941 system, was 
permitted to draw cash or cash orders against a certain 
percentage, determined by his basic rate, on the full value 





* 





' 

' 

• . ' 


. 

, 


P - 

1 

* 

* 





148 


of his voucher balance„ In his account the percentage that 
could be drawn against his voucher balance in cash was added 
to his cash balance. The manufacturer replaced his materials 
with ordinary cash orders instead of the goods replacement 
cash orders issued by merchants. 

11 

Wholesalers who signed agreements under the 1941 system 
were not permitted to draw cash against voucher deposits and 
no basic rate was allotted to them. The reason why no basic 
rate was given wholesalers was that they would presumably 
receive goods replacement cash orders from retailers for goods 
purchased outside Alberta or for those without the trade-mark. 
Wholesalers were only expected to accept vouchers in payment 
for Alberta trade-marked goods, and they were expected to use 
vouchers to replace trade-marked, goods whenever possible. 

Mention might be made here of the special provisions 
under contracts 0-5 which included depositors such as cities, 
towns, villages, municipalities, and school districts. These 
accounts were allotted basic rates for the withdrawal of cash 
to be decided on the basis of statistics submitted by the 
depositor. Such statistics included the amount of debentures 
issued which were payable in Alberta, the amount of dues 
payable to the provincial government, the amount of wages and 
other expenses, all indicating the extent to which these 
depositors could employ vouchers. 

11: Jobbers, wholesalers 1 agents, and manufacturers 1 agents 

were considered as "wholesalers M . 



. 

* 


. 

. 

' 
















. 






. 

. 










» 






■ . 1 ■ 

, 










149 


Payments that could be made in Alberta were expected to 
be met with vouchers. A basic rate was determined in each 
instance to enable the depositor to draw cash to meet 
requirements over a period of a fiscal year. Sinking funds 
for redemption of debentures payable in Alberta were to be 
accumulated in trade claims, and interest payments were to 
be made in trade claims. However, Treasury Branch facilities 
were not used extensively by such organizations until the 
restrictions of the 1941 system were removed in 1943. 

6. Demand and Term Operations of demand and term 

Savings Accounts savings accounts were characterized in 

this period by the extension of the former and simplification 
of the latter. 

Prior to February 1941 only cash was accepted on deposit 
in demand savings accounts; thereafter both cash and trade 
claims were accepted. In the Treasury Branch accounts this 
extension meant the addition -of two balance columns showing 
total and cash balances on demahd savings ledger sheets. The 
depositor could withdraw vouchers to the full extent of the 
total balance but only cash orders against the cash balance, 
and conversions of trade claims to cash had to go through the 
usual channels. No basic rate or bonus applied to demand 
savings accounts. No changes were made in the interest rate 
or the basis of its calculation but after February 1941 
interest was added to total balance only and could only be 
withdrawn in trade claims. However, demand savings accounts 







. 




. 






* 




. 






' 






, 


« 













150 


generally consisted of cash deposits and the addition of 
interest in trade claims over the relatively short period 
that this feature was in operation had no apparent effect on 
the volume of demand deposits. Provision was also made in the 
revised contracts for operating charges designed to discourage 
"overactive” accounts; these charges were only levied in 
specific instances and were rarely used. 

New term savings contracts (0-7) stipulated the same 
periods and rates of interest as before, the main innovations 
being establishment of a minimum deposit in term savings, and 
variation of the period under deposit to simplify its 
administration. Formerly deposits of any amount were 
accepted in term savings accounts; after the February changes 
no deposit for less than #25 was accepted. The reason for 
this change was that the trouble of administering the accounts 
and the costs of stationery and postage exceeded their useful¬ 
ness to the depositor and to the Treasury Branches. 

Administration of term savings was made easier by allowing 
the depositor to stipulate the term he desired to have his 
money deposited from a certain date. This provision made it 
possible for the depositor to have all his term savings 
balances mature at the same time instead of individually at 
different dates. Deposits made for terms of six to eleven 
months were classed as six-months deposits and allowed 
interest at 2 % on cash or 2-|f? on trade claims, as formerly. 
Those savings made for terms of 12 months or longer were 






151 


classified as 12 months deposits with interest paid at 2 \% 
cash or 3$ on trade claims. 

Term savings did not necessarily have to date from the 
time of deposit; for example, a deposit made on June 3 for 
six months could be made to mature on December 15 by showing 
on the deposit slip that the amount was to remain on deposit 
for six months from June 15. In all instances interest was 
paid for the exact number of days on deposit, i.e., above, 
the interest would also be paid for the twelve days prior to 
June 15. This provision made it possible for the Treasury 
Branches to have term savings accounts mature on certain days 
each month by requesting or advising depositors to date their 
deposit slips accordingly. 

7. Loaning As noted above the existence of the Trade 

Policies Claims Control Board to clamp down on possible 

wholesale conversions of trade claims to cash gave the Treasury 

Branch authorities sufficient confidence to embark on a loaning 

policy in July 1941, Although granting of loans was at first 

made with extreme caution, the adoption of a loaning policy and 

the gradual broadening of it caused a rapid growth in deposits 

12 

in the Treasury Branches. The inauguration of standard 
loans generally according to conventional banking practices 


12; See Chapter V for a detailed discussion of Treasury Branch 
loaning policies. It may be noted here, however, that 
private deposits (i.e. excluding provincial government 
deposits( with the Treasury Branches increased as follows* 
March 1940, $1,337,522; March 1941, $2,134,100; March 
1942, $2,964,700; and March 1943, $4,851,210. Public 
Accounts of Alberta , passim. (Gents omitted.) 









- 






„ 

* 

0 

. 






. 








* 






* 

* 




. 




o . 

t •• . : - 

: t 


: . . t 
<. . 
















152 


put this Social Credit institution on the road to paying its 
own way, and its public support increased in an ordinary 
business sense more than it ever had when the promotion of the 
Social Credit instruments was its chief objective. The 
realization of this fact undoubtedly had a far reaching effect 
in bringing about the changes of September 1943 which 
virtually .jettisoned all the original machinery of the Interim 
Program. 

Although the intensified Interim Program was continued 
in the described form for more than two and a half years the 
difficulties of enforcing its restrictions and administering 
its operations appeared to be more trouble than they were 
worth to many of the Treasury Branch officials who evidently 
became chiefly interested in the practical and business 
success of the institution rather than its doctrinal 
victories. The imposition of the 1941 restrictions in order 
to make the system work had only served to Increase Its un¬ 
wieldiness, and it is significant that in September 1943 when 
external conditions necessitated a change in the consumer 
bonus most of the restrictive features were dropped at the 
same time. 

In August 1943, then, the superintendent of the 
Treasury Branches issued the following statement: f, It has 
been decided by the government to make certain changes in 
the Interim Program to become effective»..September 15, 1943. 
The changes are all designed as a first step towards simplify- 


t 




. 



. 






.. - •: • .-V 


8 


■ : 




. . . 










N 






153 


ing the present procedure both from the point of view of the 

public and of the Treasury Branches...(They) involve 

elimination...of a number of the more cumbersome features of 

13 

the present (system).” 

The impetus to simplify the Interim Program appears to 
have originated from an immediate need to alter the consumers ! 
bonus system. It is likely that the trouble of administering 
the cumbersome provincial system of exchange probably would 
have been continued for a longer time if external conditions 
had not made it necessary to change the bonus and thus remove 
one of the chief inducements to use the provincial vouchers. 

Payment of the consumer bonus was, of course, intended to 
increase the demand for Alberta trade-marked goods and to 
stimulate the circulation of the vouchers. However, with the 
outbreak of war the supply of goods, particularly Alberta primary 
products subject to rationing, became so restricted that it 
was exceeded by demand* The bonus system was therefore 
operating against a national wartime policy of restriction of 
consumer spending, and It was out of harmony with general 
economic conditions characterized by a shortage of consumers* 
goods. Rather than discontinue the bonus entirely at one step 
the rate was lowered to 2 % on all goods and the Alberta trade¬ 
mark basis was removed. The need to change the bonus, 

13; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent 8 s Routine Memo 
#198 , issued August 30, 1S43 to all branches. (Unpub¬ 
lished, ) 





























' 


i:,i. O' J-=; 




- ■ « 

- 




• : 


. J ■ J /u 8.^; " 

. 

■ •• *■'••• 


■* 

: 






. 




. 


* - 













154 


supplemented in the background by the fact that deposits had 
grown to a rapid extent since the adoption of loans, gave an 
opportunity for the removal of most of the cumbersome 
features. 

Disadvantages of One of the main unwieldy features of 

the 1941 System the 1941 system was the difficulty of 
administering the bonus system dependent on the Alberta trade¬ 
mark requirement. Although a large number of Alberta 
manufacturers had signed contracts -- 707 manufacturers out of 

1,108 manufacturing firms in Alberta were listed under the 

14 

Program by August 8, 1941 --relatively few of them found it 
practicable to use the trade-mark on their products 0 

Firstly, one difficulty, particularly with large manuf¬ 
acturers , was to segregate the proportion of their product 
that would be consumed in Alberta from the exportable 
proportion. This factor applied to such firms as meat packers, 
flour mills, sugar refineries, textile manufacturers, biscuit 
companies, etc. It Is also conceivable that this condition 
may have worked in reverse and that outsiders could have had 


14: Department of Trade and Industry and Provincial Marketing 

Board, Manufacturers of Alberta Trade-Marked Goods , 

August 8, 1941, 22 pp« Also, Alberta Facts and Figures 
prepared by Bureau of Statistics and Department of 
Industry and Labor (1950) p* 220* Marketing Board list 
showed 44 types of manufacturing and processing firms in 
the scheme. Largest groups in decreasing order were: 
dairies, bakeries, coal mines, flour and feed mills, and 
lumbering firms. According to 1941 statistics in Facts 
and Figures manufacturers of animal and vegetable products 
produced 67 . 72 % of total value of production of manufac¬ 
turing industries in Alberta. Ibid, p. 221. 









: ,• 


' 





„ c 

. 

- - . 




• V ■ ■ 








- - 


V 





» * 








. 


t 

c- 




- 




* 





155 


their goods placed in a preferred class by having them sent 
to Alberta and finished or altered slightly by an Alberta 
manufacturer. In conjunction with these difficulties was 
the practical problem of devising means of trade-marking 
such products as meat, petroleum products, market produce, 
other unwrapped and bulk goods* That is, while they may 
have been produced in Alberta there was no way of distinguish¬ 
ing those goods of cooperating manufacturers from those of 
non-cooperating manufacturers, A legal barrier to the scheme 
Was the Pure Pood laws which prohibited the labelling of 
dairy products by trade-mark, making it virtually impossible 
for the largest single group of manufacturers to sign 
contracts - 182 dairy firms - to cooperate within the system. 

Difficulties With After the changes of February 1941 

The Vouchers the voucher system increased in complex¬ 

ity, both from the standpoint of depositors and the Treasury 
Branches. From the Treasury Branches* point of view the main¬ 
tenance of several balances Involving the separation of 
deposits into cash, goods replacement control, et_ al , and the 

restrictions on withdrawals, increased the time and costs of 
15 

administration* 

On the other hand, depositors, such as merchants, found 

15; This section is partially based o-n an informal report 

submitted to the Provincial Treasurer following a survey 
by government officials of a cross-section of mercantile 
organizations before adoption of the 1941 system. The 
report outlined anticipated difficulties in setting up a 
more restrictive system. Those difficulties that 
actually occurred following the changes are outlined in 
the above section. 





















. 

- 

? ■ . 

' t . _ t 5 

' • t . 

* 










* 




, 

4 















156 


it inconvenient to have to distinguish among different methods 
of payment in the form of vouchers, cash orders or goods 
replacement cash orders. The extra work and special bookkeep¬ 
ing required on the part of merchants in order to maintain a 
record of the proportion of vouchers representing other than 
Alberta trade-marked goods, and to calculate the portion of 
that amount that could be drawn upon by goods replacement 
cash orders, were a burden to the depositor. If he did not 
keep these records the merchant did not know the extent to 
which such orders could be drawn, and he ran the risk of 
having his replacement orders dishonored even though he might 
have had sufficient credit in his total balance. 

In order that wholesalers would be certain that only 
Alberta trade-marked goods were being paid for by transfer 
voucher they also had to maintain a record of the amount of 
such goods as distinguished from other goods. The maintenance 
of such records on the part of a large wholesaler proved to be 
time-consuming and costly. Also, there was always the 
possibility that retailers might tend to dispose of trade 
claims to the most cooperative wholesalers, tying up a large 
proportion of the latter ! s funds in irredeemable claims. 

However, the small number and limited size of the wholesalers 
who did sign up with the Program did not make this latter 
factor a reality. 

In the opinion of some large wholesalers local manufactured 












157 


goods could not be relied upon either in quantity or quality 
to substitute generally for imported varieties. This problem 
was one practical barrier to the extension of the voucher 
system and it could probably only have been overcome in the 
long run as demand increased sufficiently to enable more 
efficient production. Wholesalers also objected that a large 
number of Alberta manufacturers sold directly to the retail 
trade and that the cooperation of wholesalers was not in fact 
justified. That the wholesalers generally abstained from 
entering the Program is shown by the fact that only 15 whole¬ 
salers, including the Provincial Marketing Board's Implement 

Parts Distributors, were registered with the scheme by 
16 

August 8, 1941, out of a total of 385 wholesale firms in 

17 

the province at that time. 

Retailers, who did not deal extensively in Alberta-made 
goods, such as hardware merchants, druggists, exclusive 
clothing dealers, etc., found that as they had no Alberta- 
made goods to replace, the irredeemable proportion of trade 
claims (i.e., that part not covered by their basic rate; 
their gross profit) would be difficult to dispose of. For 
instance, if such a firm held a sale to raise funds to lay 
in a seasonal stock, and they could only draw an amount of 
cash equal to replacement cost of goods sold, the purpose of 

16; Manufacturers of Alberta Trade-Marked Goods , p, 22. 

17: Alberta Facts and Figures , p. 284. 









' 




J 












<■ 








t 

: . ■ - . ■ ■ f ■■■■ ■->" 

, , t f v L 

■ - - - t » 

t 


-- 

0 










■j X , i • 

t 




158 


the sale would be defeated. 

Experience in department stores showed that the ratio 
of sales of other goods to Alberta trade-marked goods was 
estimated at 5:1, i.e., for every $100 of Alberta trade- 
marked goods sold for trade claims, $500 of other goods were 
sold for trade claims. Accordingly with a basic rate of 80 °/o, 
for every $100 of trade-marked goods sold the store would 
accumulate $200 in irredeemable trade claims. As the $100 of 
Alberta goods could be replaced by $80 in trade claims a 
surplus of $120 in trade claims would result. It was 
estimated by one particular department store that in the 
course of a year their stock was turned over approximately 25 
times. On this basis, within a year they would have 
accumulated two and a half times as much in trade claims as 
would be required to replace Alberta-made goods sold for 
trade claims. At this rapid rate of accumulation it would 
be possible in a comparatively short time for such an 
organization to have its capital bound up In irredeemable 
trade claims to a crippling extent. 

A legal difficulty arose in transactions with grain 
companies, grain brokers and flour mills. Under the Canada 
Grain Act payment to producers by any means other than that 
prescribed by the Act was not permissible. This stipulation 
meant that primary producers of grain could not be paid for 
their produce by voucher. In practice organizations dealing 
with primary producers found that farmers preferred to receive 


. 

t 

/. ' . •: ' •■■■..; .. ; .1 ■ ' 0 :. . 

, 

. ■ 










. 


. 

. 

. 






. 














. 



159 


payment for their produce by standard "cash ticket" rather 
than by voucher; tickets for previously shipped produce 
were usually picked up when bringing in a new shipment and 
the farmer would use the tickets to pay for his current 
needs while in town. The cash ticket, then, was already 
another medium of exchange to the farmer without using a 
third type in the form of vouchers. Even if a Treasury 
Branch or agency was available, the fact that dairy products 
were not subject to trade-mark and the provisions of the 
Grain Act gave no incentive or made it difficult for farmers 
to deal in vouchers. 

Outside of the provincial government and some municipal¬ 
ities, the payment of wages and salaries in vouchers proved 
to be inconvenient for employers and it met with little 
support from employees. Lack of interest or direct opposition 
by many employees for political or local disposal reasons 
hindered payment of their wages in this form. Small factories 
found it relatively easy to pay a certain percentage of wages 
in vouchers but large organizations found the administration 
of payments in this form burdensome. At the same time payment 
of wages in vouchers provided the main outlet for large firms 
in disposing of accumulated trade claims rather than further 
replacement of Alberta trade-marked goods. 

The Changes The elaborate machinery built up during 

Made in 1943 years that the Interim Program proper was still 


in operation was scrapped in its entirety in September 1943 




. . 

«, , : - : .• *x';:u 

• • 

t 1 • ' ‘V •• .. • 

> , . 

: : * . - - ■ ' :\\. ' ' ' . • ‘ o • J ’* C £• 1 : '■ . ■ 

1 • 

, 

* 

. 

. 

. 





160 



UaHDQOA ttMSNVUL 

aiavixooaM-NOM 


Exhibit V: Non-nogotiable Transfer Voucher. 

(Form used from September 15, 1943 to April 25, 1945.) 




































161 


except for the remains of the voucher system and a token 
consumers 1 bonus. The extent to which the Interim Program 
was changed may be gathered from the following list of the 
alterations as they came about in 1943, 

(1) Promotion of products of Alberta manufacturers co¬ 
operating with the Interim Program, by having their goods 
placed in a preferred class of * f Alberta trade-marked” goods, 
was discontinued. After September 15, no distinction was 
made between Alberta trade-marked and other goods. 

(2) Under authorization of Order-in-Council 1484/43 the 
consumers f bonus was paid at the flat rate of 2% on all goods 
purchased by vouchers from retail merchants, and the amount 
of purchases on which the bonus was allowed on any account in 
any one month was limited to $100. If the total purchase was 
$100 or less, the bonus was calculated at 2% on the entire 
amount; if the total exceeded $100 the amount of bonus payable 
was $2 because the maximum monthly amount on which the bomis 
was payable was $100. In place of the three previous entries 
in the Treasury Branch ledgers the accounts were simplified to 
only one column for recording goods on which the bonus was 
calculated. 

(3) All reference to the expression "trade claims” was 
discontinued, the Trade Claims Control Board was abolished, 
and no distinction was made between voucher balances and 
cash balances. In the ledgers only one balance column was 
then used; total balance became the only column and goods 


. 

. 

- 

? . - - ■ < •' 

, . * ' 

. : :. • - 3 

' . ; ■ ; - : : .=a ' , ‘ "• ‘ ■ .. ' a. a a 


, 

. . '• ■ ... ' ...... ,. : ■; : 

'.i: ... . aa,v .. aa. . ': aa-aa \ • i.,' >!■ .: a ■ a 1 ' IX &,a C .. aaiaa/a a a ■! ■ 

. 

.. , a. a .. a ,...-0 .. 

a. . - J * a a a aa v* ; a o j ■ a oxal ■ a a a{ 5) 

- 

' 

. 







162 


replacement control and cash balance entries were disregarded. 

(4) - All restrictions on the withdrawal of funds from 
any account were eliminated - except for term savings accounts 
and the allotment of basic rates governing the withdrawal of 
cash for retailers, manufacturers and the groups included 
under the G-5 contracts was no longer necessary. All balances 
resulting from the deposit of vouchers could then be drawn on 
to the full extent in any account and depositors could 
withdraw cash to the full amount of total balance. The need 
for distinction between vouchers and other types of instrument 
was thus eliminated from deposit slips and other records. 

(5) The five types of current account were reduced to 

two: consumer accounts and business accounts. There was no 

difference in operating procedure except for payment of the 
bonus on consumer accounts. 

(6) Trade claims term savings accounts were discontinued 
leaving only six and twelve month cash accounts remunerated at 
their previous rates. Term savings accounts were further 
altered in April 1945 with the discontinuance of six months 
accounts leaving only twelve months 1 term accounts with 
interest reduced to 2$. The reason for this change was that 
the Treasury Branches reduced interest rates on the twelve 
months accounts in keeping with a decrease in loan rates 
brought about at that time. Interest rates on the six months 1 
deposits would then have been reduced to the same rate as 


, s ..: . •- . ■ . iO - ■ \ $; ' , , . .. ; 

- "c-.* , i 

■ 

< ■ • . :: ■ 

* 

• ' 

. 

. 

. 

« 

. : .. ■ ■ : ;■ , • • :: - , .l .. b ■■•... ■,: i 

* 

. 

• ■ ■ . ■ ; j ; j: ' ■ ; v b ' S ■; v b -:; ’ 







163 


existing demand deposits and in the eyes of the Treasury 

Branch officials their existence as separate accounts would 

not have been justified. Another reason for the cessation of 

six months* accounts in 1945 was to discontinue the cost and 

18 

trouble of looking after them. 

(7) After the 1943 changes vouchers were accepted by 

the Treasury Branches for repayment of loans, purchases of 

money orders, travellers* cheques, drafts, etc. 

Because all the existing contracts with depositors 

provided for varying rates of consumer bonus, and as the changes 

in the Interim Program were to the advantage of depositors, the 

Treasury Branch authorities did not attempt to obtain revised 

contracts, except for term savings accounts, in connection 

19 

with the 1943 changes. 

Retention of Non-negotiable transfer vouchers continued 

the Vouchers to circulate in the province under the same 
conditions of not entitling the holder to legal tender and 
currency: otherwise no distinction was made between them and 
cash orders or cheques. The only remaining semi-compulsory 
feature was that a person obtaining a voucher was obliged to 
open an account in a Treasury Branch as before, but under the 
new system he could thereupon withdraw the full amount in cash. 

18; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent*s Routine Memo 
#277 , d/April 1, 1945 a (Unpublished.) — ““ 

19; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent *s Routine 
Memo #198 . 












' JJU-.C 'X.: 

< 







„ 





1 



. 





, 


, : £ " £ ■■ 



• 


t • .. ' 




; r X . X ' Jf . 



K • ' 

. & o '.. c • .' •i n ’ : ‘i -v 


0 < ■ ■- • ■ 





• • ; , . , 

. 


t ' - •-' ’ 

- ... .. : v ... .. •... - i 

• 

■ . 0 

. 


. . .. c , - ' ■ .. 

.. ... . V : ■ : 1'7 O-jX; - J • S. .. X r -OX 1 0 OJ 

X • 1 x . X ••■vx * c r ■. > . 

, 

s ni 

r ■ . 1 ’ : 

.« 

?, * , r; . ' A 'Vx3V/. tE '^^10(11 A : £ • £ 

. 







164 


In such cases rather than go through this procedure of 
opening and closing individual accounts in each instance* 
transactions were made through a "suspense account" carried 
for that purpose, or, if the holder of the voucher preferred 
to do so, he could affix the usual excise stamp to the voucher 
and it would he cashed Immediately. 

From the governments point of view one of the objects 
of adopting the transfer voucher mechanism was to induce the 
public to use a medium of exchange other than national 
currency or chartered bank credit. To have withdrawn all 
vouchers from circulation at this time would have been a tacit 
admission of the Interim Programs defeat and it would have 
offset whatever success had been achieved in weaning the public 
away from the established modes of exchange. Under the 2% 
bonus system the use of vouchers remained stabilized at a 
somewhat lower level and after the 2% bonus was discontinued 
in 1945 their use declined gradually. 

Payment of the consumers 1 bonus was discontinued entirely 

on April 30, 1945, by authority of amendment to the Treasury 
20 

Branches Act. 

The 1945 amendment altered section 6 of the original 
act by deleting subsection 3, with particular reference to 
subsection 3 (b) which had stated: 

20: Statutes of Alberta, 1945, c, 26 "An Act to amend the 

Treasury Branches Act" (Assented to April 6, 1945). 








- 


d ‘1 ;'c s.-ol o nl 

$ 

. 

.1: t .*t : , ; ■ ■ '' o o 

’ - n 

„ 

■ d L ; 1 

. 

t •.. .. =;:■ . 6: •.. : v o.'j. oci 

* 








1 : 

■ 

* 


•■■■ 0/ r " dd ,; \r. t d , L-’d ■ J 06 










....... _.. . 




. 

; ■ .' .* 










165 


M ...in lieu of interest there shall be credited to 
the account of the depositor such amount as may be fixed 
from time to time by the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council 
on such portion or portions of his deposit used in the 
purchase of specified goods from merchants who have 
entered into contracts with the Minister.,.and which 
goods have been purchased by means of orders drawn by the 
depositor upon his deposit in favor of the merchant. 

According to the amendment, section 1; "Any provision 
in any contract whereby the Minister has agreed to pay to 
a depositor a bonus on the purchase of specified goods 
from merchants who have entered into contracts with the 
Minister shall no longer be in force or effect after the 
30th day of April 1945, and each such contract shall be 
deemed to be amended accordingly*" 

Payment at the 2% rate was allowed on vouchers presented 

to branches on or before April 25, but vouchers posted after 

22 

that date were not eligible for the bonus. Depositors were 
not informed individually of the discontinuance of the bonus 
because it had been legalized by formal amendment to the 
Treasury Branches Act and had been made known generally by 
means of newspaper and radio. After the cessation of bonus 
payments it was no longer necessary to record goods of any 
description on Treasury Branch ledger sheets and merchants 
no longer had to complete goods certification on transfer 
vouchers presented to them. New depositors’ current account 
agreements (Form TB-88) were obtained from all current 
account depositors to replace other types of contracts 
previously used. 

Following discontinuation of the consumer bonus the 


21j Revised Statutes of Alberta . 1942, c * 29, s. 6, sub¬ 
section 3. 

22; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent T s Routine 
Memo #282 , d/April 25, 1945. (Unpublished.) 






- 

. 

* 

^ • 

. 

\ 

. 


! 

■ 


. 

. 

; { ^ : .‘I \ ' -j'?' • 

w ■ ' t -c ku: t> d 








« 

„ ...... .. . ... . ..... . - .. ; ■. Ivj, |H, 













H 






Exhibit Vis Treasury B r nch Cash Order, 
(present form) 




































167 


number of vouchers issued per month declined from nearly 

45,000 in March 1945 to 35,000 in September 1945, and 

stabilized itself between 22,000 and 27,000 per month in 
23 

succeeding years. With the removal of the consumers'bonus 
the voucher system did not become entirely defunct and 
vouchers are still used fairly extensively in various towns 
and districts throughout the province * 

The personal inconveniences in dealing in vouchers 
became readily apparent in transactions inside the four major 
cities of the province. Non-negotiability of the vouchers 
proved to be particularly disadvantageous to city users by 
requiring that a recipient of a voucher either o.pen an 
account or deposit the voucher in his existing account before 
claims could be drawn against it. In cities this feature 
meant that the depositor would often have to travel long 
distances to his nearest Treasury Branch to deposit and 
withdraw trade claims or vouchers. 

Another factor was the impersonal nature and method of 
city retail transactions. Although the problem of verifying 
the identity of the Issuer was overcome by the use of monthly 
charge accounts paid by issuing a single voucher per month, 
those consumers who did not have monthly charge accounts 
found two main cumbersome features to contend with; (1) the 
necessity of verification, (2) the time taken for computation 


23: Alberta Treasury Branches Accounts (Unpublished). 






t * 

« 





■ 






■ 



• 






■ 


■ir *, \r -v:: ':V. 








p : 



.;U Cl- -? Jy. ^ 7 O y '0 j>: ■' j. >J0 13 ‘1 ;3G v>ci 0 o OOVOtJ 

i .:■ a . . o ■. - J .' ' • . :. . 


.. J • . . : ' ; ; -c ac .. : ; c •• 

« 

; ■: . •*,' v -o ■ .o? 

« ' 

« 

r. o.. ■. J •>! . ■ iup■ r sn: 5 . 






168 


of Alberta-made goods. During rush hours the inconvenience 
of these features was particularly evident. Discontinuation 
of fractional payment of civil service salaries and other 
government employees in vouchers also contributed to their 
decline in cities. Undoubtedly in the background to this 
lack of general acceptability of vouchers in the cities was 
the urban political attitude towards the Social Credit govern¬ 
ment and its programs. 

Some indication of the rapid decline in the circulation 

of vouchers in the cities may be obtained from the following 

statistics. In June 1943 when the 1941 system was still in 

effect, the number of vouchers issued that month in the four 

major cities (Edmonton, Calgary, Lethbridge, and Medicine Hat) 

amounted to 31,144, while 37,163 were issued outside the 

cities. In March 1950 the number of vouchers Issued for that 

month in the four cities amounted to only 1,345, while the 

24 

country figure stood at 22,270. A study of individual 
towns throughout the province shows that the numbers of 
vouchers Issued per month in many instances has remained 
amazingly stable. 

For example, a sampling of six towns throughout Alberta 
indicates, by the number of vouchers issued per month, a 
part of the solid core of support for the voucher system. 

Table VIII compares the number of non-negotiable transfer 

24; Alberta Treasury Branches, Accounts, for the periods 

shown. (Unpublished.) 




, 


. 




. 

. ‘ 

, 






. 











, . t . 

» ■ 










* 


. ' f 0' - ■ . ■ - ->• ■ < ' 








. 











169 


vouchers issued per month in December 1943 and September 
1950. The names of the towns are not made available as 
general information. 


Table VIII. A comparison of the transfer vouchers issued per 
month in December 1943 and September 1950 
in six Alberta towns 


Particulars 

Uown 1 

Town 2 

Town 3 

Town 4 

Town 5 

Town 6 

Number of transfer 
vouchers issued in 
December 1943 

4,016 

330 

1,537 

1,813 

1,274 

1,457 

Number of transfer 
vouchers issued in 
September 1950 

3,264 

776 

1,142 

1,487 

1,479 

1,359 


(Note: Basis of computation was changed from twice each 

calendar year to twice each fiscal year in 1944.) 


The use of transfer vouchers in the rural areas of the 
province is chiefly confined to consumers and merchants within 
the towns and villages. The disadvantages for farmers of 
using the vouchers have previously been noted. Vouchers 
appear to have remained in use in the smaller centres for a 
variety of reasons. For instance, the trouble of travelling 
to a Treasury Branch to deposit vouchers is no particular 
hardship in a town where there is a branch or agency, small 
town merchants generally know their customers personally, 
and the problem of identification usually does not exist. 

From the merchants viewpoint the vouchers provide a record 
and a receipt of transactions and have the feature of safety 
through non-negotiability; but, of course, the first two of 
these characteristics also apply to cheques or cash orders. 

One probable reason for the use of vouchers rather than 












- ... 

. . ; ■■ 1 8‘ZL . • . V 

. 

. 


. i •' j • . ■ 



; * •; -.••••;/ ; ■, J> ,;0&« eoiw v •= ■ ;; *1 C UilOlBO 


. 

, .. 

■ 

t . . c - 'J - ■ • • 

, . • 

y ... . ■ •„ : . -: { J l ;i • ■' -i <!■■•}.£ : - .. 

, .. ; V > C ’ " .. i :/ ' ... .. . ‘ ' V-* 






170 


chartered bank cheques or Treasury Branch cash orders is 
that no exchange is charged on them between branches or 
agencies throughout the province. Cash orders, on the other 
hand, are only free of exchange charges between a controlling 
branch and its surrounding agencies, and exchange is charged 
on the use of cash orders between branches 0 Similar regula¬ 
tions apply to bank cheques. 

Several possible political, sociological and psycholog¬ 
ical factors may also lurk behind the circulation of vouchers 
in the towns and villages® Politically, they may be popular 
because of the influence of a particular M.L.A-. or the 
attitudes of Social Credit supporters in the community. Other 
reasons for their usage may be traced to such factors a.s the 
traditional prairie antipathy to the chartered banks and 
private financial institutions, or the result of habit 
created over the past 13 years. Or, conversely, their 
circulation may be attributable to the traditional astuteness 
of the rural cracker-barrel merchant who has found a safe 
credit instrument sans exchange or service charges. The basic 
reason for their continued usage appears to be connected with 
the latter factor, for as they presently circulate in the 
towns the transfer vouchers have retained their safety 
features without additional expense to the user, and 
without the personal inconveniences characteristic of them in 
larger centres. 



r: o-'V.ckO f o \ ,;k - 1 1 

. 

. 












,, 






* 












' 

• 

















< 


, 














■ 

. 

• ■ - • • ■' C • 

„ 






- 










.# 





171 



o 

cm 

■§ 

0 

to 

0 

h 

Ph 

















Hi 














172 


Summary and In 1941 an attempt was made to extend the 

Conclusions instruments of the Interim Program so that 
vouchers would no longer remain a secondary method of exchange 
in the province, and at the same time through consolidation of 
the system to boost the stature of the Treasury Branches 
themselves, increasing their role as a financial institution 
in the province. The attaining of each of these objectives 
was in turn dependent to a large extent on the success of the 
o the r. 

The tightening up of the slack in the Interim Program 
mechanism made it possible for the Treasury Branches to 
compete with other financial institutions through loaning 
services. At the same time the beginning of loans emphasized 
the business-like nature of the Treasury Branch operations 
rather than its doctrinal basis. While the attempt to consol¬ 
idate the provincial system of exchange was accompanied by 
efforts to extend the use of vouchers to manufacturing and 
wholesale sectors of the economy, it was found that achieve¬ 
ment of one objective was offsetting the effects of the other. 
Thus, while the 1941 innovations were expansive In character 
they were also restrictive - as a result of limitations on 
withdrawals of cash and the limited nature of trade-marked 
goods - and in time the latter feature appeared to predominate 
over the former* 

Restrictions could not be enforced partially because of 
the nature of the restrictions themselves, and partially 
because of the opportunities that still remained for evasion. 
























’* : 

' 

. 

■ 

‘ ’ . 

. 





















• - • 














■ 

, 





















173 


The three chief sources of leakages of cash from the system, 
occurred (1) through the use of goods replacement cash 
orders by merchants who could withdraw cash from their 
accounts by this means for other than the delimited purposes, 
(2) through the use of cash orders by manufacturers in the 
same manner, and (3) through the leniency of the Trade Claims 
Control Boardo The Trade Claims Control Board was symbolic 
of the unwieldy nature of the restricted system and its 
leniency indicated that its administrators were aware of the , 
limitations of the system. 

The subsidization of consumption of a preferred class 
of goods and the use of this consumers ? bonus to extend 
voucher circulation gradually became impracticable as a 
result of economic conditions arising but of the war. Prom 
a short-term viewpoint the discontinuation of the bonus 
system in 1945 was possible because the Treasury Branches were 
becoming established following adoption of a loaning policy 
in 1941 and the removal of the Interim Program restrictions 
in 1943. Prom a broader aspect the bonus was no longer 
useful because of wartime restrictions on consumption, and 
wartime prosperity which made Its appeal insignificant to 
people with more money to spend. 

Continuation of the use of vouchers on a fairly wide 
scale in the rural areas of the province has been noted. The 
vouchers were retained partly because of this rural support 
and partly to keep the remaining workable feature of the 


































' 




. 1 J ■ . 


.1 


. . , O' .V. 


' 













174 


Program in operation. It is possible, if the provincial 
government was thinking along the lines of other governments 
during the war, that an eventual post-war recession was for- 
seen; the skeleton of the voucher system may have been kept 
in the closet as a means of building up another future social 
credit program to offset possible depression. 

The height of the Interim Program proper was reached in 
the two and a half years following the adoption of the 
intensified system in 1941. After 1943 the original social 
credit features of the Program, with the exception of the 
vouchers, were no longer retained and the Treasury Branches 
turned to a policy of commercial competition to draw the 
public away from the chartered banks. 

Bibliography - Chapter IV 

I a _Alberta government documents; 

Department of Trade and Industry and Provincial 
Marketing Board, Manufacturers of Alberta Trade-Marked 
Goods, Edmonton, Augiist 8, 1941, 22 pp. 

Department of Industries and Labor, and Bureau of 
Statistics, Alberta Facts and Figures , Edmonton, 1950, 
404 pp., passim. 

Statutes of Alberta, 1945, Chapter 26: An Act to Amend 
the Treasury Branches jo t (Assented to April 6, 1945), 











. 




■ 










. 

t • 

. 

B 

. 

^ • 

t •' t 







175 


Alberta Treasury Branches, Agreements with Depositors 
(1941 e t s e q ) 

Forms No,: C-l - Consumers Agreement 

C-2 - Wholesaler's Agreement 
C-3 - Manufacturer's Agreement 
'C-4 - Merchant's Agreement 
G-5 - Agreements with cities, towns, 

villages, municipalities, school 
districts, etc. 

Cf. also Provincial Marketing Board form MB-1-639, 
original Manufacturer's Agreement as drafted in 
1939, 


II, Alberta government documents (unpublished): 

Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent's Circular 
T2-1, d/June 10, 1941. 

Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendent's Routine 
Memos., Nos. 198 - d/August 30, 1943 
277 - d/April 1, 1945 
282 - d/April 25, 1945. 

Also used in this chapter were Public Accounts of Alberta 
and the unpublished accounts of the Treasury Branches for 
the dates concerned. 











! - - 

. ! ~ • - 

* 








» 






5 






. ' 


* , .. ■ 



♦ 






- 176 - 


TABLE IX: TREASURY BRANCH ACCOUNTING- SYSTEM AFTER THE 194 1 CHANGES , 


If a merchant deposited a $100 
voucher, plus $50 in cash, in 
his account, and of that $100 
Alberta trade-marked goods amount¬ 
ed to $25 and other goods to $75» 
the entry would he as follows: 
(assume his basic rate is 80$; 

80$ of $75 gives the $60 added 
to Col, 5). 

( a) Withdraw a l by transfer voucher: 

If the merchant drew a voucher 

for $100 his entry would be: 

'If the merchant had drawn a 
voucher for $150 on his original 
account, the entry would be: 

(b) Wjthdrawal by cash orders: 

If the merchant drew a cash 
order for $50 on his original 
deposit, his account would read: 

If he had drawn over $50 in 
cash orders the cash orders in 
excess of that amount would be 
marked NSE or considered as a 
temporary conversion. 

(c) Use of goods replacement 

cash orders; 

If the merchant had issued 
a GRC0 on his original deposit 
for $60, the entry would be: 

Or, if he had issued a GRC0 
for $110 on his original deposit, 
the entry would read: 

Or, if he had issued GRC0 in 
excess of $110 they would be 
marked NSE or considered as a 
temporary conversion. 

Or, if he had issued GRC0 for 
$80 on the original deposit, 
his account would then read: 


CU Lzl (a)Qt) (s) 

Debit Credit Total Cash Replace-* 
Balance Bal, ment 
_____ Contr ol 

150- 150- 50- no- 

loo- 50- 50- 50~ 

150- - 

50- 100- - 60~ 


6 0- 

90- 

50- 

50- 

110- 

40- 

- 

- 

80- 

70- 

30- 

30- 























TABUS XX (Continued) 


( d) Manufacturer's Account: 

Supposing a manufacturer 
made the same deposit as did 
the merchant in the above example, 
and that his basic rate was also 
80$. No replacement control 

column (no. 5) was used in manu¬ 
facturers' accounts, and the cash 
balance credit would be made up of 
80$ of total amount of the voucher 
plus the cash deposited, as 
follows: 


ill 


12)bl 


lit)(ii 


Nebit Credit Total Cash Replace- 
Balance Bal. ment 

Control 


150- 150- 130~ 












: ■ ■; •• f ...,j. . ; ■ .• 1 

■ , . ; , i . ' • ' 

* 

t , O/i 

, ! 1 

• • ■ ' ’ ' i. ■ &•/; 

■ ' r ’ 

. 

J • 



TABLE X : ALBERTA TREASURY BRANCHES: GROWTH OF DEPOSITS AMD LOANS: VOUCHERS AND CASH ORDERS 

ISSUED. (1941 to 195f0. 


(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 1 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 


ACCOUNT 

March 1941 

Sept. 30, 1943 

March 1944 

March 1945 

March 

March 1950 


Total Deposits: 

(cents omitted) 








(a) Public deposits| 

(b) Prov. govt. deposits: 

$2,134,100 

562,503 

$6,195,257 

1,020,300 

$9,949,021 

2,037,047 

$19,416,760 

1,480,995 

$24,345,002 

1,630,917 

$30,892,719 

3,202,470 


Total: 

2,696,603 

7,215,557 

11,986,068 

20,897,755 

25,975,919 

34,095,189 


Loans 

181,611 
(Advances to 
Marketing Bd 
under O.C.) 

1,273,643 
(As of July, 
1941) 

1,627,799 

2 ,221,652 

7,094,591 

10,574,209 


Transfer Vouchers 

Dec. 1942 

June Dec. 

1943 1943 


March Sept. 

1946 1945 




(Number issued per 
month on current 
accounts 

73,578 

68,307 49,433 

42,950 

44,979 35,215 

27,099 

23,615 


Caah Orders 
(Number issued per 
month on current 
accounts) 

57,513 

63,642 75,506 

81,733 

116,949 119,003 

128,348 

140,887 



MOTES 

1. These ststistics were derived from the Public .Accounts of Alberta and the unpublished accounts of the Treasury Branches, ihe 

figures were chosen with special reference to the periods of major change in the Interim Program, and the additional subdivision 

of the 1943 and 1945 columns may help to indicate the effects of the changes within a short period after they took place. 

2. Figures showing number of vouchers issued per month may not be significant because of the practice of some depositors of dealing 

in monthly accounts. These depositors would only issue one or two vouchers per month to cover their total expenses. 

3. joverment deceits, made up of current accounts for various government departments who deposit receipts from various services 
with the Treasury branches, vary considerably according to seasonal collections. 
























































• < 








f.:vi 




.. ■ 























CHAPTER V 


TREASURY BRANCH LOANING POLICIES 





179 


CHAPTER V 

TREASURY BRANCH LOANING POLICIES 


In their first stages the Treasury Branches were 
chiefly concerned with instituting and administering the 
Interim Program in keeping with its objectives. However, it 
was soon recognized that the Treasury Branches could not 
effectively promote the voucher system, maintain the co-op¬ 
eration of its adherents, and obtain new supporters when 
members of the community were dependent on banks for their 
credit requirements. 

Within a year and a half after operations began, the 
legislature enacted the first amendment to the Treasury 
Branches Act authorizing the adoption of loaning activities. 
The amendment reworded section 6, subsection 4, of the 
Treasury Branches Act which had outlined the powers of the 
Provincial Treasurer with respect to deposits. The original 
statement of these powers read; 

Subject to the terms and provisions of any contract 
existing at the date of the passing of this Act or to any 
regulations m8.de pursuant to this Act, the Minister 
either himself or by his duly authorized agents,-- 

(a) may invest any deposits received under the 
provisions of this Act in such securities as he may 
prescribe and may,..vary and transpose any investments so 
made; 

(b) may use any of the moneys deposited in the 
branches of the treasury to make purchases of goods, wares 
or merchandise for resale.^- 

1: Statutes of Alberta , 1938, c, 3, s, 6, 







t - 

. 

* 

. 

. 

. * ✓Ifls. - y..... | a: I v ; ■' a I 

» 





180 


In the amendment passed in 1940 subsection (b) above 
was changed and an additional subsection (5) was added: 

(b) may use any of the deposits received in the 
branches of the treasury to make purchases of goods, 
wares, or merchandise for resale on such terms as to 
payment as may be agreed upon. 

(5) Subject to the terms and provisions of any 
contract existing...the Minister, eitherhimself or by 
his...agents, may loan any deposits received in the 
branches of the treasury under the provisions of this 
Act to persons, firms or corporations upon such terms 
as may be agreed upon and in connection with any such 
loan may take such negotiable instruments and securities 
as he may from time to time direct*^ 

During the period between the adoption of the amendment 

and the actual institution of loans in July 1S4], the Treasury 

Branches made advances on a limited scale in exceptional 

3 

cases to commercial depositors by means of overdrafts. 

Besides advances in the form of overdrafts the Treasury 
Branches also extended loans to the Provincial Marketing 
Board and Livestock Feeder Associations, most loans of this 
type being authorized by Orders-in-Council. 

^here were two.chief reasons why the Treasury Branches 
were delayed in adopting a loaning policy. Firstly, unlike 
the chartered banks which have a minimum (in Canada) paid-up 
capital of $500,000 largely to be used as loanable funds 


2 : Ibid , 1940, c. 14, s, 2, 

3j Treasury Branches use standard banking procedure with 

overdrafts. Overdrafts are evidenced by debit balances 
in a depositor^ current account and the amount of each 
day ? s overdraft in each account is recorded in a 
register. At the end of each month the daily overdrafts 
are totalled and-one day ! s interest is charged on the 
total, 






















1 











. 











■ 


, 







* 





























. . . 













t ■ i 









































- 



















. 























S'- 






















■ 


. 

, 


V 

- 








181 


from their initiation, the Treasury Branches had no capital, 
and they were merely issued funds by appropriation sufficient 
to meet operating expenses. Therefore, unlike a bank that 
can start making loans from its beginning the Treasury Branches 
had to build up a source of loanable funds from public 
deposits. One of the objects of the February 1941 restrictions 
was to prevent possible drains on cash to permit future lending 
of funds. The early institution of term savings accounts was 
also intended to provide a "cushion" of fairly stable deposits 
that could not be withdrawn without notice. 

Secondly, the Treasury Branches had to contend with the 
banking principle that the fewer the depositors the less 
stable is the rate of cash demand against deposits, and the 
greater the number and diversity of depositors and the amount 
on deposit the more constant will be the day-to-day demand for 
cash against deposits. For example, in March 1939 total 
deposits were approximately $600,000. Of this amount the 
possible demand by a few large depositors would tend to make 
the rate of demand on deposits unstable. In March 1941, for 
example, $2,000,000 in deposits were in existence against 
which the demand by a small number of large depositors would 
have a less pronounced effect. The expansion of deposits to 
this point where Treasury Branch officials estimated that 
demand could be readily met without too great a drain on cash 
reserves led to the adoption of a loaning policy in July 1941. 

However, loaning operations were instituted with great 
caution. In view of the fact that loanable funds were con- 


. ■ t 

. 












' 

. 











. 




, 








. 

t 









182 


siaered to be somewhat limited no public announcement of the 

decision to begin loaning was made and the branch managers 

4 

were instructed not openly to solicit loans. Requests for 
"sound, profitable" loans were given consideration and all 
applications had to be approved by a Treasury Branch loans 
Committee set up by the government under Order-in-Council 
812/41. 

The extent to which, loaning operations were undertaken 
was, and is, determined to a large degree by the ratio of 
primary and secondary reserves deemed necessary to offset 
total average deposits. For instance, $4,300,000 was the 
approximate average sum on deposit at all times throughout the 
year 1942 (computed on the basis of an average of month-end 
figures) and the total amount deposited for that year was 
approximately $68,000,000. Although $68,000,000 was 
deposited by some 37,000 depositors a sufficient amount was 
left on deposit at all times roughtly equivalent to the 
$4,300,000. This figure may serve as a basis from which to 
determine the maximum amount that could be loaned at any given 
time during that year and to estimate the required cash and 
liquid reserves. 

To begin with, we will consider both primary and secondary 
reserves maintained by the Treasury Branches as compared to 
those kept by the chartered banks. Secondly, we will compare 

4; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendents Routine Memo 

#82 , d/july 4, 1941 (unpublished) and a series of Treasury 
Branch circulars* 






- ■ ■ ' • t • r:; -' 

; • ... ■ >■: • >: r:e«tv ■" ■ vc ■■ 

••• ‘-^©v v - 

» • < 




















. 



% ■ «. 










' 



? cT r 


• * * ; 

. 

' - ’ 

f ; ,*■. . - ;._ , • • ■ ; : ;j ‘ : -• ■ : 

t *.- 

e . 



183 


only the primary reserve ratios, or what is usually referred 
to as " the reserve ratio". Primary reserves will be the 
equivalent of bank cash in ordinary banking terminology, and 
secondary reserves will refer to Dominion of Canada bonds, and 
in the case of the banks, call loans. Securities are often 
labelled as "tertiary” reserves but the high liquidity of 
Dominion ’of Canada bonds seems to place them for all purposes 
into the secondary class. Of course, if all financial 
institutions began to cash in Dominion bonds at the same time 
their liquidity might be somewhat delayed. There is also the 
argument that many other gilt-edged securities could be 
considered in the secondary grouping. But Dominion bonds form 
a good proportion of banking portfolios, they are the sole 
constituents of Treasury Branches 1 investment portfolios, and 
in practice they are regarded as being analagous to cash. In 
the following comparisons "liquid” reserves will refer to both 
primary and secondary reserves, and the terms "cash reserves" 
or "bank cash" will indicate primary reserves only. 

Firstly, a consideration of liquid reserve ratios. While 
the exact percentages used by the Treasury Branches for 
estimating what they consider as suitable liquid reserves 
cannot be revealed, as an illustration, if 60 % of average 
deposits had to be safeguarded by maintenance of liquid res¬ 
erves, the remaining 40% of the average deposits would be 
considered as loadable funds. An estimate of the actual 
percentage of liquid reserves carried by the Treasury Branches 







. 

• ? 

* 

, 

. 

. 

- , 

' < . 

. • 

* 

. 






. 





184 


may be obtained by working backwards from items in the public 

accounts. In the public accounts for March, 1950, for example, 

public deposits, including provincial government deposits, 

5 

amounted to $35,500,000, and loans totalled $>10,500,000. 

Divide 35.5 into 10.5,and the answer 29.5$ represents 
loanable funds, while liquid reserves would then be approxim¬ 
ately 70$. Or alternatively, liquid reserves consisted of 
$6,900,000 cash, plus $17,550,000 in Dominion government bonds, 
totalling about $24,500,000. The ratio of liquid reserves to 
total deposits comes to over 69$, or in line with above figure, 
approximately 70$. Of course these figures are only rough 
computations based on totals rather than on averages. 

By using the same method we may arrive at a ratio of 
liquid reserves to total deposits for the chartered banks. For 

example, the Dominion Bankhs annual statement of October 31, 

6 

1950 showed the following ,( ce nts omitted and excluding Inter¬ 
bank transfers)* Bank cash was $64,608,282, and liquid 
securities plus call loans came to $170,167,703, (both 
provincial and Dominion government bonds were lumped together 
in this particular statement). Liquid assets, then, amounted 
to $234,775,°85 compared to $425,872,353 in deposits, or 
liquid assets came to more than 50$ of deposits. If other 

5; Public Accounts of Alberta , 1950, p, 232, or see below. 
Appendix G. Generally speaking government deposits at 
the Treasury Branches cannot be used as a basis for 
loans under restrictions of the Treasury Act, They may 
be invested in Dominion government bonds by the Treasury 
Dep artment» 

6; The Dominion Bank, 60th Annual Statement , October 31, 

1950, from. Edmonton Journal, December 14, 1950.* 







: v.: :..w ' ry.'y.:‘i: ctrx&i 9 : r..‘ u*xc ?: v;G oan...'Wdo &d tg*;2 

T ■ t 

t •: : • ' •■ /.■-•?. . .. ■ r i:I-j,. , 

„ t t 

. , 


, 

* 

, * . •' t • 

* 

. 

„ 

. 

t ' ■ ,.■■•. .. ' ' d ' t 

. 

t t . -v • : , £?•:.. \ ; 

. f 

6 ' 


* 

e V. 

* 

t '.' ■: >' '■ l 




185 


quick assets are included the ratio is increased to 64$. 

According to statistics in the 1950 Canada Yearbook compiled 

7 

for the ten Canadian chartered banks, based on yearly averages 

computed from 12 monthly returns in 1948, they retained an 

average of 57$ liquid assets (i.e. bank cash plus liquid 

securities totalled $4,034,038,599, and total deposits 

amounting to $7,402,776,952), However, if other quick assets 

are included in the figure it rises to 62$. 

At the present time, then, on the basis of the ratio of 

liquid reserve the Treasury Branches appear to be following 

a policy only slightly more cautious than the banks. The 

relatively high ratio of liquid assets seems to indicate that 

if a greater demand existed for good loans they would be 

granted without a further increase in primary deposits being 

necessary. This loaning potential applies particularly to the 

banks who have a much higher deposit figure and a wider 

diversity of depositors than have the Treasury Branches. 

The extreme caution with-which the Treasury Branches 

began their loaning activities may be gathered from the fact 

that six months after making the first loans (i.e., by 

December 31, 1941) total loans were approximately 11$ of total 

. 8 

deposits and liquid reserves were nearly 89% of deposits* 

One year later, by December 1942, total loans were approximately 

7; Canaoa Yearbook , 1950, pp. 1066-1067. 

8; Treasury Branch Accounts (unpublished). 








, 








































. 




. 








■ 

' 

! *T0. 


. - 

. 








, 

t • ' • : 

4 



, t . • . 


. - ■ ■ • . : • '■ - : r ' ' : 



















186 


26% of total deposits and liquid reserves were about 74-.% of 
deposits. The reduction of the liquid reserve ratio by lb% 
was based on the increase in total deposits which had been 
built up from $2,250,000 in July 1941 to some $6,500,000 by 
December 31, 1942. Since 1942 the ratio of liquid reserves 
to deposits has apparently decreased only slightly, partly as 
a result of the increase in loans proportionately as deposits 
have increased, and partly in keeping with the generally 
conservative outlook of the Treasury Branches towards loaning 
operations• 

The caution with which the Treasury Branches have under¬ 
taken their loaning operations might be illustrated in a more 
striking manner by a comparison of their primary reserves to 
those of the banks. According to Canadian banking practice 
the reserve ratio of bank cash to total deposits should vary 
somewhere around 10% 9 and in most countries a ratio is 
adhered to either by banking convention or by decree of the 
central bank. By glancing at the annual statements of two 
Canadian banks it will be seen that this ratio is adhered to 
with only minor variations. In 1949, the Imperial BankIs 

9 

primary reserves (excluding interbank transfers)' made up of 
gold and subsidiary coin, notes of the Bank of Canada, and 
deposits with the Bank of Canada, totalled $50,200,079, Total 
deposits, including provincial and Dominion government deposits, 
interest and non-interest bearing deposits of the public, 

r> 

9: Imperial Bank of Canada, 7 5th Ar.nusl hepcrt , 1949, 36 pp* 








. 

* 






, 

* 

. 

. ! : .:7 . .. ' ' • ' 

. , ■- t . . <. v- 

■' .'. . ■ 2 0 

. ... . ... .. ..." . ■ ; . '■ . •.: . . ' 



















- I 87 — 



TABLE XI: ESTIMATED RESERVE RATIOS MAINTAINED BY THE TREASURY BRANCHES. (1941-1050 ) . 



(1) 

. . (2) 

..Q) 

(4) ... . . . 

(5) 

(6) 


YEAR 

PRIMARY 
RESERVES 
(cents omitted) 

SECONDARY 

RESERVES 

TOTAL 

DEPOSITS 

PRIMARY 

RESERVE 

RATIO (5Q 

LIQUID 

RESERVE 

RATIO($) 


1?41 

$ 2,937,887 

$ (nil) Investments 
consisted of $181,611 
in inventories 

$ 2,696,802 

108$ 

- 


1942 

2,917,952 

549,500 

4,219,667 

68.1 

82.0 


1943 

4,915,230 

549,500 

6,609,493 

74.3 

82.6 


1944 

8,833,620 

1,549,500 

11,986,067 

73.7 

86.6 


1945 

11 ,207,111 

7,649,500 

20,537,654 

54.5 

91.7 


1946 

5,372,727 

15,250,000 

24,505,059 

21.9 

84.5 


1947 

3,911,697 

15,250,000 

25,975,917 

15.0 

72.6 


1948 

6,813,981 

15,250, 000 

30,134,183 

22.6 

61.6 


1949 

6,430,054 

16,459,413 

32,574,740 

19.4 

70.2 


1950 

f. / 

6,289,923 

17,550,000 

34,095,189 

23.5 

69.9 


ryn --— 


NOTES 





1. This 

table is based on totals 

rather than the averages actually used in determining 

reserve r tios. 




2. Column (2)— Primary Reserves—includes currency on hand at branches and agencies, balances on deposit with chartered banks, and 

cash items in transit, i.e. those items analagous to bank cash. 

3. Column (3)—Secondary Reserves—consists of investment in Dominion of Canada bonds only. Treasury Branches do not carry 

other ouick assets in the form of provincial or municipal securities or call loans. 

4. Column (4)—Total Deposits— includes provincial government deposits. 

5. Column (5) is the percentage ratio of cash to deposits, Column (6) is percentage ratio of cash plus bonds to deposits. 

6. This t^.ble is based on Public A ccounts of Alberta from 1941 to 1950. 





























■ 

- . 

- 

—- . - • -—.—~.. ~ . -- 



' 



'•* - 


, <VI (, 




t' 







, 




c c\ 1 




. . 

I t ;v. 




-r ■■ * 







. ■ 

V.' « • 


. —■■■ - • 

, . - ■■■ ■■ • •; - ■ * :: 
V- .- .' 


("; m - j ; 

(A) 0 

(c‘ o 

. 


















188 


amounted to $476,270,031. The ratio of bank cash in this 

instance was 9,5$. Similarly, the Bank of Montreal in 1949 

had a reserve of bank cash of $227,465,475, while total 

deposits were $1,963,760,369, yielding a ratio of 11 % in 
10 

primary reserves. The average for the ten Canadian banks 
in 1948, according to the 1950 Canada Yearbook, came to 9.71$ 
(i.e,, $719,499,043 in bank cash, compared to $7,402,766,952 
in deposits).*^ 

In contrast to the banks the Treasury Branches in 1950 

maintained a cash reserve of 23*5$, based on the ratio of 

primary reserves of currency on hand at branches and agencies, 

balances on deposit with chartered banks and cash items In 

transit, totalling $6,289,923, to total deposits Including 

. 12 

those of the government, amounting to $34,095,189, In spite 
of the size of this reserve ratio it presents a progressive 
trend compared to the extremely high ratio retained a few 
years ago. For example, only five years ago, in 1945, the 
Treasury Branches retained a reserve ratio of nearly 50$, i.e., 
cash reserves of $11,207,111 compared to total deposits of 
$20,537,654; in 1942, the reserve ratio was 68$, i.e, cash: 
$2,917,952, total deposits; $4,219,667.^ The above figures, 

10; Bank o.f Montreal, 152nd Annua 1 Report , 1949, 46 pp, 

11; Canada Yearbook , 1950, p, 1066, 

12; Public Accounts of Alberts , 1950, p, 232. 

13; Ibid . t 1942 and 1945, pp. 218-219 respectively. See 
also Table XI. 








t 











«. t «. 




















t 





' 5. 










e e. 





* ■ ' ' <5. 



















189 


based on totals rather than averages, should not be inter¬ 
preted as the absolute ratios maintained by the banks or the 
Treasury Branches, At the same time they show the conservat¬ 
ism of the Treasury Branches’ operations. The reasons for the 
extreme caution of the Treasury Branches’ lending activities 
will be discussed below. 

Outline of General The general loaning policy of the 

Loaning Policies Treasury Branches has been carried out 

essentially according to. principles drafted in 1941. In its 
basic form the general loaning policy may be outlined as 
follows; 

Advances are made in the three main forms used by t he 
banks: (1) as loans by discounting promissory notes for the 

maker, (2) as trade bills, either in the form of notes 
discounted for the payee or endorser, or by drafts discounted 
for the drawer, (3) and in the form of overdrafts. Like the 
banks the Treasury Branches will not grant these advances for 
capital expenditures or for the repayment of old debts, except 
in special circumstances. Unlike the banks the Treasury 
Branches demand tangible security on almost all advances 
including overdrafts, and they require the establishment of a 
definite source of repayment. Long term loans on the strength 
of mortgages are not made by the Treasury Branches; they deal 
primarily In short term advances up to twelve months. 

The specific purposes for which advances are, made are 




. 

. 

0 

- 

. 

* . •• - J ■ ' ■■■■■• ; , ^ 

... . . . ,■ ■ i ;V i 

■ 

- 

; 

" ' *r\ 5 \ ■’ .. .• 






190 


considered under five main groups, including manufacturers 

and allied occupations, retail merchants who are already 

established and operating, cities, towns, villages, etc,, 

primary producers, and personal loans to wage earners, 

14 

professional people and others* Loans, to manufacturers in 
the province who are already established and operating, may be 
made to cover current operating expenses, or for restricted 
capital assistance for the creation of tangible assets based 
on a reasonable percentage of the investment. The Treasury 
Branches will not finance capital expenditure up to 100$ under 
any circumstances, but they may finance such expenditures to a 
partial degree under certain conditions. The same stipulations 
apply to wholesalers, contractors, and other industrial bodies 
in the province. The loans are for a maximum period of two 
years in each instance. 

Retailers may obtain advances for two main purposes: (1) 
to cover current operating expenses, (2) to buy stock at a 
discount. Provision is also made for the granting of 
temporary overdrafts to them. Loans to cities, towns, 
villages, municipal districts, municipal hospital districts, 
school divisions and districts, are all secured by assignment 
of taxes and grants. These loans are granted to cover current 
operating expenses, or for limited capital purposes under 
certain circumstances. 

14j As outlined in Superintendent’s Circular Al-1 d/june 2, 

1941, and subsequent editions of the circular. 

(Un published.) 
























. 
























t <. - ' ; 

■ t • •• • • • 






; ’ 5 , 
- 










■ 


. 





















191 


Table XII: Classification of Treasury Branch Loans 
According to Purpose as at March 31, 1950 


Purpose 


Number of 
Borrowers 

Aggregate 

Amount 

Agricultural 

o • 

1,833 

|1,414,993 

Industrial asoo,?.,?. 

0 • 

116 

3,785,657 

Business, mercantile, etc, ... 

O 9 

837 

3,068,711 

Professional •••«*»• 

9 » 

20 

18,926 

Personal .......a,.,,,...,,,.. 

• -J 

948 

280,010 

Housing and Home Improvement 

9 » 

348 

1,349,361 

Municipal, school districts,etc, 

29 

505,561 

Feeder* as so cations .. 

<9 * 

5 

117,840 

Irrigation projects 


1 

30,000 

Provincial government (direct 
loans j 

$ 9 

2 

2, 079 

Misce11aneous ,, » 

9 9 

2 

3,148 

Totals »«»»» 

"> * 

4,141 

$10,576,289 


Advances to Marketing Services Ltd, and other government 
projects and departments are included in the above figures 
under the appropriate classifications. 

Included in the above total is approximately $500,000 in loans 
fully secured in Dominion of Canada bonds. This does not 
suggest that the remainder of the loans are not secured; in 
many instances several types of security are used for one 
loan of which a Dominion bond pledge may be only a fraction. 

Source of this table; Treasury Branch Accounts (unpublished). 


Includes Edmonton n Dawson Creek" housing project shown as 
one borrower. 




















192 


Farmers are granted loans for three main purposes; (1) 
to assist in preparing livestock for market, (2) for current 
operating expenses when repayment is guaranteed from a source 
other than from crop proceeds, (3) for limited financing of 
machinery, not to exceed 60$ where repayment is assured out 
of the season*s operations. Personal loans are granted for 
any legitimate purpose” including home improvements, to be 
secured by endorsement of a third party or by salary assign¬ 
ment, and in the form of term loans, for periods not exceeding 
three months, or as monthly installment loans for periods not 
exceeding twelve months* 

Loans Guaranteed Besides the groups included under the 

By the province above categories the Treasury Branches 

undertake various types of loans that are directly or indirectly 

guaranteed by the provincial government. These loans may be 

made to Livestock Feeder Associations, private firms, 

provincial Crown companies, or other designated parties* 

One of the main forms of provincial guaranteed loans are 

those made to Livestock Feeder Associations under the Feeder 

15 

Associations Guarantee Act and its amendments* Under this 
Act the government undertakes to lend money to a farmer who has 
surplus feed to enable him to buy livestock from farmers who 
have insufficient feed, so that the livestock can be prepared 
for market without loss to either party. In practise this 


13; Statutes of Alberta , 1937, c, 33 























, 





* 

* 



■ 

. ' 



, 














193 


system represents an attempt to establish coordination between 
those areas of the province that are likely to have feed 
surpluses^ and livestock producing areas that are likely to 
encounter feed shortages. 

An "association of feeders 1 * is formed which buys live¬ 
stock and "farms ff its stock out to individual farmers for 
feeding. When the stock is conditioned for market the 
individual members then sell the animals through the association. 
When an association is formed and approved it advises the 
provincial livestock commissioner which financial institution 
is to be used for the transactions, and an Order-in-Council is 
passed authorizing the association to borrow from, that 
institution up to a certain maximum amount with repayment 
guaranteed under the Order-in-Council. The Feeder Association 
may select a chartered bank or a Treasury Branch to obtain its 
loan* and the proportion of the loan that is guaranteed. 

Other types of guaranteed loans are backed for varying rates 
up to as high as 100$. An example of the latter are loans to 
rural electrification associations, fully guaranteed by the 
provincial government and authorized by individual Orders-in- 
Counc il , 

Another form of provincial guaranteed loan issued by the 
Treasury Branches is illustrated by a recent land clearing 
project undertaken at Wanham in northern Alberta. A private 
company was appointed by the Department of Lands and Forests 
to undertake the clearing project, and the Treasury Branches 



194 


then supplied funds to the company to finance its operations* 

The loan was guaranteed indirectly through the government 
paying the company - subject to inspection of its work - the 
funds to repay the Treasury Branch loan. 

The Treasury Branches have continued to finance the 

16 

Marketing Serviced operations in buying and selling 
manufacturers’ inventories by loans which have varied from 
$100,000 to $500,000 per year since the war. Funds enabling 
the Marketing Services to bid competitively for war surplus 
goods in Alberta were also supplied by the Treasury Branches, 
but at a higher rate of interest than that charged for the 
inventory transactions. 

Another sphere of the Treasury Branches’ loaning operations 
to government bodies is the supplying of funds to the Alberta 
Industrial Corporation. Under the jurisdiction of the Industrial 
Development Board, the Alberta Industrial Corporation provides 
loans for capital expenditures by certain private firms. The 
Treasury Branches merely advance the funds to the Alberta 
Industrial Corporation under Orders-in-Council ; they have no 
jurisdiction over the spending and disposition of the funds* 
Ordinarily the Treasury Branches receive repayment of the loans 
as the borrowing firms pay back the Alberta Industrial 
Corporation, The Treasury Branches obtain a demand note from 
the Corporation for each advance, and these notes are guaranteed 
by the Provincial Treasurer. If the Treasury Branches demand 


16: See Chapter VII* 



. 

- 

: - r T • ■■ 

- \ : ■ : 5 . ■■ 

- ■ t * 

. 1 

. 

' 

. 





195 


payment the Alberta Industrial Corporation is authorized by 
Order-in-Council to issue debentures to the stipulated amount. 
Up to May 1950 the Treasury Branches had $1,250,000 outstanding 
in advances to the Alberta Industrial Corporation, out of 
$1,500,000 authorized by Order-in-Council. Through these 
guaranteed loans to the Corporation the Treasury Branches have 
been able indirectly to supply funds for capital expenditures 
of firms within the province. 

Treasury Branch Loans Because they are not subject 

Compared With Bank Loans to the Bank Act or the written 
conventions of the Canadian Bankers* Association the Treasury 
Branches are theoretically able to deviate considerably from 
standard bank loaning procedure. In practice the existing 
outlook towards loaning operations, based on reasons discussed 
below, has tended to make Treasury Branch loaning policy more 
conservative than that of the banks in most respects. The 
chief differences between Treasury Branch and bank loans 
arise from three factors: (1) the types of acceptable 
security, (2) rates of interest charged, and (5) government 
guarantees at the Dominion and provincial levels. 

Banking institutions, including the Treasury Branches, do 
not make loans if there is any possibility of having to 
realize upon the security for repayment; security for short 
term bank loans is usually referred to as ’’collateral” 
security rather than ‘^absolute” security, such as is required 




% 

- ' ~ ' ' ' t 


. ■ ? 

1 

* 

< ' 

, . 

t ' t 

. .. : . o' ' - '• - : 

\ 






196 


for long-term mortgage loans. Security, then, is taken as a 
secondary safeguard against loss to be resorted to only if the 
primary source of payment fails. In practice this means that 
before a loan is granted there must be a definite source of 
repayment other than the security provided. 

For security on loans the Treasury Branches may take 
chattel mortgages, land mortgages or a ''hypothecation of 
duplicate certificate of title'* - i.e., a land title considered 
as an equitable mortgage - all acceptable at the time advances 
are made. Banks are prohibited from using any of these forms 
of security directly, A bank can take these three types of 
security as additional security to a loan that already exists, 
but a bank loan cannot be originated with these types of 
security. 

The hypothecation of title means that at any time the 
Treasury Branches can file a caveat against the property and 
at any date thereafter institute foreclosure proceedings. 

While caveats are often filed - that Is, they are recorded on 
the original certificate of title In effect preventing transfer 
or other disposition of the property without consulting the 
Treasury Branches - foreclosure proceedings have never been 
a -lied. Ghattel mortgages are not applicable to personal 
effects. These mortgages are applied to marketable commodities 

over and above those listed under the Provincial Exemptions 

iv 

Act, ' which reduces considerably the scope of chattel 

17; Revised Statutes of Alberta, 1942, c» 123, s 9 2 a See 

also subsequent amendments. 






, ‘ ! : s - - 

• i * c 

. 

, 

. . . '..■■■ u . : frS. , 3 , v 

■ . 

» 

. ■■ • 

. 

* 

* 

. .. . ... 





197 


mortgages that may be foreclosed upon. 

Chattel mortgages are used most frequently as security, 
and the Treasury Branches seldom take a land mortgage. Instead 
of land mortgages the Treasury Branches prefer to use the 
hypothecation of title. Generally a person whose credit is so 
low that a land mortgage should be taken in preference to a 
hypothecation of title would not be granted a loan in the first 
place. Banks, on the other hand, may make loans on lodgment 
of title but this does not include the filing of caveat 
privileges. The Bank Act does provide that once the loan is 
made on this basis, hypothecation of title can then be made 
and a caveat filed. This procedure is usually applied by the 
banks on renewals of loans. One technical advantage of the 
Treasury Branch method of originating loans by chattel 
mortgage or hypothecation of title is that the borrower is 
prevented from using the same security to borrow from other 
sources, 

Unsecured loans are made by the Treasury Branches in 
exceptional cases by temporary overdrafts, but unsecured 
loans are never given in the form, of a note, or a loan granted 
by a note. The use of salary assignments and accommodation 
endorsements by a third party virtually amount to unsecured 
loans and from the Treasury Branches 1 point of view they have 
the effect of divided risk. Like the banks the Treasury 
Branches accept letters of guarantee, assignment of book 
debts, assignment, of contracts, assignment of bank accounts 










'■ v " -■ ‘-io-:: :;j ^.,h C 


„ 

. 










t ■ „ ■ • 

'■ ■ f r j- . i: 

0 

. 

. ' 

. 

. 

■ . ' - - : 









198 


or money on deposit, life insurance, hypothecation of title 
to stocks and bonds, collateral notes, borrowing resolutions 
from cities, municipalities, etc., on assignment of taxes and 
grants, and other types of security. 

In place of the chattel mortgages accepted by Treasury 
Branches, the banks may grant loans under similar circumstances 
either without security entirely, or under Section 88 of the 
Bank Act, which in essence gives the same security as a 
chattel mortgage 0 The major difference between the provisions 
of Section 88 and a chattel mortgage is that the former deals 
entirely with pledges of future production, or goods that are 
unrealized at present. For people who cannot obtain unsecured 
loans from the banks, the Treasury Branch method of making 
advances appears to be more convenient to the borrower than 
using the procedure under Section 88. Under Section 88 the 
time lag resulting from the registering of ,f notice of 
intention” to give security under the section may be longer 
than the time required to take out chattel mortgage security. 

An additional advantage (although it is potential rather than 
actual) of being able to take chattel mortgages and real 
estate mortgages Is that the Treasury Branches may have a wide 
and sound opportunity of making capital loans on equipment and 
property. The chief disadvantage of the Treasury Branches 1 
loaning policy is that the formality of signing over security 
tends to repell the sound borrower who can walk across the 
street and obtain an unsecured loan from a bank. 




. 




«,,. 














. 


















. 


. 

































199 


The second factor distinguishing Treasury Branch from 
bank loans is the presence of competitive interest rates* 
Because of the secret and competitive nature of interest 
rates the effect of this factor on loaning policies can only 
be speculated upon. The only concrete figure available is 
the maximum rate of on Treasury Branch loans compared to 
the maximum rate of 6% on bank loans. This figure is not 
significant, because, of course, the banks often kee their 
rates below 6%. Whether or not the banks have tended to keep 
their limit below 6 % because of Treasury Branch competition is 
also difficult to say. Probably the factor of interest rates 
is affected by competition among the banks themselves rather 
than with the Treasury Branches* The competition in rates 
applies to all the provinces; in Alberta the Treasury Branches 
merely represent an additional competitive factor. The above 
maximum rates apply on all loans except for certain specific 
classes where considerably lower rates are charged, for 
example, as low as on loans fully secured by Dominion of 

Canada bonds. 

Undoubtedly Treasury Branch and bank interest rates 
fluctuate considerably depending on the element of competition, 
the purpose of the loan, the type of security offered, and 
its duration. The element of competition in interest rates 
becomes particularly predominant in the granting of the 
larger commercial or municipal loans. In the future the 
Treasury Branches may have an advantage in competing with the 











' 









' 




* 

. 

■ t ■ 

. 

« 

. 

’ 

• » 



200 


banks by being able to undercut their rates without regard to 
profitability. This would be likely to occur if the provin¬ 
cial government took an active hand in supporting the Treasury 
Branches during a period when banks were contracting loans and 
charging high interest rates. On the other hand, the banks 1 
wide diversity and strength of assets may enable them to 
effectively counteract possible Treasury Branch competition© 

The conservatism of Treasury Branch loaning policies at 
present does not appear to make competition in interest rates 
very significant from the banks’ point of view, except with a 
few of the larger loans. If the Treasury Branches expand 
their loaning operations in the future their effect on the 
banks * interest rates may become more apparent. If the 
provincial government actively enters the credit field, as 
suggested above, when the banks are contracting their 
activities, the Treasury Branches may then be able to compete 
with banks and undertake loaning or assistance programs to 
offset a depression on a provincial level. 

The third factor separating Treasury Branch loans from 
those of the chartered banks is the field of government 
guaranteed loans. Although the Treasury Branches participate 

' j : 

in several types of guaranteed loans in the province not 
ordinarily available to chartered banks, for example the Market¬ 
ing Board and Alberta Industrial Corporation loans, the Treasury 
Branches are at a distinct disadvantage with respect to 
Dominion government sponsored loan schemes. The chartered 
banks are also able to compete with the Treasury Branches in 
obtaining certain types of provincial guaranteed loans, i.e. 


m - >'■■■ 














t : * ■ 

. r ■ 















' 









T 



. 






V 




. * ' 





201 


with the Feeder Associations*. 

Since the war the Dominion government has extended the 

area of banking through such measures as the Farm Improvement 

Loan Act, the Home Improvement Loan Act, amendments to the 

Veterans 1 Land Act, and through government agencies and 

Crown corporations, such as Central Mortgage and Housing 

Corporation, In the agricultural economy of Alberta the 

chartered banks, with access to the Farm Improvement Loan 
18 

Act, ‘ have been able to give a loaning service beyond the 
scope of the Treasury Branches, The existence and application 
of these forms of Dominion assistance have reduced the scope 
of the Treasury Branches and have contributed to the slowness 
of their development in the loaning field. The banks are also 
able to use this legislation to obtain customers from the 
Treasury Branches in two ways; (1) by asking customers to 
transfer their accounts to the particular bank as a prerequisite 
to receiving a loan under the Farm Improvement Loan Act, and 


18; Farm Improvement Loans are granted for the following 

purposes; (1) for purchase of breeder livestock, with 
the livestock as security, (2) machinery or consumers 1 
durable goods not firmly attached to property or 
buildings; article itself serves as security, (3) 
purchase and Installation of a farm electrical system, 
security as under Section 88, (4) repairs to a farm 

electrical system, (5) repairs to farm buildings or 
construction of new buildings. Bank may take security 
on all farm machinery on similar terms as a chattel 
mortgage. Bank may also take a land mortgage under this 
section for a ten year maximum period, (6) Loans granted 
for fencing, drainage, general improvement to farm 
including breaking or brushing: security may be taken 
on farm equipment. Act makes it possible for tenant 
farmers on lease to borrow for general improvements. 
Maximum limit of all categories of farm improvement loans 
is $3,000 per borrower. 




L 7 













' 





















. 


; • ’• JCt ■ 



. 


* 

. 

. 

. 

* 






202 


(2) by obtaining title to the farmer*s chattels or land, 
making it impossible for him to borrow from the Treasury 
Branches in the future. The extent to which the Farm 
Improvement Loan Act is employed in this way depends on the 
attitudes of the local bank managers, and the extent to which 
the local farmers require that particular type of loan. 

Administration of the Up to May 1, 1943, all applications 

Loaning Policies for Treasury Branch loans had to be 

submitted for consideration to officials at head office. 

During this period the superintendent could deal with applications 
up to a certain amount and other applications had to be referred 
to the loans committee* Originally the loans.committee was 
comprised of three persons, one of whom was the superintendent 
of the Treasury Branches, with the others being selected from 
other government departments. Every appointee to the committee 
was required to have had previous banking experience and the 
final decision on all loans had to have unanimous approval of 
the members. Up to this time no managers were given 
discretionary loaning powers on local advances. 

After May 1943 certain Treasury Branch managers were then 
given discretionary loaning powers, the discretionary limit 
depending entirely on the head office officials* estimates of 
the personal ability and judgment of the managers. Subsequently 
loans could be undertaken by certain managers without reference 
to head office, and discretionary powers were ultimately extended 





* 








? 

. 


V 




203 


to all managers. At present. In addition to general 
discretionary powers, managers are permitted to make additional 
loans secured by Dominion bonds up to a considerably higher 
figure without referring them to head office. The managers 
are required to keep head office informed on the progress of 
all loans and advances by submitting periodical reports, for 
example, reporting each overdraft with full particulars. 

These reports are thoroughly checked and investigated by head 
office loan officials. 

As the volume of applications for loans increased it was 
necessary to enlarge the administrative staff in head office, 
until at present there is a permanent chairman of the loans 
committee who^ supervises the entire lending procedure. The 
superintendent still has certain discretionary powers; he 
is no longer a member of the loans committee but he acts as 
adviser without vote. Other loans personnel, with varying 
discretionary powers, include a supervisor of investments, an 
assistant supervisor of investments, and two credit officers 
who deal with applications from various sections of the 
province* 

The existing loans committee consists of four members 
appointed by Order-in-Council and subject to change from 
time to time. At present the members include a chairman, who 
is an employee of the Treasury Branches, the supervisor of 
investments from the Treasury Branches, and two other members 





- 





, 


. . . • . : 











, 


. 

. 




ft 




















. 



t ■ 


■ 




• • c 


- ■ 



























204 


from government departments. All applications for loans are 
briefed by the supervisor of investments, and copies are 
forwarded to each committee member several days before the 
committee meets. The loans committee meets once a week and a 
majority decision is now considered a quorum instead of the 
unanimous approval previously required. The chief disadvantage 
of the loans committee is that by meeting only once a week 
decisions are frequently delayed, but the Treasury Branch 
officials claim that this does not necessarily mean that it 
takes longer to obtain loans from the Treasury Branches. A 
similar time lag occurs when dealing with banks in amounts 
beyond the managers 1 discretionary limits* 


Reserve for Bad Two additional amendments to the 

and Doubtful Debts Treasury Branches Act might be considered 

at this point. The first of these amendments, passed in 1948, 
provided a reserve fund for bad and doubtful debts. The 
amendment reworded section 9 of the Act to read; 

9a - (1) The Minister in order to make provision for 
bad and doubtful debts may establish out cf the earnings and 
profits of the treasury branches a reserve to be known as 
f, Reserve for Bad. and Doubtful Debts 11 which Reserve shall be 
established and maintained at the Edmonton main treasury 
branch, 

(2) The Superintendent of treasury branches 
appointed under this Act may charge against the said reserve 
any debt or portion thereof due to the Minister arising in 
connection with the operation of any treasury branch which has 
become irrecoverable or only partially recoverable.,,^ 


19; Statutes of Alberta , 1948, c. 30. 






* 

. 



















' 














* 

. 









. 







205 


The amount of the reserve is based on a certain 
percentage of average loans made throughout the year. During 
the year the Treasury Branch officials determine the loans 
that are considered to be uncollectible; they are charged 
against this reserve ana written off prior to the end of each 
fiscal year. When these loans are considered as uncollectible 
the Treasury Branch officials apply to the Treasury Board for 
permission to write off the amount against the reserve for bad 
and doubtful debts. The Treasury Board then issues a 
'’Treasury Minute” authorizing the write-off. 

At the first indication of an unsatisfactory feature 
arising in connection with a loan, such as interest default 
for a period of two years, or in instances where it is 
necessary to take proceedings to recover from security, the 
debts are placed-in a special "non-current” category and 
thereafter their progress is followed closely by the loan 
officials. Once the advance is placed in a non-current 
category, the interest is held in a suspense account instead 
of being credited to revenue, serving as a further reserve 
against the possibility of an ultimate write-off. The interest 
in the suspense account is thus held by the Branches as an 
"interest contingent fund" against bad debts. In the event 
of collecting a loan in this category the interest is then 
transferred to revenue account. The non-current balances 
are observed carefully over varying periods of time, and in 
September every year those considered uncollectible are 
















TABLE XIII t 

ALBERTA TREASURY BRANCHES: 

EFFECTS OF LENDING AND INVESTMENT ON REVENUE 

AND EXPENDITURE (1943-1950^ 



(1) 


(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

YEAR Revenue 

(Mar* 31) From Loans 

Revenue From Revenue Total 

Investments From Other Revenue 

Sources 

Total Net Deficit 

Expenditure or Profits 

Total Dornn* 
Bond 

Investments 

Average Amount on Average Advances 
Deposit for Year For Year 

Number of 
Depositors 

1943 

$52,600 


#27,900 

$41,700 

$ 122,200 

$ 369,800 $ 

*247,600 

$ 5 49,500 

$ 5,644,000 (last $ 
6 raosi of 1943) 

1,717,000 

36,946 

(Dec./42) 

1944 

75,600 


62,900 

65,700 

204,200 

419,000 

-214,800 

1,549,500 

8,099,000 

1,337,000 

38,233 

1945 

99,500 


185,100 

100 ,200 

384,800 

539,100 

- 154,300 

7,649,500 

15,583,000 

1,701,000 

45,018 

1946 

152,100 


490,000 

118, 500 

760,600 

692,700 

67,900 

15,250,000 

22,094,000 

2,970,000 

50,280 

1947 

279,800 


403,800 

244,200 

927,800 

800,100 

127,600 

15,250,000 

24,569,000 

5,965,000 

52,170 

1948 

398,900 


483,800 

167,200 

1,049,900 

924,300 

125,500 

15,250,000 

28,121,000 

8,692,000 

53,137 

1949 

429,500 


491,900 

183,300 

1,104,700 

995,300 

109,300 

*70.000 

"39,30 b 

16,459,413 

31,018,000 

9,567,000 

55,577 

1950 

433,700 


528,200 

192,300 

1,154,200 

1,118,800 

35,400 

-33,500 

1 l.O'OTT 

17,550,000 

33,014,000 

10,016,000 

54,963 

1. 

Columns (1) 

to 

(6) given to 

nearest $100, 

Column (7) 

NOTES 

gives exact figures. Columns 

(8) and (9) are 

to nearest 1,000, and 

Column (Y) is exact* 

2 • 

Computations 

for 1949 and 1950 in Column 

(6) show subtraction of reserve 

for bad and 

doubtful debts 

from net profits* 



3* 

Column (3), 

Revenue from Other Sources, 

includes commissions, exchange, 

operating charges, safety deposit rentals, safekeeping charges. 

fire 


Insurance and life insurance commissions, car and truck license fees, bond sales canmissions et a 1 * 


4 


This table Is derived from the Public Accounts of Alberta, and the unpublished accounts of the Treasury Branches 



















U ;. ...u:.)_.. .vj .._ Uj.. 

|J :( , : r • • 


v • ©Or ' ' •' . 

r^.C-yX'. 


r 0 


G 




^ i * 


■'I 


XOO 






G \ 


oxv,.. 


x-0: t cv\t 
o/o: , r I 
GOG , ■ 


t 




'.?p r t .;.sx 


■ • l.. € 




O'"',:';, [•: • 


goo,, " 


v- r 


* 


'VOX 

o; - 01 
OX (Of 
V; °X 

00/ OJ 
QbQL 


r ; 


OCX 


OGO 


,, G 





, X, • . ; ' c i or \ C ,• r, ■. . c >. «X 

0. : G:G T . • • ' v : 

' • ' " t g xo‘:: , ' v O' . )» ■ 

• -r. t r■. .* 0 : - r ;1 ‘ ■ : : ' ■ : ■ ' 

;••- r, ' v. . 0 .' • ■■ Y ; • G/ ’■ 0 : ; • . 






207 


selected for write-off at head office. 

A considerable proportion of the first reserve for bad 
debts, i.e. $70,000 set aside in 1949, was used to write off 
an accumulation of small uncollectible accounts covering the 
period from 1941 to 1949. Approximately fifty accounts, 
amounting to less than one third of the reserve allotted for 
the first year, made up these cumulative bad debts over the 
eight-year period. The reasons why the write-off was so low 
over this fairly long period appear to result from (1) the 
conservative loaning policy of the Treasury Branches, which 
lessened risk of default, and (2) prosperous economic 
conditions which tended to reduce the rate of default. In 
1950 the addition to the reserve consisted of 33,500, and a 
proportionate amount will probably be set aside in future 
years. 


The other amendment, passed in 1946, can only be subjected 
to speculation concerning its original intent. Apparently the 
amendment merely empowered the Treasury Branches to receive 
deposits of outstanding savings certificates issued during the 
twenties. The amendment added a subsection to section 5 of 
the Treasury Branches Act, as follows: 

5 (2) The Minister may receive from depositors 
deposits of transferable savings certificates issued pur¬ 
suant to The Savings Certificates Act, and may issue 
receipts therefor and may receive fronrdepositors assign¬ 
ments of the whole or any part of such deposits in amounts 
of not less than five dollars or a multiple thereof and in 
such form as may be approved by the Minister...Any deposits 
so received will be kept in an account separate...^0 


20; Statutes of Alberta , 1946, c. 20. 








. 

■ % 


■ 

. 

.... ... . 

* 



: 

. 



r 


















,:.U 7/€ 

i 




















208 


From all indications available the provisions of the 
amendment have never been carried out by the Treasury 
Branches and its actual intention is open to conjecture* 

The amendment may have been designed to permit the Treasury 
Branches to take over the outstanding savings certificates 
as a basis for loans. Or, the intention may have been to 
authorize hypothecation of ownership of certificates to secure 
loans in certain instances, or some other reason that is not 
readily apparent. 

Loans, Investments, Before considering the effects of 

and Profitability investments and loans on the Treasury ' 

Branches * profitability, mention should be made of investments 
undertaken by the Treasury Branches other than in loans. The 
other investments consist entirely of Dominion of Canada 
bonds. These investments are made by the Provincial Treasurer 
in the name of the Treasury Branches from surplus depositors 1 
funds In the Depositors 1 Trust Account in the Imperial Bank, 
in keeping with the provincial government’s general investment 
policy. 

The statistical effects of Treasury Branch loaning and 
investment activities over the past seven years may be seen 
from Table XIII* From their beginning the Treasury Branches 
were faced with high operational and administrative expenses 
in salaries, interest paid on savings, costs of administering 
the Interim program, and numerous other itesm. The fact that 













* 

. 




- 








1 








* 

1 • ‘ 






. 


• lit 




209 


rental costs were often low as a result of using provincial 
government premises, and the relative economies of administer¬ 
ing the agency system, compared to an equivalent number of 
branches, were not sufficient to offset mounting costs of 
operations as the services were expanded. The limited scale 
of loaning operations and the fact that few other investments 
were made to assure sources of revenue meant that there were 
few counteracting influences to costs. From 1938 to the 
fiscal year ending March 31, 1945 total expenditures exceeded 
total revenue, notwithstanding the fact that a certain 
amount of surplus funds had been invested in Victory Bonds, 
and loans had been made since 1941. Columns (5) and (6) in 
the table show the existence of an annual deficit varying 

between $100,000 and $200,000 a year up to 1945, By March 

21 

1945 the total cumulative deficit stood at $2,046,657, 

Up to this point then, it appears that the provincial govern¬ 
ment regarded the Treasury Branches essentially as a service 
institution. Prior to the discontinuation of the consumers 1 
bonus in 1945 the government probably entertained some hope 
of retaining the original Interim Program or of putting it 
back into operation when wartime prosperity ended. But public 
and political criticism of the size of the deficit, plus the 
general abandonment of the Interim Program appear to have 
turned the government’s attention to the profitability of 
the Treasury Branches. The large investments of 1944 and 1945 

21; Public Accounts of "Iberia, 1945, p. 







. . ' .. , . ... . . . •. , o 

. 

. 

: ;p. ■ ' . * . :. 

• '' ' 


* t 





- 





. 





’ . . - 

- .. 

: 


* 
























- ’210 


out of surpluses in the Depositors* Trust Account resulted, and 

the increase in investments within two years by $14,000,000 

reveals this turning point in the provincial governments 

attitude, (cf. column 7). Within five years after the 

adoption of more vigorous loaning and investment policies the 

total deficit had been reduced by $1,712,619, as at March 
22 

31, 1950 o 

The rate at which the total deficit is reduced in 
succeeding years will depend on several factors. Provision 
of the reserve for bad and doubtful debts in 1949 and 1950 
reduced the net profit figure considerably for those years, 
as shown in column (6). Further provisions for bad and 
doubtful debts will continue to reduce the net profit figure 
and limit reduction of the total deficit. It has been pointed 
out that the deficit, as it had manifested itself prior to 
1945, was made up solely of operating costs and expenses. The 
importance of operating costs is directly reflected in the low 
net profit figure for 1950, i.e. $1,900 compared to $39,300 
the year before. In 1950 the Treasury Branches began paying 
a cost-of-living bonus to their employees, and together with 
other increases in salaries this accounted for an additional 
$90,000 in expenses. Another major item in the increase in 
expenditures was the rise in the total amount of interest 
paid on savings by $33,000. Gradual or sudden changes, then, 

22; Public Accounts of Alberta , 1950, p. 232. Table XIII 

shows only the net deficit or profit for each year. For 
the cumulative deficit figures from year to year see. 
the Treasury Branches * balance sheets in the public 
accounts. 








' * 

t . 

. 





0 

„ 

' 


* 

t - - 

t 


/ * ^ i , : ■. . ' . J. : ■ 

0 : r 

. 



211 


in operating expenses will profoundly affect the size of the 
net profit figure and the rate at which the total deficit 
will be reduced. 

The overall picture of the Treasury Branches’ operations 
over the past seven years is probably self-explanatory 
from Table XIII. One further remark is necessary regarding 
the last figure in column (10). The fall in the number of 
depositors in 1950 is not significant in this particular 
instance. This reduction is attributable to the closing out 
of dormant accounts held in suspense as unclaimed balances 
and then removed from current ledgers for the sake of conven¬ 
ience. This practice of closing out dormant accounts was 
enforced at this particular time , resulting in an accumulation 
of small inactive accounts being transferred during 1949. 

Summary and Treasury Branch loaning policies were 

Conclusions originally instituted as a means of strengthen¬ 
ing the Interim Program by expanding and consolidating the 
support of the people of the province primarily dependent 
on banks for their short-term credit requirements. For various 
reasons the scope of Treasry Branch loaning operations was 
highly restricted, making it impossible for them to supply 
credit on a scale that would bring about anything like overall 
support for the Interim Program. This factor, combined with 
the unwieldy nature of the voucher machinery, placed a 
maximum limit on the success of the Interim Program. 




' ' . 

. 

. 



. - . . . . 

■ 

.r. » ' P 

- 

' - . .... \ p.: : 

; .. /. a, , no - oil P© 'octroi nad'ct PH. 

■ 

-■ . .* ; - “ " • : , ", . ; ' .. • ; . ■ ' - -as 

- I . iu . .. ' 

■ ‘ «, • • • 

. 

c '• 

■ 

, 





- 212 - 


When the Interim Program was further undermined and 
finally discontinued with the return of prosperity, the 
provincial government seems to have left the Treasury 
Branches to find their own way in competition with the 
commercial banks* Except for the investments undertaken 
after the war to offset public criticism of the deficit, 
the provincial government has not overtly supported the 
Treasury Branches* In fact, the making of the investments 
seemed further to imply that the Treasury Branches were to 
pay their own way; and except for the field of provincial 
guaranteed loans this is what they have had to do* Although 
the making of the Dominion bond investments was merely sound 
business practice it marked a step forward in the evolution 
of the Treasury Branches, and the resultant profitability of 
their operations in the subsequent years was a direct reflec¬ 
tion of this policy. 

Retention of funds in the Depositors 9 Trust Account 
prior to these investments may have been partially 
justifiable to maintain a reserve against the transfer 
vouchers, although the liquid Dominion securities probably 
would have been nearly as adequate. An explanation of the 
governments tardiness in undertaking these investments for 
the Treasury Branches appears to rest basically on the 
principles of the Social Credit government at that time® 
Because of the social credit view of debt and the Alberta 


. . - •: :■ . «. 

'-i : £ '-.11 o'oe.l aii 

1 e , : -1 ... U ' 'Mi.. -■ O . 3 0 V* - il 


t ,: ' ' ■, i 

;.. : J 



V • 00 , ■ , "• 


' - 




, 



■ 

• ; • .. r*: oo o . ■ :.! . ' ‘30 


' 

. -3 ■j 8 ‘ •• i . : i i 



;... mi: ■; ol ni’iwt a!' ar-..t a ocft 
,;' o X v o o. i 1 v : ... m ih ..1 i ■: ..-. 
■f f'O' . X 0 . v r r: '.v Mr Mi xx os? 1 --I ••• ;o,v oxx 

. 


* 




0: ■ oO.OiiO ,i ,0 C ,o L;jJU.'i3 




-■ 0 . ,o ,0, . 0 o.j f ov;o; u/l .0,0 o .. , 






i 

; -i-: ‘ j 0 ' , " 101O i 0 OoJ 

. o • : -ooi. 

1 0 r O' . 1'0,00, \> ll 00 ■ 0 

:■ ■ o . ', ■ 

.•; o .00 ' : oov ■ , ... 10 o', . 01 O or ooo! oOl 

’ 

- 

. 

0 i • ..• .. o v : 1 - ■ f/oocol 



213 


governments opposition to financing through the issue of 
bonds the administration apparently felt that it could not 
condone the purchase of bonds for the Treasury Branches* 
Another secondary reason may be attributable to the general 
attitude of the government, at that time, that the Treasury 
Branches should operate primarily as a service institution 
without regard to profitability. 

To a certain extent the investment policy, when it was 
finally adopted, served as a substitute for the revenue that 
could have been obtained from a wider loaning program® 
Although the existence of these liquid reserves increased the 
loaning potential of the Treasury Branches, the revenue 
derived directly from the investments has continued to 
exceed revenue from loans since 1945 (see Table XIII) * This 
attitude towards potential revenue still goes back to the 
reasons behind Treasury Branch loaning conservatism. 

In general, if the provincial government gave the 
Treasury Branches a preferred status - i.e., by requiring 
that all groups receiving provincial grants or loans deal 
through them - the government would be subject to charges 
of discrimination. For example, loans or grants on many 
municipal projects are made directly from the Treasury 
Department. It is left to the individual local governing 
body as to where it will do business once it receives the 
amount of the loan or grant from the Treasury. Another 


. v : ' ■: - 

.. : . ■- i ,J f W '■ - 

, .r X .. \ .. '• -! -• . 

...... ‘ - '■ ■■ 

- .. . ' ■ . .. t ' .. i'.' ... . . ■ ~ ::r, 

’ 










■ 


>;;L s . 1 5 


J r f ?.n 11 


: ; .. ■ ' r , ; /. , r 'V ' ;■ 1, ' . L* r ‘ 4 " - - 4 

* 

<. .... ... •:.. .: " ; . -"I • v ... : . .. > ,.... : .- 

, . 1* '.... • : •• *. ; - v 


,..., - K ; 4 *''» ~ bub. j 


v -., ■■ 

v£b 

t: 'J ! i 11 

€ :B 

b j c- ,. r. - 



■ • . ... 



* 

• 

. 

1 So., : £.83 

' 

: n lib® .. 1 

■ 



\--iL ^--j\bb nib 


0, .\£& ’i-0 




214 


reason why the government does not Insist on such organ¬ 
izations dealing directly with the Treasury Branches in this 
instance is simply that there may not be a branch in that 
particular district. An example of such an area is in 
southern Alberta in the triangle Calgary, Medicine Hat, and 
Lethbridge, where there are only three branches among these 
points♦ 

The Treasury Branches, then, are faced with this 
situation: they receive little direct support from the 

provincial government at the present time; yet they have to 
compete with the banks in such a way that they will not 
incur a further deficit or make bad loans, which in turn 
would subject the government to extensive public criticism. 
This condition may be said to be the political factor govern¬ 
ing the caution of Treasury Branch loaning operations* 

A second general condition governing loaning conservat¬ 
ism is a result of the limits of the Treasury Branches ! scope 
within the boundaries of the province, and their consequent 
dependence on the peculiar economic conditions of Alberta, 

As has been outlined in Chapter I, the Alberta economy, with 
grain-farming at its basis, is essentially subject to extreme 
variations in agricultural incomes. 

Treasury Branch loans are all made within the province, 
and the risks of repayment or interest default are subject 
to fluctuations in incomes of the borrowers. Although the 
chartered banks are faced with a similar situation their 


. - ■ ■ . •• . ■ - ■ . •• i ; ' 

■.. j ; . ... ..:... ■ . . : .. . • < • icr ' 




, l*i ' ■ 


. ‘ ... : :• • -j , L ‘ ' •>.' - J. '3 

■ • •.v . ‘ , -• ■■■:, .. / ' .:■<?; t o x f '"ICUlu &J. 

. ' ... < • i ‘' * . ; :.*i : 

; 

a '-■.■J eda^;-;:oo 

' V. , • ' . . ■ ■ . ' •• ,e m;.'.o-.t ' 

, / ' " 4 : . . k; • 

. . 

. V-- ■ ' ' ■ ' '• V 

. 

. 

. ; . : ..... * -■ .• «, ; = ■ -i*: ■ .■• . ■ ' - ' ~ 

. 

„ . . j OtHJl l ■ ' ' . ' ' ■ -■ -■ - 

. 


215 


loaning risks are offset by the wide diversification of 
depositors and other loans in those sections of Canada which 
are not subject to such extreme variations in income. Prom 
the Treasury Branches 1 point of view the risks of nonrepayment 
through variability of incomes may be offset by recent trends 
towards the industrialization of the province. The effects 
of the risks of nonrepayment might also be allayed in the 
Treasury Branch organization through the potential support 
of the provincial government in the background; but this 
support remains potential rather than actual and it is subject 
to the political factor mentioned above. 

In spite of recent industrializing trends in Alberta the 
breakdown of Treasury Branch loans in Table XII shows the 
influence of an unstable agricultural economy. Agricultural 
borrowers were the largest single group of debtors, but the 
$1,414,993 spread over 1,833 borrowers amounted only to an 
average of $771 per loan. Probably a good proportion of the 
business and personal loans granted throughout the province 
were to merchants and individuals dependent on prosperous 
agricultural prices and the farm trade. Some of the industrial 
loans were probably for the processing of natural products 
also subject to wide fluctuations in price. The existence of 
these basic unstable conditions within the province has 
undoubtedly contributed to a restricted loaning policy on the 
part of the Treasury Branches. 


r-. i V : ■ 7 v:>. 7.- .77" ‘ I'h’i; - f 77’77''7 .,^.7 .--I 

7/: / " :< i: : .. iIm 1 ’ •.r. o 1 7 - .? 

\ * ■ 1 . ' : '■'/ . - • ■•••' v ■ 7. - o 7; ■'. - 

: T -'., : ; J ■ : “...lev. iS;>, rj ■■ 7f 

. 77 .... 7 -■ '. :d 7.7 ' ... 777." '• ; ,> : ", J 7* 7 : 7" .7 7' 77 7.;. 

. 

, ... • ■. • - ■ :• ■' 7... 7 c? • .7; . ; ' 7 Z 77 ■': '• : 

i- .. .. ' ' '*• ■ 7 . ' “ 7 ■■ - :: ■’*> -- . 

; 

:. : .7. ‘ ... : ... . - 7 

. 

:• ,.i . . ii. ' . 7 ' 7 * • . - - • ...a i -l .. 7 7 

" 7 . •• ... ■■ ... ’7 ■ 

„ 

. 

. ■ ) . k 

■ . . , 7: , * - -.7: , .. 77 7 7 7 77 ' 7 7 7 ’ ■ 7 ' 

■ 

.: . 7:.. , 71 7. . ' 7..- 7 G : : *• . 7" 7 77;; , .7 ,. 777 

. 

' 

. 

„ 7 7 








216 


The technical factor which contributed to conservatism 
in lending during the days of the Interim Program has 
still remained with the Treasury Branches. As pointed out 
previously, the maintenance of liquid reserves equivalent 
to or exceeding those of the banks has meant that Treasury 
Branch loaning activities have been curtailed on the grounds 
that they have not the number nor the diversity of depositors 
available to banks* The Treasury Branches were at some 
disadvantage from their beginning by not having something 
like the chartered banks* $500,000 minimum capital. In fact, 
of course, the lack of this capital appropriation was not 
significant unless the Treasury Branches had been started on 
a small scale within their means and with the intention of 
becoming profitable* Obviously if the Treasury Branches had 
been Intended as profit-making institutions they would never 
have been inaugurated on the scale that they were under the 
Interim Program. This fact is one of the basic differences 
between the Treasury Branches and the banks. To a certain 
extent it serves as a reason why the Treasury Branches and 
the banks can hardly be compared in terms of their profitab¬ 
ility. By operating primarily as a service institution 
during the Interim Program the Treasury Branches did not have 
sufficient sources of revenue through investments, loans and 
exchange charges to finance themselves by means of revenue* 
The existing cumulative deficit of more than $1,700,000, in 


. 



J-r' -C xl V. : i’u'acO ■ x:ao.Xi - xox xiix 

x ' . 

,; x . ; \ .. * ' x • i(\ ...... .■ i :>riS X ; x • alum ■ II .!: * . 

x ... •; , ... .xx \ x. x ■ • . ..xx- . x ■ . - ■ j x; ;xx.VXX -x, 

. . ■ X J x .: O ' x ._} : X Xa 

,./,XX. . Xx >1 , ;u.X: X...iX . .. x i r * Z&i'.C?- V XXX. gxjxiXOi i £fi XlH 

x i x,.,rixo u' Ox ,x : 'Ixxx .Xl.x vdJ &A3 icx &vsn- y&£id Jsdt 

. 

t . .... ’ ' «, 

.. ■- ; t ■ '•■■■'• ■••• 

• ' X. . ' 

) 

x ■ x ... ox ' -xx 'x*x xi x-v; xx . x. '. rt&scf 

■ - ■. ■ x, 'X v . . xjx • : / x x x.r.f;:.: x x :-.I . x . xxx 

al 

. , :. - 

■ ■ ■-. ..X ... X X .XXV X.V . ■ X •: .. ■ ■ ■- V «TX. X XX ' 

- 

* 

ft,. x.I t x;xx: * . x. x, ;xcxxx . xxxxvx ; lo x-x;xxvx $na 

, .. x. . ; 

.. X , ; t : g S : ■ . ' X. / ■ ■■’x.. ■ X, V J. , ;.1 CX,.. : X V; x" . :.; 1 .>: -;■ ••.. V. 




217 


spite of five currently profitable years, stands as evidence 
to that. 

Security requirements on most types of loan affect the 
scope of Treasury Branch lending only with respect to the 
smaller advances. The large borrower is required to provide 
security for his loan regardless whether he obtains it from 
a bank or from a Treasury Branch. Small borrowers, say up 
to $1,000, who are able to obtain bank loans on the basis of 
their character or their job, are perhaps more inclined to 
balk at the security required by the Treasury Branches. On 
the other hand, these security requirements may make it 
possible for the somewhat unreliable or unknown borrower to 
obtain a loan from the Treasury Branches. The taking of a 
chattel mortgage or hypothecation of title at the time of the 
advance may tend to offset the risk of dealing with such a 
borrower, by turning potential unreliability into reliability. 
In practice, however, the canniness of Treasury Branch 
lending has apparently caused them to turn down many borrowers 
who would be considered as reliable by the banks. 

The above discussion has been chiefly concerned with the 
general conditions and effects of Treasury Branch caution in 
extending loans. It is now necessary to arrive at the 
immediate cause underlying this caution. In essence Treasury 
Branch conservatism today is based on the relative youth of 
their organization in the banking field, and more specifically. 






, ■' ;: -n ; H c’" ? X :; t 3 1 C, a 

m 


e,a;. .-. ce-xM ; H " nm c..o M xme?■ m. M 

. 

. •.. • ' • 


, ■ . . •' a 1 £ - ■ ■ 

; ‘ * ■ V ■ ". .•. ' ' ■ ' r . ’* — " ? O -■ * ;i• 

;x-X : . - • 1 • '■■' ■ •" t * •’ clr 

£ 1 ■ - . 3 ' ■ *3 - ' • 

t 

V ^ . . ■• \. \ t v: O 'K "• A ;/:-.3 1: U I j, ... i* ; 


' - . ■ : ^ : . c.. r ■ 

: 

. . . ;; ' ■ ; *-o v ' V . - v ' : ■ -x 'no?,.. ■ 

- • ■ ' . ' J . ■ 

■’ r-..- '■ * G 

•iv. ■", *. ■ k v.'• v.-.-jl?*:’ vM nvw.iiz?. 

. 

* . . , ., .:, . ... •,.• "r M : V. ■ Ovv 

;y j; -r-v-o M'-- ed svedjs erfd 

: „ .. V. do dM . -0V “ j * j v i.1 ( :M 

. * 

, ; 

l< . • e • 

c ‘.Mi ,. . ' ■ 





- 21Q 


on inexperience in loaning judgment on the part of branch 
managers* Although all senior positions in the Treasury 
Branches were filled by former banking or trust company 
personnel, they were not usually men who had been in manag¬ 
erial or executive posts. Besides this relative lack of 
experience in loaning operations, the head office and manag¬ 
erial people were, prior to September 1943, chiefly concerned 
with administering and revising the Interim Program* 

Discretionary loaning powers were not given to the 
managers until May 1943, and even then not to all of them. 
Although all branch managers now have discretionary powers 
(except in circumstances when these powers might be 
temporarily witheld from a newly-appointed manager) it appears 
that in many instances the discretionary limits of managers 
are lower than those accorded to their banking opposites. 

The political possibility of criticism against the govern¬ 
ment resulting from bad loans would not exist, or would be 
considerably reduced, if Treasury Branch personnel were able 
to judge loaning risks In a more capable manner. The technical 
factor of high liquid reserves is in reality an effect rather 
than a cause of loaning conservatism. Although high liquid 
reserves are maintained, partially with an eye towards the 
number and diversity of depositors, the immediate short run 
reason seems to be reluctance to delegate greater loaning 
powers to the managers* Despite this singular handicap in 


■ .. * ' 

; . - ' X Ill *doi 

:U ;'■■ ■ .<• ^ ■-'■'■"■ ■ /. ! •■"•.■'. ; . • IaI/-, J "'"■(! '^ 

- 1 -. * .... ' J'•:•' '• •■■.'.'•■• - f ‘ ' ' - 

or- , :.: o.M : ... :: .0 llSs .; C.L r 0^,ri?qX8 

' .. 

V .: : I j . .1 ■■ . Z-i /IPf'i .. ' c 6 C .:. ^ .* 

» • . . -■ .. ; > \ 

'/Jo io. "■'■ ;t- 

■ . • - o x a ., 

. ; . .. , : ; fi i .O ill) l. -. 1 - ..i...- 

* J I / ' • ' ■ - - ■' ' • 

# 

~-t-zr;Q% '■ hi*- ■ ' o' • - % : . : Hl roe IzsliXilcq o-o. 

. :i \ ;• f ■ :.;v : '.j . ' . ' M ' O i‘ ' ' Cl OOQ '-Hi ^irHlAr:. vT;;j- 

' t 

. " o ^ Vi rj/- r 'r t »K v foif*. H 

. ■ ; . ■ ‘ 

. 

- e .... J : * 

• : i .. • .. '. - o ivZh - ; o: a 

, -;o..o ..0 ; ... • J -'.a.:.. 

• '• .••■•■■■ • • - 








219 - 


trained personnel the Treasury Branches have experienced a 
small percentage of bad loans, and they have been able to 
compete fairly effectively with the banks in some instances. 

At the same time, the small percentage of bad loans is a 
direct reflection of the relatively high proportion of their 
advances which are referred to the superintendent or the 
loans committee beyond the control of the managers. Until 
their managers generally develop a greater degree of resource¬ 
fulness and skill in granting loans the Treasury Branch system 
is likely to continue to remain on a restricted scale subject 
to extensive supervision from its head office. 

Although the Treasury Branches have increased their 
advances to the public by nearly $1,000,000 a year for the 
past three years, and at $3,000,000 for the previous two 
years, the effect of their credit-creating activities on 
the money supply of the province has not been large. Up to 
1950 average advances for a single year have not exceeded 
$10,016,000. On the basis of available statistics w© can 
only theorize upon the maximum loaning capacity of the Treasury 
Branches by means of very approximate comparisons. Firstly, 
if the conventional primary ratio of reserves to total 
deposits in Canada is 10$, then, on the basis of last year*s 
figures, the Treasury Branches with primary reserves of 
$6,289,923 should have had total deposits of something like 
$63,000,000. Included in the $63,000,000, of course, would 


?i1 v a: ' . a 1 . . <1 a a . 

• ■ . t • :• . .'a: ■ .. . 

a';-:-:, r-:- ' 3 .. : * rftf ' 7 .1 v V ’ 1 O ti'' 1 ' ? 1 «S *:b! WOO 

i • • ' , 1 s '. r ' ' , T J 3 8 ■ u ; 

‘ ■ '• i •, .. .. i«C: .Tea'y 

: ... , a,-. . . y-- •' " - ’’ - '-a a". - a. a a. a a./ .a vr ■■ 

■ ■; a ; /.:;r -a ■ ■ a; a ;• ■ a a * a >i • '■ oq a;: -cl 

a a - . a ... a.. 1 

. . .' r. • ; ‘ yy . v . 

. 

/. . a * . ■ , . a.: yy. t ■ 

: • * y : f ' ' • . 

■ - * 

.. 

. . 

. 

: • ' . . ,. ■■ la ■ v.. 

, • ; ; 

... 0 a. a 1 -yaaliq "a: a 1 a : aa a . 11 al 

f • ■.. . a a-. ; -1 a *■ ■ >ru .a -a.a a ,c y. ■ .-a- 

’• 3 :■ .■ 

. • •’ <. • y> 

. * 

.. 





220 


b© deposits created for those customers who received loans. 

Secondly, going back to the chartered banks, we find that 

for Canada the ratio of total loans to total average deposits 

is 31.85? (i.e., $2,388,597,680 in loans over $7,402,776,952 
23 

in deposits). Now, in 1950 the Treasury Branches 
maintained approximately the same ratio of total loans to 
deposits, i.e., $10,016,000 in average loans to $33,014,000 
in average deposits, or 33.6$ 0 Therefore, taking our 
previous estimate of $63,000,000 as potential total deposits 
with a reserve ratio of 10 % ($6,289,923) we find that 33.6$ 
of total deposits is $21,168,000. This figure represents 
the potential loaning capacity of the Treasury Branches in 
1950 if they had retained a standard 10$ reserve ratio. Under 
these hypothetical conditions the breakdown of deposits would 
probably be as follows, as compared to the 1950 distribution: 


Item 1950 Potential 

Cash $ 6 million $ 6 million 

Bonds .. 17 million 36 million 

Loans 10 million 21 million 

Total deposits $33 million $63 million 


The main reasons, then, why the Treasury Branches have 
not been able to live up to something like this loaning 
potential centres around three basic factors. Firstly, 

23: Canada Yearbook. 1950. pp. 1066-67. Figures for 1948. 




















* 


6..,-' znoh;.. t>e 


' ae ' a*.- 


•• t- 

4 E • . 

c J 

< ' ' ' " 




■ t'j e* : •• ;m -x ;•-/ 


: t 

• VQ I -v.. 

». ■ t • - 




\ i • x • :-• :■ 

* 

. 




: u 

... ... . v ■ : ■ 


, * • 


- 

« * « • l 



- e 

* ■ - 

* . ... 1 



• • - ■ ’ ■ : .. ■• •• 



» 


t t 





• 




, ... : : • . /. 2 .. 

* 

; v '• 

a;' .. : ■ :i .:‘r 

X .. ■ ■ . .• .. . . ' 4' » X o • 'X J. X ^ M'l- 

■ 

t •• ■ * . x . v ( j - . : ' ... a: It ' 


* ■ . ■■ : . . ; j, . ■ . ■ -xj ^ -xr _ : 












221 


their operations are confined to a highly specialized economy 
characterized by extreme variations in net incomes. This 
condition, even with direct government support at some future 
date, will likely remain as a limiting influence on the scope 
of their lending operations. Secondly, the crucial limiting 
factor in the form of managerial judgment can only gradually 
be overcome in the long run as experience is developed and 
utilized. The third limiting condition in the form of the 
size and diversity of deposits can also be overcome in the 
long run. At the present time the Treasury Branches maintain, 
with considerable justification, that they have not the funds 
available to increase loans without liquidating some of their 
bond investments. The high ratio of cash reserves to deposits 
is only partially attributable to lending conservatism, it is 
also based on the high cash requirements for operation of the 
agency system. Abo, as a result of the time lag in clearing 
items deposited through the agency system the average total 
amount on deposit tends to remain small. Although the diversity 
of deposits is subject to the limitations of the economic back¬ 
ground, the amount of total primary deposits may be increased 
as a means of expanding the scope of lending activities. At 
present, or in the near future, it seems likely that the 
Treasury Branches will undertake promotional or other schemes 
to increase their total primary deposits as a basis for 
expanding loaning operations. 



• 1 : "' j j ;.V; ; '•. c ‘i.i'.o n$ 

* 

. . -5' v-,. ; s. .. \ • •: £>•: \ir , 

; :■■■■ ’-i .lz< LL z, *c /.y- -\i •:;/11 ±~.Zw t ttj ab 

. 

r: :: i ‘ : > ' ‘-.O 1 < XOi - V • i. UC 

.....' * 

< • \ , / V . . 

i 

* 

, 

' , r , . ;. . •/. * : •; . • . ; ~J‘l .. - £i; r' ^t3-9.d C 

■ ■ 7 ' t f . . 

' 

7.v; : ■ .. ' . • .• : ■ • *. ■ ..• ■ e ... .• .< 

- ' ' -J . . ’ , . ' • '■ . •: 3 ■ ' 

:• - - Jtt-' r :.o 

j ... ■ j. 

. , 





222 


Bibliography - Chapter V 
I» Dominion government documents; 

Statutes of Canada, The Bank Act , s. 88. 
Canada Yearbook . 1950, pp. 1066-1067. 


II. Alberta government documents: 

Statutes of Alberta ; 1938 (2nd session) c. 3. 

1940, c. 14 
1946, c. 20 
1948, c. 30 
1937, c. 33 

Revised Statutes of Alberta s 1942, c. 123. 
Order-in-Council 812/41. 

Public Accounts of Alberta, passim. 


Ill* Alberta government documents (unpublished); 

Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendents Routine 
Memo #82. d/july 4, 1941. 

Superintendent* s Circular 
Al-1 . d/ju'ne 2. 1941. et. seq. 

_____ Accounts, passim. 


IV. Other sources; 

Dominion Bank, 80th Annual Statement . October 31, 

1950, from Edmonton Journal, d/December 14, 1950. 

Imperial Bank of Canada, 75th Annual Report , 1949, 36 pp. 

Bank of Montreal, 152nd Annual Report , 1949, 46 pp. 




























$ 






CHAPTER VI 


TREASURY BRANCH AGENCIES AMD OTHER SERVICES 




223 


CHAPTER VI 

TREASURY BRANCH AGENCIES AND OTHER SERVICES 


A Treasury Branch agent is a person engaged in some 
other private business who is appointed by Order-in-Council 
to act on a part-time commission basis for the purpose of 
accepting deposits, cashing cheques, selling money orders, 
and similar activities on behalf of the nearest Treasury 
Branch* 

The function of the agencies is to give a modest form 
of financial service to communities where it would be unprof¬ 
itable to operate full-time branches, the original intention 
being to establish agencies at all points not serviced by 
chartered banks* In many instances agencies were established 
in response to requests from local Social Credit Party groups 
or by public petition for banking services. Although they 
were at first established on an experimental basis the 
agencies were opened in large numbers to facilitate the carry¬ 
ing out of the Interim Program. During the first year or two 
of Treasury Branch operations, approximately 300 agencies were 
opened, but by the end of 1942 the number had been reduced to 
nearly 200.^ There were two reasons for this reduction in 
numbers: firstly, sufficient support failed to materialize 

in certain areas, and secondly, the agent selected may have 

1: By December 31, 1942, there were 198 agencies. Treasury 

Branch Accounts (unpublished). 






... . _. 

- . >1 : 6H'l3 

/' v,'. * V *’ *. i t^vJ:*tor in $o 

.. j ■ „ ■• j - ■ r- . 1 .' ' - 7 :J / :: 

t ; ■: , ::.C - -so X -ii:, -v;OD r 

:: .. • .. . 

. 

‘ ..:. .. . ■. '. . . ;. 0 •. .... t ; . ■ ~ 

. ... , ; t :/ : . \ •. . «* 

. ’ ■ . .:. ' / X -j■ ; sllVcisSvs . 

X I 1 ■ . ■ - 1 ' . X >;■ -if v: 1 • i 

, 

- .; j.. '■■■•£: v t.~~ "Xn : j:; VI o hi© .7 ; - hh, TB ©7^7 

. . . . .. .; ’ a -• , •' U ■ 

u 1 h »:• '1 .. : h . h.L- ?. 7 '■ ■ : Jv is. 

■ r . 7 .'. 13 ° 

r ■ 

l 

- ■ 4 - ■ •' t 1 ’ : 

«_ . - J s. X 

„ , ■' . ....... , ■ ; . •• ‘A. tv vi I ' 1 V ■ i X 

. .. hj , 7 ; £. .. j : '• ' 







224 


proved unsatisfactory and a suitable replacement could not be 
found. In addition, this paring down of the agencies placed 
the system on a more stable and profitable operating level. 

At first agents were allowed to accept deposits only, 
and later the sale of money orders was added. When certain 
agents won the confidence of Treasury Branch officials and 
could provide themselves with adequate safekeeping facilities, 
they were provided with nominal amounts of till cash to make 
change and to cash cheques. Today a large number of agents 
also act for other government departments in the issuance of 
licenses, sale of fire, life and hail insurance. 

All agents are bonded by the Treasury Branches and they 
are provided with burglary, robbery, messenger, and registered 
mail insurance. Each agent is required to sign an agreement 
with the Provincial Treasurer outlining his responsibilities. 

He also must sign an undertaking covering the cash supplied 
to him in which he assumes full responsibility for the cash 
and agrees to regard it as a fiduciary trust. 

Deposits received by an agent are forwarded daily to 
his controlling branch where all ledger records are maintained. 
Passbooks for agency accounts are posted by the controlling 
branch and returned to the agent for delivery to the depositor. 
Similarly funds derived from the sale of money orders and 
cheques cashed by the agent are forwarded to the controlling 
branch where records are kept. The agents are paid a 
commission by the Treasury Branches on the total amount they 




an, ^ r- -v'.. 2-Ui : .. :' s t r .-: oeTr.'ig; 

. 

, ■• . ; ■; 1 •;, jn< . \. : <o < n . r ■ 

•j'...- \ £ . ■ " c .> .C3.v v • v:\..r €;7i2: 7 7 2 x ?A 

;; ;-. 6 : 77-77 7 / s f x 3 ^.norn u >a ecut rja^js.C k«.e 

■ 

t - .. . ' -■ . v • 7 C;-I .■!./ 

.. A A. • 7 ■ - 3; ... - : 

' 


- - .-i ,: \i . , •' .■ - ...' ■ ' - ■ 

.:■/ . . . .. •'....• t .• . ■ • 7 , ■ ‘ 7 L' ' : ... ■■■' >■' ' ‘ J. ■ 7 7 '... 






. 




. . ■ •• _■ r.v 




... . • ...... c 


■ 




4 • • . -• ! ■ ■ - : 

. •'/: •: '. . 

1 ■■■■■;.■■ .... 7: • v . 77 T-O Si..,£'3d0 

. • v • . .. 

. 





- 225 


receive on deposit per month. Originally, the commission 

was paid at the rate of % of 1% on consumer deposits and 

, 2 
one tenth of 1% on mercantile deposits. In 1942 the 

commission basis was changed so that on consumer deposits 

commission was paid at J of 1% on the first $15,000 received 

during the month and at one tenth of 1% on the remainder and 

on all mercantile deposits. After January 3, 1949, commission 

was changed to J of 1% on total deposits per month, in effect 

3 

equalizing the previous ratios. No commission is paid to 
agents on provincial government deposits. 

Additional service is given at some agencies by having 
one or two employees from the controlling branch attend the 
agency on regular days each week to post passbooks, verify 
accounts, take loan applications and to perform other services 
not normally available to agency clients. Seven such H ledger 
and loan service” agencies are now in operation; the number 
varies from time to time according to the availability of 
transport facilities, the availability of personnel at the 
controlling branch and other conditions. Supervision of 
agencies is maintained by periodical inspection of agency 
records by the controlling branch manager and Treasury Branch 
inspectors. Controlling branch inspection is carried out four 

times a year and an audit by Treasury Branch inspectors is 

4 

made once a year. 

2; Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendents Circular 
A2-2 , November 2, 1942* 

3: Ibid , January 3, 1949. 

The Treasury Branches themselves are inspected and audited 
at least once a year by a staff of four inspectors. 


4 





."A a i - 3.v ns evA :■ ■ *•: 

■ a 

■ ./ * . J : i. . 

■ • , ■ ' ‘ . 

. , 

A A. A A j i : > - ■ ' * '■ '■ ■ - ; : ' - - 0A. AA A . . i. 'A. ■? 

; ; •• , . . ,.;c . . . ■ -• • : • I; 'A'. 

al , ■- q . 

- 

, :.- a •: 

- 

. t , • aV . ... - • ■ ' a ' - '■ -a: ho 

• ; , j • . o » aaa 

■ : ’. . ■ •• - • A • ' ■: ■ 1 

i .. . a • .. • ■ ■ ' a f , •: a fv .: :■ v 'a 

.. A ; ' A . ' • A ' j ; ' ' .. A - U A A : A ■ . : A ■ ■ A;:A . - A . A 

' ' , ' 

' l 

• : .. ■ t . i to J - l S £<f. .hi ■ A . . it 

■ ' ' ' 

. 

. . 

\ ... a ; ' ' _ . , - . .... . . -A . . . i . : 

.. , . v ~ 

* . ■ - \ A a ; 

1; : - 

, ■ . 



- 226 - 


As at December 31, 1950, there were 109 agencies in 
operation, including the seven ledger and loan service 
agencies. Total deposit turnover per agency varied in 
1949 from under $3,000 to over $1,800,000 during the year. 
The scope of agency operations may be gathered from Table 
XIV below: 5 

Table XIV. Total deposits received by agencies 
for calendar year 1949 


No. of agencies Total deposits turnover per year 


6 

from 

$1,000,000 

to 

$1,800,000 

13 

from 

500,000 

to 

1,000,000 

24 

from 

250,000 

to 

500,000 

34 

from 

100,000 

to 

250,000 

18 

from 

50,000 

to 

100,000 

13 


under 


50,000 

Total 108 

Total 

$32,332, 

000 


Balance of total deposits on hand in agency accounts as 
at December 31, 1949 - $6,627,000 


An agency with a low deposit turnover might be operated 
for some purpose other than obtaining deposit business, for 
example^ to provide cashing facilities for cheques of an 
important depositor, such as a school division or municipal 
district. 

5: Alberta Treasury Branches, Accounts (unpublished). 










• * 






,, 










i 

. . - -.-X r ^ . ’ . 




:>,. 7a ii.JOu-.vi X .. -.•: 

; . ....... X0i ■ ■ '■ - 

' . .. . . : r J ' X . . /.xo :,fiX •; 

I. • "... . XX" . . X ■■■■X.xt: ■;> 

* ■ 


• ... 



. . 















227 


Profitability of the agencies to the Treasury Branches 
is estimated by determining what percentage their costs are 
of average deposits and by comparing this percentage with 
the average yield from investments of their deposits in 
loans or bonds. The agent computes his own profitability 
by comparing his proceeds on commissions to his overhead 
costs which he supplies at his own expense, including his 
premises, furnishings, safekeeping facilities and staff 
membe rs• 

Those costs of the agencies contributed by the Treasury 
Branches include all direct costs paid by the controlling 
branch, such as, stationary, bond and insurance premiums, 
interest paid on agency savings deposits, agent ? s commission, 
postage and express. Other sources of agency revenue for the 
Treasury Branches, not included in this computation of 
profitability, are exchange and commission on cheques and 
other items cashed and deposited, and operating charges on 
agency accounts. 

The percentage that costs are of total average deposits 
varies between 3.2$ and 0.7$ with the majority of agency 
costs varying between 1 and 2$. On the above basis it would 
appear that the agency system operates at a profit to the 
Treasury Branches as well as to the agents, and it is evident 
that they are considerably less costly to operate than full¬ 
time branches and sub-branches. With the eSLstence of 
controlling branches as a basis for their operations the 


. .. .. ■ = ' . o-. - ■■ .• r ail 

c a I . . . * ' ... . . d ‘ - • 

t 



■ 


al - 

..:st 


., j a 


yfi 


.. 








. . t... i 

' 0 



* 


-! c ■ a - 












airi 


. j;., 



B.L r : a 









... to 0 

.' :iw to .. 

iOO 









t 




. o I .. 













* 

. 























■••• : . - . r ; - 

. 



JL 

' 



* 







•1 >i 




</ ::a 





1 

• * 


' 


. 

■ i 6' - 









si O o ■ 








■ . ' t .. ' . % : : '".1~ .' ' 0 l'i 

. 

■ 0 X -.t C - . ■; t J 1 . 3 - luia 8 l >. J 1 a. a.D.a 0 

. 

. ... . 

: 

a: Xi^-.v as & .\dorxja-iS %'useyy^ 

..: ., j L-a .■ ■ J.d Vtaaj. i* at ■„ Wio 

.. . - - 

; : .. • . a: .' . t ■ -a -or-: :• ;. >: :.l a. : a o 



228 - 


Treasury Branches have been able to extend their services 
through their agencies at a low cost. Even the agencies 
with the largest turnover have been able to operate with 
costs to the Treasury Branches of around 1.8$ or 2% of total 
deposits. 

Besides the agencies, six Treasury Branch sub-branches 
were in operation throughout the province in 1950. Sub¬ 
branches operate from one to five days a week, and on those 
days two or three employees from a controlling branch give 
full services to customers at that centre. The employees 
return to the controlling branch at the closC. of sub-branch 
operations each day. Costs of sub-branch services are borne 
entirely by the controlling branch. 

As an innovation in the banking field the chief 
characteristic of the agencies is that they enable the Treasury 
Branches to extend partial service to communities where it 
would be unprofitable to operate full-time branches. They 
also provide a means by which the government can consolidate 
services of various departments, such as the issuance of 
licenses, sale of fire, life and hail insurance. All of 
these activities, under the agency system, may be carried 
out from one source, with the records under one roof, and by 
one agent bonded to perform all the services. 

E&perience of the Treasury Branches has also shown that 
the agencies can, at times, operate in towns where banking 
facilities already exist because of their low costs of 


i J . ' • d •. 

. oc 

u'Uo Xv x. -x. IOl. <i w XSOxl.Cx. o . • X j,‘"X'lw 

n... . : ! i .. ■ . . :: ■ xo 

* 

. - . . t . l 

* 

„ 

. 

4 

■ • 

■ " • : " , ' ' •" ' > ; t : - k 

. - . > “ '• . j l .’. ... 1 

V/.- -x... ; : . . .. : . •. 'ru olv o ^ e-;*! 0 

. 

' 

■ . ...... : . . 

. .... t • ■... r. - , v i :•* o . • ■... 

« , 

... - , 

... o .. .*• ■ r ;-"' . :■ . ox - . X', o -. c 

* ■ - 

x • •.... c. ■■ Ic u^nai oioqx-: 

. -. .: , •.... T :.' . u o -J ox. .. 

. : .' • 3 .: * .. 




229 


operations, the elimination of exchange charges, and conven¬ 
ience of transactions in districts where numerous agencies 
are located around a branch. Exchange charges are 
eliminated when a cluster of agencies around a controlling 
branch make it possible for people in that area to issue 
cash orders without charge. The existence of separate bank 
branches, even if they are of the same bank, entails 

exchange charges for the customer on cheques drawn on each 
6 

centre. 

The chief disadvantage of the agencies is the limited 
nature of the services they offer and the fact that their 
records are all carried at the controlling branch. For 
example, depositors 1 passbooks have to be mailed or sent to 
the controlling branch for posting. The banking service 
offered by the agencies is of necessity by remote control 
at times subject to delay depending on mailing and transport 
services available. The agency system is also dependent on 
the reliability of the individual agents, but apparently the 
Treasury Branches have had little difficulty in obtaining 
suitable agents in recent years. Potential agents must be 
recommended to the Treasury Branches by at least two local 
citizens; in selecting an agent the Treasury Branch officials 

For example Killam branch has nine agencies in the 
district: at Daysland , Strome, Sedgewick , Lougheed, 

Hardisty , Hughenoon~ Czar, MetiskowT and Provost . 
(Underlined ones have bank branches.) 


6 : 







. . ... : . ; o . ; j\/ixqo 

• 2: ,'i ' 

.. • ; ’ 

,t . t . ' : ■- " I •' - . xc, 

‘ j . . ; . .o . ■ • : . ? - t. 

•• • . .. ■: ... : *. ■ ■ •' " .A •. ■ ■ 

' 

■ 

. .. ■ . 

, . : -o d ' ’ . .•oc •' ! ' io« • - so t e £q- - 

. •: . .■ j : ' . x n 

.. . ., .1 i : -‘ . > ' ' 

, . ... . 

/ la ■■ 

: 

* " ■ , .. • , 

. . 







- 230 - 


usually ensure that he is a person who is in a non¬ 
competitive type of business. 

Other Treasury As a branch of the provincial govern- 

Branch Services ment the Treasury Branches undertake 
various services for other government departments. Wherever 
there is a Treasury Branch the Alberta Government Telephones 
and the Alberta Liquor Board accounts are kept with them. The 
Treasury Branches issue and redeem construction industry- 
holiday pay stamps for the Board of Industrial Relations, 
issue truck licenses, auto and drivers* licenses, sell 
insurance for the Alberta Hail Insurance Board, and carry out 
collections at the direction of certain departments. Each 
government department concerned sets up its own procedure to 
be followed by the Treasury Branches regarding method and 
frequency of accounting and remitting of funds collected. 

The Treasury Branches receive commission on the sale of 
insurance, issuance of licenses and control of holiday stamps, 
but other services are provided without charge to the govern¬ 
ment departments. 

The Treasury Branches also assisted establishment of a 
provincial government fire insurance company by providing 
readily available agency facilities. Originally both fire 
and life insurance were transacted by the Alberta Government 
Insurance Office as a branch of the provincial secretary*s 
department. This insurance office has since been replaced by 




x . . V ; .: . ■ ; * : . v. ' j . ... v.<\\ , ..... ... • ■ 

* . ' •-.:.. . . ••• 


...... ■ ' :• ‘I*- 'J ' 

v.\ 7;...or. oaojhrxoB do: 

. ■ , ■' ...,: IV ■.. . £ CiiC t/i V 

, 

t - 4 ; . : -i• . : • •-' : - • •• . . ■ 

J . . 

. , I . 0■■ ■ • • . ' i ■ ■ ■ - ■ - . 0 ’>'• >.r : ; o: 4 X ~ c:H 

-" ' <r 

■ 

■ 

^ ... t 

. 

' 

. 

. 


■ 









. . 













231 


two Crown companies, the Alberta General Insurance Company 
and the Life Insurance Company of Alberta. At one time the 
individual Treasury Branch managers were allowed a share of 
the insurance commission derived from sales, but this 
practice was subsequently abolished and the Treasury Branches 
presently receive such commissions on account. 

The Treasury Branches have also been able to carry out 
foreign exchange transactions for their customers. When the 
Treasury Branches were set up in 1938 foreign exchange was 
not subject to control by federal agencies. Purchases of 
foreign exchange, made by the Treasury Branches acting as 
agent for their customers, were made at current rates 
obtained at chartered banks. For example. If a customer 
received a foreign cheque or bill the Treasury Branches would 
note the banks 1 buying rate, calculate the premium at the 
bank rate, credit the customer with the Canadian equivalent 
and then present the foreign cheque or bill through their 
clearing facilities with the banks. Sales of foreign 
exchange were made through facilities offered by the Canadian 
Pacific and Canadian National express companies. 

With the adoption of foreign exchange control in 1939, 
the Treasury Branches, through an Order“in-Council issued 
by the federal government were appointed by the Foreign 
Exchange Control Board as special agents with limited 
powers to deal In foreign exchange, making settlement through 
banks or express companies as formerly. The limitation of the 


* 

'll- l x> ■■.r.:nr, :• Of; xx r v,-; ■ r xT £x;<x 

. 

+ . ■ ' . . . v X x . x . ■ • ? .. ; ' 

. . . - ; v . 

: • ■■ . 

. 

. x . . . ' '• X'xX 

. * • -■ ■- 

“ . , • 

. •• , , X - * ? 

. . ‘ . <. --O'. t 

, x; /x ' , c . .. / ‘ • - -x-x, j ‘jiu ; xzo, 

. 

» . x ■ ' .0 • ■ ' ■ “ x*; ■ ' a ,.1 ;•<■ c■ xx ;j x: ■' 



- ■ x ' ?: ‘1 . •: , ■ • : • • 

. 


. 

■ 

. 




- 232 


Treasury Branch operations in foreign exchange was confined 
mainly to large commercial transactions when they had to 
deal through the banks to obtain the required foreign exchange 
for their clients. For small commercial transactions, trans¬ 
fer of funds for benevolent remittances, travel funds or 
transactions of a personal nature the Treasury Branches had 
the same powers as the banks. The authority of the banks 
was also limited considerably and both the Treasury Branches 
and the banks had the right to apply to the Foreign Exchange 
Control Board for special authority beyond their limits. 

Bibliography - Chapter VI 

I. Alberta government documents (unpublished): 

Alberta Treasury Branches, Superintendents Circular A2-2 
d/November 2, 1942 and Ibid for January 3, 1949. 

Treasury Branch Accounts , passim. 







' 

■ 

. f’< ■ v ' 

'J v?( 

. ■ 


. 










S >i n 6 



s. 


• 




£ 


* ' 



■ on&o : : 



■ 


■ 







V 






, 




- 








, 

1 j • . ' v. 





. 








a. 































CHAPTER VII 


THE PROVINCIAL MARKETING BOARD 





CHAPTER VII 


THE PROVINCIAL MARKETING BOARD 


The instruments of the Interim Program were supplemented 
in 1939 by more direct attempts to assist Alberta industries 
through the organizations set up under the Alberta Marketing 
Act. The formation of these special developmental groups 
was seen as necessary in order to bring Alberta manufacturers 
and wholesalers into the Program and to retain their support 
before the Treasury Branches were able to undertake loaning 
policies on a large scale. 

In its early stages the Social Credit government 
provided for assistance to, or control of, industry through 
such measures as the Provincial Industries Development Act"*” 
which guaranteed the securities of provincial companies 
with a "capital not in excess of $100,000...having for their 
object the development, processing or manufacturing of any 
natural resources of the province", and an amendment to the 
Department of Trade and Industry Act in the first session of 
the legislature, which gave the power to fix prices in 
general to the government, and the power to fix fuel oil 
prices in particular to the Board of Public Utility Commission¬ 
ers. That the government would probably have to take a direct 


1 : 


Statutes of Alberta . 1936, c. 71. 



















t 




■ '■ - ' t '■ ’ ; ^ -V. ■ r: 






. 


,, * 




. • ^ , , , 


• 




< ' • ■■ 

' 

* 








. . , ' .. t .. _ _ . 








- 235 


hand in marketing and development in the province seems to 

have been realized in such early measures as the Fuel Oil 
3 

Licensing Act which permitted the "lieutenant-governor-in¬ 
council to authorize any minister to engage on behalf of the 

province in the business of wholesale and retail distribution 

4 

of fuel oil, lubricating oils and greases"* 

The Alberta Marketing Act of 1939 (or as it was formally 
termed, "an Act respecting the marketing of natural products 
and other commodities and to provide for the regulation 
thereof within the province",) was typical of Interim Program 
legislation in that it set up a body which was organized 
immediately for specific purposes. 

5 

Sections (1) and (2) of the Act read as follows x 

(1) For the purpose of providing producers, manuf¬ 
acturers, distributors and consumers in the Province with 
the means of buying and selling goods, wares, merchandise 
and natural products at a price which is fair and equifc - 
able, the Lieutenant Governor-in-Council may constitute a 
Board to be known as "The Provincial Marketing Board" 
which shall be a body corporate and shall be empowered to 
buy and sell and deal in any goods, wares, merchandise and 
natural products, or any of them whatsoever, either by 
broker, factor, or agent for any person in the acquisition 
or disposition of any goods, wares, merchandise or natural 
products... (italics mine) 

(2) With the approval of the Lieutenant Governor-in- 
Council the Provincial Board is empowered to engage in any 
or all of the following businesses, namely, manufacturing, 
producing, processing, handling or distributing of any of 
the goods, wares, merchandise or natural products...and to 
transact all acts and things which a natural person 
engaged in any such business has the capacity or power to 


3: Statutes of Alberta , 1936, c. 68. 

4 : Ibid , s. 33. 

5: Statutes of Alberta . 1939, c. 3, s. 1, or Revised 

Statutes of Alberta , 1942, Vol. Ill, c. 253. 











! 










* 


I 


r ,? 


■ 

, 

■ 




. 

■;.i ■ : . £ - .. 

, 

; ' 

t 

:: 

. . . 


- - ' 

- 

t : - A : ■ e 

- 

* . 4 ■ * e 






, 


" . . 


■■ ■ 


,L; 


**■ 




236 


transact, including the borrowing of money for any of 
the...purposes. 

Activities of the Armed with the above powers the 

Marketing Board Provincial Marketing Board, supplementary 

to the Treasury Branches, undertook the promotion of the 
immediate objectives of the Interim Program, together with 
assistance measures for Alberta manufacturers, businesses, and 
farmerso In connection with the Interim Program the Marketing 
Board endeavored to extend the use of vouchers by opening 
channels with manufacturers for merchants who were unable to 
replenish their supplies with Alberta-made goods. Through 
their transactions with manufacturers the Marketing Board 
tried to promote the use of vouchers by accepting them in 
payment for materials obtained for manufacturers, and by 
encouraging the manufacturers to deal In them* 

As a section of the Department of Trade and Industry the 
Marketing Board undertook the main promotional activities of 
the Interim Program at the wholesale and manufacturing levels, 
and the first manufacturers» contracts were to have been 
signed with the Minister of Trade and Industry rather than 
with the Provincial Treasurer* The Marketing Board appears 
to have been successful in selling the I n terim Program to 
manufacturers in the province during the promotional campaign 
in 1941, but it had considerably less success in dealing with 
wholesalers * S 

6: Cf. Provincial Marketing Board, Manufacturers of Alberta 

Trade-Marked Goods , Edmonton, 1941, ££ pp* 








« . . , 

... 


:‘G - . • , 


. "1 \_ 




•OU ■ 

t 



; -M .. 

■J 



; o: . . .. ■; . 


. 







. 












■ 










' 



go Cciov-'y^q go" 

, 

• . ’ . . . /• 










' : G .. . c : 



















. 






■ 

•: ' • : 


,:g : a;■; ' v< -. c. 


r ' . ' ' s • ' f • 

, ... .. 

. ' .• " » ' . : : 

. , , . . . 





237 


The Marketing Board*s assistance and developmental 
programs gradually overshadowed its other activities, and 
since 1943 they have formed the core of its operations. 

These activities took three main forms; (1) the provision 
of small Alberta manufacturers with the economies of large 
scale by buying raw materials in large quantities for re¬ 
sale to them, (2) the reduction of prices by removing the 
distributor’s, wholesaler’s or other middleman’s markup 
from a transaction, and (3) during World War II and after¬ 
wards the obtaining of materials for Alberta manufacturers 
affected by shortages. 

Achievement of the first two objectives was based on the 
particular circumstances under which many small Alberta 
manufacturers operated. In these instances the manufacturer 
had to buy his raw materials In small lots from a wholesaler 
and in turn had to market the completed product by re-selling 
it to a distributor. Thus the small manufacturer was often 
faced with the problem of obtaining materials at a relatively 
high price from a wholesaler and then obtaining a relatively 
small return because he had to market the product through a 
distributor. To overcome these disadvantages the Marketing 
Board would buy a carload of required raw materials for one 
or more small manufacturers, place them in a warehouse, and 
the manufacturers could draw the materials as required, paying 
the Marketing Board for each withdrawal. Distribution of the 
small manufacturers* products was to be aided by advertising 


. 

* 

. 

* 


: 







- 








, 


L 




* 


■ 





258 


7 

of Alberta-made goods and by encouraging merchants to 
accept Alberta manufactured goods through the voucher 
system. 

Subdivision of the The Marketing Board system was 

Board®s Activities expanded in December 1942 with the organ¬ 
ization of Marketing Services Ltd. as a "Crown" corporation 
under Part III of the Alberta Marketing Act which authorized 
formation of "Marketing Corporations". The setting up of 
Marketing Services Ltd. subdivided the functions of the 
original Marketing Board and left the latter as a supervisory 
policy body. The Marketing Board held all the "shares" in 
the Crown corporations formed under this plan and the shares 
were in the custody of the Provincial Treasurer in the name of 
the Marketing Board. Marketing Services Ltd. was in turn 
divided into two subsidiary groups: the Implement Parts 
Distributors* and a Wholesale Division. The Prairie Woollen 
Mills at Magrath, situated about 50 miles north of the Montana 
border, were later registered as a Crown Corporation under 
the Marketing Board. 

Implement Parts Distributors had as its chief function 
the reduction of prices on machinery repair parts to farmers, 
machinery users and in some instances to implement parts 
dealers. The provision of this service was based on conditions 

Readers may remember the displays of Alberta-made goods 
in manufacturers® buildings at summer fairs throughout 
the province. A "buy Alberta trade-marked goods week" 
was another publicity device in 1941. 


7 






' 



- 

. 

. 

. 

. 

* * 

. 

■ e 

. 

. 

’ 

: 

. 




259 - 


arising out of th© depression (see Chapter I) and World War 

II* Users of machinery, unable to replace their equipment, 

were faced with high costs of repairs and replacement parts. 

As machinery deteriorated repairs became more expensive, and 

as the war progressed parts became scarcer. 

The objective of the Implement Parts Distributors, 

through depots located at Edmonton, Calgary, Red Deer and 

Lethbridge, appears to have been not to displace other 

implement parts distributors, but to undercut their prices 

on scarce parts by amounts varying from 15 to 35$. Through 

their contacts with brokers and manufacturers* agents 

(particularly in the United States) this branch of th© 

Marketing Services was apparently able to accomplish this 

objective to some extent in centres where depots were located. 

Reductions in price were obtained by Implement Parts 

Distributors by purchasing parts in large quantities and by 

obtaining discounts through payment in cash. 

As a result of these activities. Marketing Board officials 

claim that their ample inventories of some scarce parts during 

the war provided supplies for many Implement dealers, and even 

some wholesalers who were formerly in opposition to their 

scheme. After the War the IPD continued to distribute parts 

in short supplyj the extent of their activities for one year 

8 

is shown in their accounts as at December 31, 1947, when 
implement parts inventories on hand amounted to $137,977.69 

8* Public Accounts of Alberta, 1948, pp. 260-263. 




' c;-; • ' ■ & •’ 

„ 

t ■ 

. 

■ ;i ■ ■ • *■ 1 

? 

* 

‘ • ' 

, 

^ \ ' | . .A 

* 

c ■ '• < . 




- 240 


and parts distributed during the year amounted to $114,469. 

After the war conditions of short supply were gradually 
overcome, and the general prosperity of farmers and other 
machinery users changed the situation. New machinery models 
appeared on the market and users were able to buy them. With 
a higher percentage of new machinery in operation the turn¬ 
over in parts was reduced to some extent, and most users 
could afford to replace the parts they required. Turnover 
was reduced to a sufficient extent by 1950 that on November 
28 of that year a Social Credit caucus at Edmonton was 
informed by the minister of industries and labor of the 

governments decision to close down the Implement Parts 
9 

depots. 

The Prairie Woollen Mills at Magrath were taken over in 
1942 by the Marketing Board on the authority of the Provincial 
Treasurer who had been the chief creditor of the woollen 
mills before they had become insolvent under private ownership® 
The Marketing Board continued to operate the woollen mills 
until 1949 when a Crown Corporation was formed by authority 
of the Marketing Act, making the firm a subsidiary of the 
Board instead of being under its direct operation® 

The Wholesale Division of Marketing Services Ltd. has 
operated chiefly to relieve shortages of materials and to 
aid in distribution of completed products. Examples of the 
Wholesale Division’s activities since the war include the 

9; The Edmonton Journal , Wednesday, November 29, 1950* 




*- 


* «. 

' 

■ 

. 

. 

, . . . - - 

. 

-V . 

t ' . . * 

# 

' 

, 

■ 

' X L 

• s :r - \ 

* 

* 

• • 1 . 

. 


. 




- 241 


obtaining of scarce plumbing materials (in 1947 to the amoun t 
10 

of $165,922), supplying housing materials from dismantled 
wartime air fields in Alberta, and a $1,000,000 project of 
dismantling army huts at Dawson Creek, British Columbia, for 
reassembly at Edmonton as temporary housing units. 

Other activities of the Marketing Board have included* 
the patenting and marketing of various mechanical innovations 
by individuals in the province, management of the provincial 
governments oil sands project at Bitumount, the operation 
of an insulation plant (‘'Hock Wool’ 1 insulation), and operation 
as an agent for the provincial government in various other 
capacities, including the disposal of used motor vehicles and 
other equipment. 

Financing of the Under Clause 15 (1) of the Alberta 

Marketing Groups Marketing Act, the Marketing Board was 
“empowered to borrow from the Provincial Treasurer from time 
to time such sums as it may require for the purpose of trans¬ 
acting business, provided always that the aggregate amount of 
such borrowings shall not...exceed the sum of $25,000“. The 
initial sum was provided out of the General Revenue Fund of 
the province, and the Marketing Board f s operations were sub¬ 
sequently financed by the Treasury Branches through advances 
mad© as agent of the Provincial Treasurer, the advances 
being authorized by Orders-in-Council. 

10: Public Accounts of Alberta . 1948. That year they sold 

$97,560 worth of plumbing" materials and had $66,562 on 
hand in inventories on December 51. 







242 


The Crown Corporations were financed under Part III 
of the Marketing Act allowing the Provincial Treasurer to 
provide these corporations with amounts up to $100,000; a 
subsequent amendment increased the amounts to $200,000 for 
each corporation. These sums represent the initial 
appropriations and since then operational financing has 
been by means of Treasury Branch loans. The Marketing 
Services groups have covered their operating costs by 
charges made to merchants and manufacturers for services and 
supply of goods. 

Issuing of shares in these Crown Corporations is merely 
a formality to establish their ownership. In the public 
accounts the authorized share capital for Marketing Services 
Ltd* is '*10,000 shares with a par value of $10 each".'*’ 1 The 
provincial auditor describes an issue in 1947 as follows: 

"The Corporation issued to the Provincial Marketing Board 100 
shares of capital stock for which no value was received. This 
transaction is not recorded and is not reflected in...the 
balance sheet." Dividend policy is declared by the Lieut¬ 
enant Governor-in-Council and surpluses are transferred to the 
General Revenue Fund of the province. According to the Market¬ 
ing Act the "Lieutenant-governor in Council may order that the 

cash surplus or any part thereof may be paid into and form 

15 

part of the General Revenue Fund". This transfer would take 

11: Public Accounts of Alberta . 1948, p. 261. 

12; Ibid, p. 262. 

15: Revised Statutes of Alberta , 1942, c. 255, Part III, 

1959, s. 21. 






. 


. 

. 



. • ' ■ ■ 

- 

, ' ; , ■: . r~:j .. ! j.J . "i t ' 

V ' -i ' • * 1 * ■ ■ 

* 

- • 0 ■ * 

. 

- 

. 

* 


.. . t 














245 


place only if the cash-on-hand balance had been large over 
a long period and appeared to be an inactive account. As 
a result the Marketing Board usually governs its operations 
so that the cash balance does not remain large or inactive* 

Financing of To obtain raw materials in bulk for a 

Transactions manufacturer the Marketing Services usually 
obtain a loan from the Treasury Branches in the form of a 
demand note with a specified time limit, such as 90 days. 
Security for the loan is provided by the consignment itself, 
a cash deposit made by the manufacturer with the Marketing 
Services, and the accumulated profits of the Marketing Services. 
The interest charge made from these Treasury Branch loans is 
usually around 4$. 

The Marketing Services deals with each manufacturer 
individually. In each transaction the manufacturer contracts 
to pay a deposit on the shipment (possibly 10$) in cash and 
the deposit is held as security by the Marketing Services. A 
brokerage fee of 2 % is levied by the Marketing Services when 
the stock is received by them, and the inventories are resold 
at their cost plus this 2$ fee. 

Upon arrival the materials are placed in a bonded ware¬ 
house or yard by a bonded agent. The manufacturer draws from 
the stockpile the necessary materials for his activities over 
certain periods; he receives an invoice of the goods he 
withdraws from Marketing Services and pays them for that 
amount. At the end of each month the manufacturer pays an 





, 

' 










. 

, ' 

, 

■ 


. 


. 


. 


. 












■ 

. 








244 


interest charge of one half of one percent to Marketing 
Services on the remainder of the stock still in the ware¬ 
house as at the end of that month. Therefore the Marketing 
Services does not recover interest costs on transactions with 
quick turnovers, but they make the amount back on transactions 
with manufacturers who have a slower turnover. An example of 
the former is the flour industry where the stock of wheat is 
often used up within a month; an example of the latter is in 
the textile industry where a six months’ turnover is normal. 

Because of its stake in the transaction the Marketing 
Board may exercise a certain amount of control or issue 
’’advice* 1 in the disposal and handling of the inventories by 
the manufacturer or tradesman. The Marketing Board, for 
instance, may specify the commodities in which the raw 
materials to be advanced should be used, or where and what 
contracts should be undertaken in the selling of the finished 
product. The object of these controls is to ensure that the 
businessman is undertaking a profitable transaction, and at 
the same time to protect the Marketing Board’s investment in 
the original materials. The extent to which this control is 
applied depends upon the nature and ability-to-pay of the 
individual firm; the control and advice are usually exercised 
in instances where the Marketing Services has invested in 
inventories that make up 60$ or more of the invested capital 
of the firm. 

In the event of default on the part of a manufacturer. 


. 

. 


t 

.. . 


- ^ 

^ . ' • 

. 

■ ,u v- ■ ■ - 5 ;•: ' n: t x ;; v ' rOv- : CXX; .;X X.xIxT . 

. 

:. ■ £ ■ 

■ 

■ • • 

* 


t . j ■■■ M :• x ; ■ ■, 1 x lx ; lx 




- 245 


or the closing down of a firm, the Marketing Board retains 
any cash deposits advanced by the manufacturer on his 
account, and the stocks still in the hands of the Marketing 
Services are kept in their own name. Under these conditions 
the Treasury Branch loans are repaid from the cash assets of 
the Marketing Services. If the Marketing Services are able 
to sell the inventories on hand to another manufacturer and 
their investment in the stock is realized, the previously 
defaulting manufacturer is paid the proceeds from the sale 
or receives his original cash deposit. 

Summary and Since the discontinuation of the original 

Conclusions Interim. Program the Marketing Board has confined 
its activities to assisting various firms in the province, 
either through its aid to small-scale manufacturers, the 
obtaining of scarce materials, or assistance to new enterprises. 
By taking security that is not acceptable to banks the Marketing 
Board through the Treasury Branches has to some extent attempted 
to aid those businesses who would not ordinarily be able to 
obtain assistance from the banks. In the face of high post¬ 
war prices the Marketing Board has also attempted to keep 
costs for certain manufacturers as low as possible. In 
November 1950, about fifteen n large fl manufacturers* inven¬ 
tories were declared to be in operation in addition to 
several smaller ones. 

The Marketing Board organizations had two characteris¬ 
tics typical of Interim Program institutions: (1) the 




' 

‘ . . ;; ' r ' — ' v 0,i. : C-'J V C 

- 

' 

. 

' . ■ 





. ' 

■ w 

. 


y 

. 

. 

< • ' -/ . : Va ■ & - i«K ■ 















■ * - 



■ 


■ 



■ 









* , 

■; . 






- 246 


relatively small scale of their activities while attempting 
to carry out their original purpose, (2) the relatively 
large scale of their operations when changing economic 
conditions made their original purpose no longer necessary. 

In the first year of its operations the Marketing 
Board sold only $12,765 worth of goods and had $49,888 worth 
of inventories on hand on December 31, 1939. In spite of the 
small scope of its operations within the first year it had 
recorded a net profit of $627.21,which continued to rise 
to $8,709.93 by 1950, while the overall activities of the 
combined organizations has reached the million dollar mark. 

The most ambitious phase of the Marketing Board f s 
program was the original objective of providing economies 
of large scale buying to small manufacturers® During a 
depression there is a case for local and provincial govern¬ 
ments subsidizing or supporting home industries. Support of 
marginal producers under such conditions may be justifiable 
on the grounds that the small manufacturer may be forced 
into a marginal position because of the weakness of his 
working capital position. Also, assistance enabling them to 
maintain production helps to alleviate the unemployment 
problem. Prom a social point of view subsidization of small 
producers may be thought necessary to avoid over-concentration 

14: Public Accounts of Alberta , 1940, p. 254. 

15: Ibid , 1950, pp. 249-258, This figure refers to net 

profit of Marketing Services Ltd. Magrath Mills had 
a net loss of $2,199.10. 









* 

t * 

# 

; j 

. 

* 




, 






* 







■ 
















. 




. 


i 

* , > 

. 







* 











* 

. 

. 


» 

. 

















247 


of power in that industry* 

With the return of prosperity only the last argument 
retains force. But it is doubtful whether the Marketing 
Board has been primarily concerned with this objective of 
combatting over-concentration. Instead its policies have 
been linked to the general objective of the Social Credit 
government to encourage Alberta industries. Since World War 
II the trend of the Marketing Board*s operations has appeared 
to be away from its original function of aiding the small 
manufacturer. As a result of the need to replace materials 
in short supply services were provided for manufacturers and 
producers of all sizes. 

Recent activities of the Marketing Board have consisted 
to a large extent, of obtaining supplies for oil firms in the 
form of casing, sheet metal, cast iron pipe, castings, 
cylinders, steel bars and tubing. The Marketing Board has 
attempted to obtain some of these supplies from European 
countries with devalued currencies to reduce costs and in 
some instances to increase quality. However, this assistance 
has not been made to small "wildcat’* operators to a large 
extent; service to the oil Industry has chiefly been to 
medium-sized and even to the big international companies 
whose activities are likely to have a more permanent effect 
on the development of Alberta. 

The supplying of cheaper machinery parts through 
Implement Parts Distributors remained on a fairly small scale 









* 












■ 




. 

' : • c ’, 

• OxJ 

p 




. 








■. .. ;■ . t : ■ ' ... 

. 




• ■ t 


’ . r . . 






* 















248 


from its beginning and was chiefly concerned with reducing 

one particular, although important cost item of farmers 

during difficult times. When prosperity returned and 

farmers were able to buy new machinery and pay for their own 

parts this subsidiary was discontinued, apparently without 

making a permanent reduction in machinery parts prices. 

The activities of the Marketing Board in operating the 

Magrath Mills, and control by the Marketing Board of the 

policies of some firms, can hardly be considered as a movement 

in the direction of socialist policies on the part of the 

provincial government. The Magrath Mills were given a degree 

of autonomy by being formed into a Crown corporation in 1949, 

and it is likely that if they become profitable the government 

16 

will be willing to resell the mills to private interests. 
Control of a firm’s policies, as carried out by the Marketing 
Board when they have extended materials valued at more than 
60% of the firm’s investment, is only of a temporary nature 
and is applied only when necessary. 

With the return of quasi-wartime shortages in 1950-51 
the Marketing Board will again probably turn to the supplying 
of materials which are difficult to obtain. _Three possible 
criticisms might arise concerning such a policy in wartime; 

(1) through the prestige of a government agency the organ¬ 
ization might be able to obtain essential materials for non- 

16: According to Marketing Board officials, one disadvantage 

of operating the Magrath Mills in competition with 
private firms is that full details of the mills’ 
operations are outlined in the Public Accounts. 



' 


4 




. , 

* 









- 



. 

■ 




. 



1 : ■; :■>; 

' 


' 


t .- 





- 

. 

. 



... \ . : : 3 o':. . 


■ 





l - 






. , : ■ . 

. • - , *... ? *■ 

.. ^ ■■ ' ,o ■ ' .1 ■" v 

, t ’ 1 

, 

1 ... ~ - 

. 

. 

- . . 

« - »" - J 

* . . •• - " ■ 



- 249 


essential local industries causing shortages in war industries, 
(2) such an agency could resell scarce goods at a high price 
forming an unofficial government black market for sale of 
materials to needy local producers, or (3) the method of 
distributing scarce supplies might be based to some extent 
on political patronage* There is no indication that these 
criticisms have applied or are likely to apply to the Alberta 
agencies; they merely represent possibilities in the 
operation of a government agency of this nature* 

A question that should be asked in regard to the 
Marketing Board f s present organization is: do their activities 
represent a duplication of existing private services available 
to firms? Firstly, as mentioned above, the Marketing Board is 
able to extend direct assistance at a fairly low cost by 
providing specific needs for firms who would ordinarily not 
be able to obtain general assistance from the banks or 
Treasury Branches* The extent to which this service has 
been applied and whether or not it has been extended to 
inefficient firms is difficult to estimate. 

However, the Marketing Board may have three advantages 
in this direction: (1) it can provide for specific needs of 
firms who have exhausted their bank credit, or who for other 
reasons cannot obtain bank loans, provided they can supply a 
cash deposit; (2) the Marketing Board*s recent trend towards 
dealing with medium-sized or larger firms may mean assistance 
to fairly efficient producers who do not have a large supply 


« : S - . ' ■ ■ - J ! ; 

o 1 t ■ * : : . r t; . * . jfu i-K In ■ i; r : :: '■inn : 

■ 

; . . 

n 

' 

, 

' 

t 

. ■ 

* 

. 

: < 

, 

. 




2b0 


of capital, and (3) through its extensive brokerage connections 
in Canada, the United States, and overseas, the Marketing 
Board may enable firms who would not ordinarily use inter¬ 
national connections to have access to a wider variety of 
materials in quality and quantity. If this service is 
performed efficiently it should save the ordinary local 
firm considerable time and effort in the obtaining of 
materials* On the other hand, a reluctance to incur a 
deficit might cause the Marketing Board to restrict 
operations only to those companies that appear profitable, 
leaving for instance some new firms who would not necessarily 
be inefficient, without assistance. Variations in the amount 
of the cash deposit required by the Marketing Board when 
undertaking a transaction may also tend to set a minimum 
limit to the size of firms dealing with them. 

It appears that the provincial government has retained 
the Marketing Board organization for several probable reasons 
or combination of reasons. Firstly, these organizations may 
be considered useful in aiding the development of an already 
expanding economy In Alberta, supplementary to the promotion¬ 
al and assistance programs of the Industrial Development 
Board and the Alberta Industrial Corporation. Secondly, the 
government may feel that the Marketing Board is providing a 
useful service to Alberta firms through its buying 
facilities abroad; thirdly, the Marketing Board groups may 
be kept as a framework suitable for extending specific 



?. at: x a) 





a a aa/x i 1 

a, .a 

a a (<S 

) a 

.aa ■ . lx'a V 

X 0 




:/ : .: 

- 

. 

a 18 

x x/ i 


, 


- . 







' 


■ m x a. axi lx. 



!V * 



.. i ' a-: aV 




^nnaO la ft aat 






...a. a 

* 

■ 


IBj. ' 

, a .a ©Xi/aa? 


. 



1 

l 


, 


..;. -a 

'a 

- 


1.;,, ;i ? a-x or* <: ■■ ,.../ Iclaa aa.:/ a-a qo m: ■ at 

* 

: ‘X;- . : ^ V... ' xB. XaB'' a. c :■/ I'.Li U _L a il X 3 D 

.. v : _ ; t - . v.' . a.-. .. v .aaaa a-aa: aaaia. r ix7 V^-' 

.. , . i. ^ ; ; 

.. ... . X _ >■■ .. : : $: < . _ .a* x: ■? -v c, j ‘7a 

x ' .<■ r a, c ... ' >y -aa u. •,,, 

, . . ■ : : ■ . a 1 1 ,, •- a. " a:; a \ a : 1 : • : . 

• , . a. ; a ■ ■ .x ; :a . a a a i 1 a-' aa- .a.' :■ xx; 

■ar,; a • alxlaaaaq • aa-a 1 aa "a/a a, :•... *>s a-. --.aa : >x.s^a ;: n:ia axiMB; sr^ 

■ 

t 

- xx"a. ' : x a. ; ■ . ; " - a: * ' J aa a ■ ' ■ a a 

-r ■ ■ ; :■ '" .. ' " ' • - \ ■ ■" • •' o : 

a x -a a ■ la aa.- r -a . lx- - ox,; saaa^ aia a x laa: la 

.. 

ax-; ; .... a 1 -7 X • :■ : ' a a v. A5.:>«' r »a,/ ; H l'?VC\ 

... . ... .a. ' . ~ 

. , , aa. ... a : 

If/laa: -1 lla-aa X.x a .aax,.aea.a/1 a, i-.l/ t- 







251 


assistance to industry in the event of a future depression, 
or fourthly, the organization may be maintained merely 
because it has continually shown a net profit in its 
operations, if the existence of a net profit is considered 
sufficient justification for continuing a government 
service. However, the small scale of its operations in its 
first stages, and the limitations of its present-day 
activities to specific services seem to indicate that while 
the Marketing Board’s operations are valuable to certain 
firms or sections of industry, its general effect on the 
development of the Alberta economy as a whole has not been 
extensive* 


Bibliography - Chapter VII 


I. Alberta government documents: 

Revised Statutes of Alberta, 1942, Vol, III, c. 253, 

The Alberta Marketing Act . 

Provincial Marketing Board, Eleventh Annual Report . 
Edmonton, 1949, 43 pp. 

Provincial Marketing Board, Directory of Made in Alberta 
Goods and Alberta Manufacturers, Edmonton, 1940, 96 pp* 

Provincial Marketing Board, Manufacturers of Alberta 
Trade-Marked Goods , Edmonton, 1941, 22 pp. 

Public Accounts of Alberta , 1940 to 1950, statements 
operations of Marketing Board and its subsidiaries. 

For preliminary legislation to Alberta Marketing Act 
see Statutes of Alberta , 1936, Chapters 68 and 71. 

II. Other Publications: 


Edmonton Journal, Province Decides to Close Implement 
Parts Depots , Edmonton, Wednesday, November 29, 1950. 






















02 


•J '■ .- 


v : ■; ^' 


' V. : _ .J ■- : . I 

. 



- :: ■ -I -0 sj ,>d 



B 


■V 01 ;.; 






; : ... •: . 33 .. ' - .£ 


i. 01 0 ; : 


- ' - 


. 




. 


• t . ■. 














: ''*»a 




i t 

k 


? 


. . .' : . : r, : r; •. .l-.. ' • 

. ' ’ 'V7. 7 / • . .. *:/> t. ..L. 










CHAPTER VIII 


CONCLUSIONS 








252 


CHAPTER VIII 
CONCLUSIONS 


I. The interim P ro gram 

The achievements and failures of the interim Program 
must be considered in terms of its immediate and ultimate 
objectives. Although the ultimate objectives are open to a 
certain amount of theorizing (for example, regarding eventual 
payment of a basic dividend) they may be regarded for all 
purposes here in the light of the aims given by the Social 
Credit Board, The first of these ultimate objectives was 
to ^provide the people,».with alternative facilities for 
gaining access to their credit resourcesBy rl alternative 
facilities” the writer was probably referring to the establish¬ 
ment of a provincial system of bookkeeping, or to loans which 
would be granted by a provincial credit institution. The 
second objective was to place at the disposal of the people 
,! an institution under their own control so that they...could 
release themselves from the domination of the private money 
monopoly 1 ’. This institution, the interim Program provided 
through establishment of the Treasury Branches. An ©valuation 
of the Treasury Branches as a provincial credit institution 
forms Part II of this chapter. 

Ij Social Credit Board, Alberta ! s Treasury Branches . 

Edmonton, (no date), p. 9. 


2 : 


Ibid , p. 11 













* 

sc; ■ . . ... • - . i 

* ■ 

« 


*. * 

j" : ■ ■■ .. ; A , . . .. i , - ' ' 

. 

. 

» 

‘ 








253 


Two immediate objectives of the Interim Program as a 
means of accomplishing its long run purposes were (1) to 
stimulate recovery of the Alberta economy, and (2) to increase 
the purchasing power of consumers. Both of these immediate 
aims were clearly designed as a means of obtaining public 
support as an essential first step in the overall scheme. 

An estimation of the extent to which the Interim Program 
achieved the first of these immediate ends is practically 
impossible to undertake, chiefly because the Program coin¬ 
cided with a general return to prosperity after 1938. Never¬ 
theless it is possible by examining the methods used, to 
gauge whether or not such measures alone would have been 
likely to effect recovery. The main link in this means of 
promoting recovery was the consumers* bonus. Payment of the 
bonus was designed to help bring about recovery through the 
stimulation of demand for Alberta-made goods, and at the same 
time it was to provide additional purchasing power to the 
public to buy more goods. An appraisal of the two immediate 
aims of the Program rests essentially on a study of the 
consumers* bonus as a stimulating factor in the economy. 

Our first step will be a consideration of the extent to 
which the first ultimate objective of "alternative facilities" 
was attained through the voucher system. Previous chapters 
have outlined the immediate and technical reasons for the 
rise and decline of the voucher system to its present status. 
This account will be concerned with the attributes of the 





- 

• {. ... - 

. ■.. v 

■ 

. 

* 

' . 

• ; : ' .... . • . ■; C .. .. ! ■ . i 

- 

*. •••• ' 

‘ ■ 

. 

..i, •: 

■ 

. 

■ f ., • ■ ■ '■■■■ >.-■■■ •• ■ - 

el - • 

* : . . '. 



254 


vouchers as a medium of exchange. The three other conven¬ 
tional characteristics of money need not concern us here 
because of the voucher system’s dependency on the established 
money system. 

As a unit of value the purchasing power of the vouchers 
was according to the purchasing power of the dollar and the 
existing price level at the time. Again, as a standard of 
deferred payments the vouchers merely followed the 
vicissitudes of the domestic currency. However, up to the 
abandonment of the restricted system in 1943 the vouchers 
could not be considered as being on an exact par with money 
as a store of value. Through the penalties and restrictions 
imposed on the conversion of vouchers into cash, the voucher 
balances became less liquid than corresponding cash 
balances. Obversely they had the characteristic of most 
partially illiquid assets of earning a higher rate of return 
on savings accounts than the rates paid on cash savings 
balances. In practice, the lenient conversion regulations 
actually placed most voucher balances in the same liquid 
category as money as a store of value. But the degree of 
liquidity depended only partially on such regulations. The 
main determinant was the restricted use of the vouchers 
stemming from their lack of general acceptability as a 
medium of exchange. 

As a medium of exchange the vouchers may be studied 
on the basis of two criteria; (1) general acceptability. 


* 

* 

. 

. 



t 


. 

. 


• I ■ - ■ 






i i. . i 

. 

« ■ 












: . ' 






- 255 


(2) facilitation of trade. The many factors governing 
general acceptability of the vouchers by businessmen and 
consumers in the province have been outlined in detail in 
previous sections. However, the onus of general acceptability 
did not fall entirely upon the public. In its first stages 
the circulation of the vouchers was confined to retail and 
consumer transactions only. When provision was made to 
extend the system to other sectors of the economy in 1941, 
the category of Alberta trade-marked goods, being a good 
deal smaller than the previous classification reduced the 
number of goods which were eligible for the bonus and the 
types of goods that could be purchased with vouchers. 

Widespread acceptance of the vouchers was further 
hindered by their indivisibility and their cumbersomeness 
in use. The vouchers were indivisible because they were 
non-negotiable, i.e., a single voucher could be used only 
for one transaction, then it had to be deposited in a 
Treasury Branch account. Closely related to their indivis¬ 
ibility was the problem of cumbersomeness. Retailers had 
to keep records of the proportion of Alberta-made goods, 
vouchers had to be converted to buy inventories, several 
types of withdrawal were used in different accounts, identity 
of consumers had to be verified and Alberta goods computed 
at the time of a purchase, and so on. Steps to overcome 
these unwieldy features in the form of monthly accounts, 
helped to reduce these cumbersome attributes, but this method 


. 




. 

. ‘ ■ ' ‘ 

- 

. 



* 



. • J . . .. , -1 

t ■ 





* 





!; : 


. 


. , „ 


. 


. 

, v„ ■ ■ - ■ . k : : ■ - ■ ' 4 i l&'Til Ou 


, 





■ 


. 



• 








256 


only served to reduce the circulation of the vouchers to one 
or two per month in an account* Admittedly the use of 
monthly accounts did not reduce the extent to which the 
provincial system of bookkeeping was used, and it could be 
argued that the government was concerned with the overall 
use of voucher credit rather than the circulation of the 
vouchers themselves. But a widespread use of monthly 
accounts would have reduced the general public*s contact 
with the vouchers in daily transactions and it may have 
contributed to the impression that the vouchers were not 
widely used. Despite the incentive of the bonus the vouchers, 
particularly in the cities, proved to be unwieldy in compar¬ 
ison with other media of exchange. 

Facilitation of trade through the voucher system was 
encouraged by the consumers* bonus on the one hand, and 
discouraged by the unwieldy nature of the system on the other. 
When the vouchers were in their ascendancy their acceptance 
by some merchants undoubtedly increased the trade of those 
retailers over the merchants who would not accept them. 

But this was a shift in the distribution of trade rather 
than a general facilitation of it. Because the system was 
at no time expanded to all sectors of the economy the 
progress of trade would actually have been hindered if 
provision had not been made for conversion into standard 
currency. Even if the voucher system had been used as a 
general medium of exchange within the province its scope 


- 

, 









• 




■ 


4 

* 

. • 

, 

...... . • r 

. ■ , • •; ■ : 




■ 






. 




. 



... . « ' '• 






# 





- 257 


would have been restricted by the needs of transactions 
outside Alberta. 

In facilitating trade the vouchers have proven useful 
for transactions in rural areas of the province, particularly 
in the towns. As noted in Chapter IV the circulation of 
vouchers in many of the small towns of the province has not 
declined to any great extent and in one or two instances 
circulation has actually increased. The vouchers are 
particularly adaptable to the personal, unhurried nature of 
rural or town business, and the absence of exchange charges 
for their use anywhere in the province gives them an 
advantage over the use of ordinary cheques. To this extent, 
the Interim Program has been successful in weaning fairly 
large numbers of people in the province away from the use 
of conventional methods of exchange. In this respect the 
voucher system may be considered as an alternative medium 
to some sections of the public* it provides a cheaper 
method of exchange than chartered bank cheques; there are 
no restrictions on voucher conversions any more; and 
through being non-negotiable they provide an additional 
safety feature. 

On the basis of their circulation, chiefly in the 
rural districts, it might be argued that the vouchers form 
a method of discrimination against people in larger centres 
by providing a cheaper medium of exchange adaptable only 














■ 











„ 

























t . 









. 




- 

* 























- 258 


to small town transactions. But the failure of the 
vouchers in the larger towns and the cities cannot be 
attributable entirely to mechanical reasons. Such social 
and political factors as antipathy towards social credit 
schemes (during the 1930»s at any rate) probably influenced 
voucher circulation as much, if not more than the technical 
causes. In addition, it is possible that the institution 
of the Interim Program after three years of dispute occurred 
at a. time when many people were weary of social credit con¬ 
troversy and doubtful of the efficacy of any such government 
scheme * 

According to the Social Credit Board the object of the 
voucher system was to make alternative credit facilities 
available to the public. Ho?;ever, the voucher system was 
an alternative medium of exchange representing a dollar-for- 
dollar counterpart of existing facilities. In fact, the 
users of the system could not be said to have had access 
to alternative “credit" facilities - except for additional 
purchasing power distributed by the consumers* bonus - until 
the Treasury Branches undertook the creation of credit 
through loaning operations after 1941. And even after the 
institution of credit-creating activities only a relatively 
small number of voucher-users had access to these "alternative 
credit facilities" in the form of loans. 

In evaluating the consumers 1 bonus as a stimulating 
influence in the economy one encounters an immediate and 






. 






. . 





. 

. 






* 





? ■ 

, 





- 












- 


» 

. , .. • .... - 7 

, v ... .... . . 7 ... - .•?;' i... 7 :• 

... 7*7, : . ... . 7 A j . • J 17 ':i& 

, 

- ... ... ? ‘v;o .... . . ■■ 7Liu 

' 

• : . N: ; 7 ; i' - 777 : 77'77l,c i..:.-., 7 c.e i.i' v .; 7 i ,:7 

... 7.' *: ;■ : ./ .7, J. : ; 7.. ' ..7' 777~-,L ‘77 -7. ‘Ac =7;\7;77y A7 7:....;.,. 


. 







* 


, 

7 , M ■ c ' .;v.,7 


259 - 


important limitation: the size of the bonus itself. The 
inducement of recovery by subsidizing consumption through 
issuance of additional purchasing power ordinarily can 
only be applied on a large scale. Even with a given accel¬ 
eration factor an issue of purchasing power is likely to 
have to be large in order to bring about recovery from the 
bottom up. 

A second factor influencing the effectiveness of a 
subsidy on consumption is the distribution of such a 
payment. If the subsidy or bonus is paid to families on 
relief who have very small incomes, or to other unemployed 
who have no incomes, its stimulation effects would tend to 
be greater because the payment would be spent immediately 
rather than be saved. If the subsidy or bonus is paid to 
those who have medium or large-sized incomes its effects 
may be dissipated through saving because it has gone to 
people who tend to have a lower marginal propensity to con¬ 
sume, The Alberta consumers’ bonus, as a small payment 
issued to people who had incomes, fits primarily into the 
latter category. 

Prom the standpoint of increasing consumption the 
Alberta consumers 1 bonus does not appear to have been overly 
significant. Even if a person had a relatively high income 
of #100 a month in 1959, and he spent #80 on goods, of 
which one-third was Alberta-made, he would have received 
only #2.40 in extra purchasing power in the form of voucher 



* 


: 



. 

. 

, 

. 

: 

. 








. 

« . 

, 

. 







260 


credit. The total amount of consumers * bonus outstanding 

from February 1941 to April 1945 was quoted by the 

provincial auditor in 1950 as being $480,738 5 which includes 

the carryover of the 3$ bonus from 1938-41. Over a period 

of seven years the bonus represented an average increase in 

purchasing power of some $68,000 per year. According to 

Alberta Facts and Figures the average retail trade per year 

in the province over the nine years from 1938 to 1946 was 
4 

$253,182,000. It will easily be seen that the bonus by 
itself could not have been expected to bring about a sig¬ 
nificant increase in total sales within the province. More¬ 
over the small amount of the bonus made even the subsequent 
5 % rate ineffective when prosperity returned and people no 
longer had to watch their pennies. 

It might be argued, though, that the intention of the 
bonus was not to increase consumption in an absolute sense 
through an increase in purchasing power, but rather it was 
in conjunction with an advertising campaign, to encourage 
people to buy more aggregate Alberta goods. Even the small 
rebate, it could be argued, would be psychologically 
sufficient to increase overall demand for Alberta goods. 

The first defect in this concept of the bonus arose from a 
technicality in its administration. When the 3 % rate w a s 

3: Public Accounts of Alberta. 1950, p. 233. 

4: Alberta Facts and Figures . 1950, p. 284. 






1 




















i j; . ■ n . • ='. 

. 

*. 

% • 

/ ■ 

* 

% 

I 




. 











, 


















261 


in use it was found that the one-third requirement needed 
for the maximum bonus could be obtained too easily to 
appreciably stimulate demand for Alberta goods* When the 
changes were made in 1941 the range of Alberta trade-marked 
goods was so much smaller that although the bonus and the 
proportion of goods required were higher, it still was not 
likely to boost domestic consumption. At the same time 
where a choice existed between similar products manufactured 
in Alberta and those brought in from other provinces the 
payment of the bonus undoubtedly contributed to increased 
demand for the Alberta brand at the expense of the "imported" 
product. There was probably a shifting in demand to Alberta 
goods in some instances, but the extent of this shift and 
its effects on the provincial economy is difficult to 
estimate. 

The main defect in the "stimulation" argument points 
the way to a basic criticism of the bonus system. When one 
speaks of increasing consumption the first question to be 
answered is, what kind of consumption? This brings us to 
the crucial point in the idea of stimulating consumption in 
a regional economy such as Alberta. Studies over the past 
20 years have shown that consumption in durable consumers 1 
goods fluctuates violently according to changes in income, 
while the consumption of primary consumers’ goods remains 
relatively stable* Now, in 1938 over 75 % of Alberta’s 
industries were devoted to the processing or manufacturing of 








X ' 0 " c ~i" X I ' C<''X K V' • <ij ; 1 




- 




V ., 


v.\,c-u cd .v- j v-M io v.Xo€ 


. ■' 

■ 

. . X ■ .. x r .... : 

’ '.C X ■ *. ' i 

v..' . • ' ■. . .X 1 

d •- 

. . 

. 






: ' - *• , 

' 

. 

? ■ 

» • 


. .. ... X, x. ? .v. ,, ■■-C .''X'V, : xx.Xv ,,;C I. 




. 









- 262 


primary products, including vegetable, animal, textile 

5 

and wood or paper products. Iron and steel goods accounted 
for only 6 % of the value of production, and the remainder 
was made up of chemical non-ferrous metals or other miscel¬ 
laneous items. A similar ratio of production, only 
slightly modified, still holds. Alberta ! s economy, then 
was characterized by production of primary consumers 1 
products a large proportion of which was exported out of the 
province. The remainder of this production, forming the 
necessities of the population, was consumed at home. There¬ 
fore, following through this comparison, it seems evident 
that the bonus was applied to Alberta-made goods the main 
proportion of which was made up of natural products with a 
stable consumption rate. An attempt to encourage people 
with incomes to increase their consumption of Alberta 
primary products by means of a small rebate was not likely 
to meet with success. 

This discussion brings us to a consideration of the 
general idea behind the interim Program and the previously 
attempted social credit plans for recovery in Alberta, 
throughout social credit legislation and the writings of 
Douglas and Aberhart, one finds a general autarchic or 
mercantillstic vein of thinking. Both the proposals of 
Douglas and Aberhart centred on the matter of "control of 


5 : 


Op. Git. , p. 221 






e 

. 








. 

. 1 ‘ • f : .! 




•• » . • 

■ • 

* 

. 

- 

. 

. 

, 




263 


local credit ' 1 5 they viewed the flow of goods to and from 
Alberta as "imports and exports'* across a national 
boundary, and they regarded the province as an association 
of individuals entitled to the control of their own destiny. 
Douglas even went so far in his Interim Report on Alberta 
as to regard all currency or media created outside the 
province as "foreign exchange". The continuity is apparent 
between these concepts and the main features of the Interim 
Program* 

At the same time the Interim Program cannot be 
condemned merely because it was an endeavor to stimulate 
local recovery. Rather, it is a matter of questioning the 
practicability of attempting such a scheme in a region 
which does not have complete political or economic control 
over its own affairs. As we have seen, the Alberta govern¬ 
ment ? s efforts to attain complete control over the province’s 
financial affairs and certain civil matters resulted in dis¬ 
allowance, Any serious attempt to discriminate against or 
to control the marketing of products produced outside the 
province would have brought about retaliation. Even the 
limited scope of the Interim Program aroused virtual boycott 
by wholesalers and extensive opposition from such groups 
as the chambers of commerce. 

Lastly regardless of what attempts were made at self- 
sufficiency an exporting region such as Alberta essentially 
had no alternative but to wait until world prices of their 


' 

$ ,e, , -C". 

. . 


. 

. 

-• , « 

. 



» 

. 




. 










264 


staple products increased and basic incomes in the region 
were again restored. Experience during the 1930 f s has 
shown that the provincial governments can carry out anti¬ 
depression measures only on a limited scale. The onus for 
anti-depression policies fundamentally remains with the 
federal government which has the power and the resources to 
undertake monetary-fiscal or other curative measures on 
national dimensions. 

II. The Treasury Branches 

At the present time the Treasury Branches are in an 
indeterminate position. Their doctrinaire raison d*etre 
has disappeared and they have entered the field of 
competition with the chartered banks equipped only with a 
few years experience in the complicated business of banking. 
While they are closely tied to the government in matters of 
financing and administration the Treasury Branches apparently 
receive little direct support from the government^ and as a 
result they appear to be unsure of what the government 
expects of them. In spite of this somewhat disadvantageous 
situation the Treasury Branches have, albeit on a minor 
scale compared to the banks, expanded their activities 
particularly during the past five years. 

On the basis of this background an appraisal of the 
Treasury Branches will be undertaken from two angles: (1) 
their present operations as a banking institution in com- 




' ' ■ . 

- * . l r V , i. . 

, 


....... ' ~ • - 

. 

. 










. .. ; *1 




. t ' ' ■ - ■ - 






- 265 


petition with the chartered banks, and (2) their current 
role as a provincial government bank and an estimation of 
their potentialities in the future. Such a division will 
have the advantage of separating fact from speculation. 
Although a certain amount of conjecture is included in the 
first part, it will at least be based on reality. The 
second part of the survey will begin from a set of premises 
as to what the role of a provincial government bank ought to 
be, applied to the Treasury Branches as they are. This 
section will include a discussion of the possible disadvan¬ 
tages of a provincial government bank and its potentialities. 

Three broad categories may be used as a basis for com¬ 
paring existing Treasury Branch operations with those of the 
chartered banks: (1) the types of services offered, (2) 
the cost of the services to the public, and (3) the extent 
to which their services are available. 

(1) Types of services offered to the public : In 
addition to standard banking services the Treasury Branches 
provide two kinds of facilities not offered by the banks: 

(1) the agency system, and (2) services for other provincial 
government departments. Through the inexpensive nature of 
the agency system the government was able to expand the 
Treasury Branches throughout the province on a large scale. 
The agency system provided a means of extending banking 
facilities to districts where banks had closed down or to 
centres where they had never been located. Prom the Social 
Credit administration’s viewpoint the agencies were a 



. 

* 

„ 




* 









. 


























. 







~ . ' ' • 

«. ?: •: ' v . . ' ■; c • j. ■ ; v :t - . ' '• ■. •> 

. 

. 

■ 

* *■ 




!•; ft : ■ 

. 

: 








266 


method of conditioning the people in those districts to a 
government banking system. Although they have been estab¬ 
lished in areas that the banks consider unprofitable, the 
low costs of agency operations and the extent to which they 
have been supported by the public have enabled them to show 
consistent profits. 

From the Treasury Branches' standpoint the agencies 
are a considerable asset to the system. According to 
recent statistics the agencies obtain between 13$ and 15$ 
of the total deposits received by the Treasury Branches per 
year. For Instance, in 1947 the Treasury Branches had a 
deposit turnover of more than $197,000,000 of which the 
agencies obtained $27,749,000. In 1948 the agencies had a 
deposit turnover of $32,121,000 out of a total of over 
$208,000,000 received by the system* ^ The chief disadvantage 
of the agencies to the Treasury Branches is the high cash 
reo A uirements needed for their operation, necessitating a high 
proportion of cash reserves on hand in the system. Mailing 
of deposits from the agencies to branches also means that a 
high percentage of cash items are in transit and the average 
amount on deposit within the branches tends to be smaller 
than the actual amount deposited within the entire system. 
Because loaning activities are based on average cash ratios 
both of these factors are contributory to lending 
conservatism. 

6: Treasury Branch Accounts (unpublished). 




. 

- 

■ ;> ..J 

** .. x J . • 

. 

. ' ' ; 0 

o- V . " y. . v /• riti j 

. 





t ' ' . 

. 

. 

0. ■■ * - • • 

. „ . t 

. t , . ■ j 


• .... -O 










\ ' . .' . : : . a r ... 

, 




* 
















267 


Prom the viewpoint of the public the agencies are 

providing an important, although limited, service to the 

rural areas of the province. According to Alberta Facts and 

Figures , in 1949 Treasury Branch agencies, sub-branches and 

branches were located in 70 centres throughout the province 

7 

which did not have banking facilities of any sort. The 
main disadvantage of the agencies is that the people using 
them still have to travel to larger centres to obtain loans 
or services beyond the scope of the agencies. And, it might 
be argued, people in smaller centres would use banking 
facilities anyway by merely travelling to the nearest bank 
branch. This argument doubtless does apply to those people 
who do use banking facilities, but there are persons in 
remote as well as other areas who do not understand banks 
and are suspicious of them. Through their operation by 
local citizens and by using the governments name the 
agencies have probably helped to utilize the savings of 
people who would not ordinarily use the banks. It seems 
likely that a fair proportion of the $30,000,000 in deposits 
collected by the agents annually represents savings which 
ordinarily would have been retained in old socks and 
mattresses. In general the agencies represent a more equit¬ 
able distribution of banking facilities throughout the 
province, and through their location in f? unbanked n areas 

7: Alberta Facts and Figures . 1950, pp. 346-350. 







« . 


. . .* . - ;. . =• ■> ...cr ; 

. c ' . . 

. 

* ^ , v . ‘ 

» 
























.: . .1. .• !. ■ ■ ■ ■■ . .j ' i'.v 














, 






. 


Ci i ' fl : 

n £i 

**. . . 




< - 


~ 














268 


they reduce the social costs of safekeeping and other 
services to the public. 

Provision of other government services through the 
Treasury Branches and the agencies as a function not per¬ 
formed by the banks need not be stressed here. To the public, 
the availability of these services under one roof is a con¬ 
venience, and the administrative costs to the Treasury 
Branches is offset by the commissions received for them. 

On the other hand, the banks, because of their national 
organization, are able to supply services beyond the scope 
of the Treasury Branches* Businesses or individuals who 
have extensive transactions outside the province are 
naturally going to keep their accounts with the banks. A 
permanent limit to the size of the Treasury Branch system 
rests on this factor and unless it becomes possible to set 
up representatives in centres outside of the province they 
will never be able to compete with the banks in this 
respect. Even if such facilities were provided the transfer 
of deposits outside of the province would represent a loss 
of funds to the system whereas to the banks it is merely 
a shift in the location of funds. 

(2) Costs of services to the public ; Actual costs of 
a banking service to the public are made up of the rates of 
interest charged on loans, charges for various services and 
with a government bank, a third factor in the form of its 
effects on the public deficit or surplus* Because the main 








. 



. 

- • • 

. 

. 

♦ 

* 

e l 

. 

* 

. 

♦ 






269 


expansive period of the Treasury Branches has coincided 
with a time of cheap money and easily advanced credit from 
the commercial banks the lower interest, service, exchange 
and other charges made by the Treasury Branches have 
probably not been effective in influencing general public 
support. Although the Treasury Branches' maximum loan rate 
is 1 % lower than that of the banks it is more than counter¬ 
balanced by the larger volume of bank credit extended to the 
public. During the current period of high administrative 
costs the Treasury Branches have followed a general policy 
of levying low rates on various service and exchange 
charges, but because of their competitive nature the extent 
to which these rates are lower than those of the banks is 
impossible to estimate. 

In two respects, on interest rates and other charges, 
the Treasury Branches have kept costs to the public at a 
slightly lower level than those charged by the banks. But 
because the Treasury Branches are a government institution 
the matter of real costs to the public has two sides to it. 
If the public pays less for their services and loans the 
Treasury Branches may have a smaller source of revenue 
resulting in a deficit and a consequent loss to the public 
for the benefit of the people who deal with the Treasury 
Branches. However, from all indications the deficit 
resulted not from this factor, but from the governments 
failure to undertake investments as a source of revenue. 






' 

. 

t : „ - 'V ’ ft < ' • - ' 

- . . 

' 

♦ ' ■ 

. 

, 

, 

' ; :/ V. .■ •: 

. 

: 

, 














- ; . 






270 


Although recent years have shown net profits the past 
reluctance of the government to assume revenue-producing 
investments has resulted in a cumulative deficit still out¬ 
standing at over $1,000,000. This figure represents the 
costs of Treasury Branches to the public over the past 12 
years but it is not attributable to lower rates charged on 
their services. 

(5) Extent of services offered to the public; The 
extent to which Treasury Branch services meet the needs of 
the public can perhaps be gauged by those members of the 
public who use these services as depositors. Geographically, 
the Treasury Branches have expanded banking services through 
the agency system to many people who would not ordinarily use 
banking facilities. This factor, combined with the 
provision of services at a lower cost to the public, is more 
than counterbalanced by the limited extent to which the 
Treasury Branches are able to meet the credit requirements 
of the province. 

The initiative in lending remains with the banks who 
can grant loans to greater extent because of their access¬ 
ibility to larger and more diverse funds, ability to grant 
unsecured loans, use of Dominion statutes guaranteeing 
advances, and greater experience of their managers and 
executives. The conditions limiting the Treasury Branches 
lending also tend to restrict the scope of their services 
to the public through the loss of depositors to the banks. 



' . $ , 

■\i-. *'.■■■ ' • J •- ,/r;j i lo ■O: tn 

.... . . ^ ^ - • • ■ ■ ■ ■ -• 

c ■ i 

■: - f V.. • ' . . :.r . / :n ■ . . :T '• c - . ■ ;.'S 

• • 

- , ... _ _ " ;‘ ; .' 












..... ■•••■: .< 

, 






[Xi- ■ . J 


.... J 

' 


olt* .. .L O' : . . i • 


. .... . r' 



, 

■ 

f 











i 





, 

' 

. - ■ 

. 

: . . *. . ‘ •%' ‘'r- • ■ • 

' 

„ 




271 


In effect, if the Treasury Branches are not able to increase 
lending or provide some form of incentive to deal with them 
other than available credit facilities, the extent of their 
services to the public may be reduced through the gradual 
loss of depositors. 

In evaluating present operations of the Treasury Branches 
the central question is, what has been their effect on 
chartered banks in the province? It is at this point that 
we again enter the realm of conjecture. According to the 
semi-official bank attitude the Treasury Branches are more 
or less a nonentity, or at most a fly in the ointment. 
Conversely the Treasury Branch administrators claim that they 
have made fairly extensive breaches in the banking network 
throughout the province. 

To begin with, the Treasury Branches probably would 
not have been instituted had it not been for the peculiar 
monetary theories of the Social Credit Party. The Canadian 
banking system, although not altogether exemplary, has 
through its oligopolistic organization provided an efficient 
and continuous banking service compared to the cumbersomeness 
and former instability of the American unitary system. In 
view of the characteristic stability and efficiency of the 
Canadian banking system, the Treasury Branches would at 
first glance appear to be a departure In the wrong direction: 
i.e., towards unitary banking on a provincial scale. 


, 

« 

' 

t • 

. 

- 

v . ■ ; . ., 

. '■*'■■■• -r-r 

• . ; : . 

. ■ ; , 

• * 

■ 

:\,w . .. .. . i 

' 

; 

* ■ : ' «. * 





272 


However, as a result of the background of financing 
on the prairies and the social attitudes resulting from 
the weaknesses of the economy, it becomes evident that 
the Treasury Branches were not entirely established for the 
sake of a political theory* Restriction of credit by the 
banks, and their foreclosure on mortgages during the thirties 
increased the old western antagonism, and the en masse 
closing of branches left a real need for banking facilities 
in a once ^overbanked 11 region. It is significant that the 
first Treasury Branches and agencies were established on the 
basis of petitions submitted by districts throughout the 
province. Moreover, the legislators, outside of doctrinal 
reasons, must have seen that a provincial bank established 
in an unstable agricultural economy such as Alberta, would 
have to be backed by the government* Although the actual 
impetus for establishment of the Treasury Branches emanated 
from social credit doctrine, their organization coincided 
with the traditional western antipathy towards the banks and 
the need of many districts for banking services. 

On the other hand, the Treasury Branches were instituted 
near the termination of the Great Depression. Within a few 
years after the Treasury Branches 1 organization, the banks 
had loosened credit, were extending loans on a scale that the 
Treasury Branches could not hope to compete against, and 
following World War II began to reopen the closed branches. 

As a result of these recent trends western antagonism to 
the banks has probably ebbed considerably, and with it, a 



: ■ •• ' - .. ■ ' ... 5 t -A ”• ■ ; "v ft ■ 







* 





. 








, 

t 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ r l 





273 


certain amount of support for the Treasury Branches. While 
Treasury Branch support does not depend solely upon this 
customary opposition to banks it is probable that many of 
its customers, particularly in the rural areas, prefer to 
patronize a government bank for this reason. 

Because their establishment coincided with a return 

to full employment the effect of the Treasury Branches on 

the chartered banks is hard to estimate. The post-war 

expansion of bank branches is undoubtedly based on general 

prosperity, but the existence of the Treasury Branches 

may have stimulated opening of branches in some districts. 

In their first stages the Treasury Branches did not 

appreciably affect banking policy; at any rate, the banks 

continued closing up branches after 1938 - from 180 to 164 

8 

branches up to 1944. At the same time, the upsurge in bank 
branches to 202 in 1947 may have been influenced, if only to 
a minor degree, by the comparative vigor of Treasury Branch 
operations once the Interim Program had been abandoned and 
they were on a sound financial basis after the Investments 
of 1945 and 1946. 

The current effectiveness of the Treasury Branch 
system in competing with the banks is restricted by its 
comparative weakness as a regional bank, even with government 
support, compared to the strength of the national institutions. 
The competitive efficiency of the Treasury Branches is 

8: Alberta Facts and Figures , 1950, p. 346. 




* 






t 


t ■ 


. 












-. ■ 











, 














. 


- f 










« 

, 


. 


- 


... ; .. V ' . C , . . .t. V - . ; 




, .... 










' 






r. t • 










274 


further reduced by two factors: (1) the recency of their 
entrance into the banking field and (2) their status as a 
government institution. As we have seen, the first factor 
has manifested itself particularly in the inexperience of 
managerial personnel and a resultant caution in operations 
emanating from this condition. 

As a provincial government department the Treasury 
Branches are also at a disadvantage compared to the banks. 
Since the Interim Program their general status has not been 
made clear to the public, and the government has made no 
statements nor apparently set out a definite policy as to 
their future. The Treasury Branches have a certain degree 
of autonomy In their operations, but they have not the 
advantages of a Crown corporation or other type of indepen¬ 
dent government unit. Tnis condition is strikingly 
illustrated by the operations of the Treasury Branches as a 
government department in contributing to and withdrawing 
from the general revenue fund of the province, their use of 
a government revenue and expenditure accounting system which 
reduces the awareness of branch profitability and efficiency 
of operation, and their lack of control over such an 
important matter as investment of surplus funds for revenue 
purposes. 

In addition, the Treasury Branches have to operate 
under the shadow of politics. Whereas the banks are able to 
keep instances of misappropriation of funds, or other mis- 


.. -... ... • .... i : - x r ^.. ■ - .... v • \ 

. C .;,v . :.. .......... ... ; : .x " . •-v v J .• . - o;: ntfrs© 

. 

• .V. ■ ... ... . ; ' - . ’ xx ' 

' 

.. ■ . . . X •' . .$£V. • *.. X. .v'J/X ' X-r-^o. 

- 

■ - r 1 ' 1 ;•> xxr-x-ri-p. cb p . 

, 

■ s . ' -o "il :■ .:o;p'Xx 

•- . t ... ;; c ; 

; 

-a . •■-. ... .;,J ‘X : ;ioo iv* : < »iO ft . C -. : xx 

♦ 

, : x:.. ■ . • .-*-x ... .-p.o v ., x x: .X.. 

..v».'x : nt ■ ixxox. '‘XXevo$ 

' ■ ; , > • • - ■ 

■ 

* 

' ... .. :. . n X;. ■ 








275 


management to themselves, the Treasury Branches by being 
a public institution are open to general scrutiny and 
criticism if a wrong step is taken. The Treasury Branches, 
then, have to remain cautious in their operations to avoid 
subjecting the government to criticism, and of course their 
entire future depends on the changing fortunes of the 
political scene. In the light of the above disadvantages 
it is to the credit of the Treasury Branches that they have 
been able to operate as effectively as they have. But 
because of these conditions they have not been able to ful¬ 
fil the peculiar financial needs of Alberta to the extent 
that they were probably intended to do. That fact is, 
that the banks are presently in a position to meet the needs 
of the west In a satisfactory manner, and so long as they 
are able to do so, it is improbable that the Treasury 
Branches will be able to replace them as a factor in the 
economy. 

The chief criticism directed at the Treasury Branches 
is that they merely represent a duplication of exi. sting 
banking services. To some extent this is true, particularly 
with regard to branches located in centres where there are 
several bank branches. But one of the main defects of the 
banking system in the West has been rapid shifts from "over¬ 
banked” to "underbanked" conditions. When the Treasury 
Branches were established many areas in Alberta lacked bank 
facilities, and today most of the agencies are situated in 
centres where there are no banks. Although the Treasury 


VI 

< ■ ■ ; e *' ■ ■ ... ^ . ■: ■ ?, .* t. $ j 3 . a ■■ \ r , ' itmlo 13 1 i s 

■ ' ! I r c / st- 1$//: . . i :> 

. 

. . 

' 

. ■ •.. ■ d - 

- r .. . i'i • . 





. 





J 

V v . ; • ,J“ . . bt ■■ , . 

• :.v. r 





. 

J 




• 




llq ■ 

: . < ' ' 

■ ■■ ■. : ■ ■ 

• . \ • v... ::i 

. 

- 

, 











276 


Branches may represent a duplication of banking services 
in some districts, they also provide a stable core of 
branches and agencies not likely to be subject to closure 
during depression. Through the agencies the Treasury 
Branches have avoided the concentration of bank branches in 
a few centres typical of the overbanking periods. It is 
also possible that the existence of the Treasury Branch 
system may in the event of future depression tend to 
discourage the closing out of bank premises. 

While the Treasury Branches are not subject to the 
conventions of the Canadian Bankers * Association their 
departures from orthodox banking practices have since the 
Interim Program been relatively few. Their services 
essentially may be regarded as similar to those offered by the 
banks, and in this respect the Treasury Branches represent 
a duplication of banking facilities. However, they do 
provide a real alternative for those individuals who prefer 
not to deal with the chartered banks, and the Treasury 
Branches have so far obtained more than 50,000 such 
individuals as depositors. 

In absolute terms, however, the Treasury Branches 
probably have not materially affected the operation of the 
chartered banks in the province to a great extent. A con¬ 
servative estimate indicates that the Treasury Branches 
handle about one tenth of the banking business in Alberta, 
their loaning ability is small compared to the banks, and 


e ■: ‘ .. :J ... fa a r * t'xqoy /; o..; - :'ar. .:a.C 

.. • - ; :■ l cal:' . ;i.' ‘ . ‘ j cl. ■ 

' . . •- ,.Ca ’ C, :• ■ :•••' : . . - £•■ ia a : : 

• '■ . ’ 

; • .' , ■, .•/ 'i. ; .v. : :a : .a.:, a 'J , . >J>. a - ,:a c:;a. 

j. /:■ iv >. cr 

. 

■ 

5 . . .. . . r . ...■ . „• • o 

■ - • ' ... ' ' ... * . ■ . .. ' 

. 

’ . . . 

: • / . ; : . > a . --aa/a-v .. a . I B&b -.it sc . 

, 

, ’: .■ l ■ i 

. 

v-. ■ a . '• ■ . ...' - t .• a--.,: rjy l 'a a 

- . . . ; a . a ; v a' a a-ea : do 

< . ..; ... . .... ....• ;iaaa:r oao :.a... I . .. 1 

• . .. .. .. . l!:m& zl \$ 1 £ 16 b %nln®oJL *i lorU 

■ 






- 277 - 


the banks have branches in the ratio of 4 to 1 to full¬ 
time Treasury Branches. At the same time the Treasury 
Branches may be justified today on the grounds that they 
are utilizing the savings of more people and are providing 
services through the agency system that would not ordinarily 
be available to certain sections of the public. Secondly, 
their existence may be justified because they are a form of 
competition outside of the banking oligopoly that the banks, 
from time to time, have to keep an eye on. Finally, lest 
the ineffectiveness of the Treasury Branches is over¬ 
emphasized, they have an annual deposit turnover of over 
$200,000,000, that the banks in Alberta would probably be 
glad to obtain* 

A consideration of the Treasury Branches as a provin¬ 
cial government banking institution will be based on (1) 
the purposes and possible advantages of a provincial govern¬ 
ment bank, (2) the possible disadvantages of a provincial 
government bank, and (3) a brief survey of the potentialities 
of such an institution. 

Aside from political or doctrinal reasons a provincial 
government bank would presumably be formed to provide 
services not given by established institutions, or to 
control the activities of the latter. This broad function 
could conceivably be subdivided into three chief purposes: 

(1) to provide for specific regional credit requirements. 


. 

, ’ 

t; \ ' .. 

t ,, < 

- ■ 

l 

t t 

■ 




- 

' 

t 

. 

. 

... iO<t 

• , ■ ' • . ... ;... ’ ; : v, - :.v .>1 ... .-j. 

, ; ■ • ■ ' ■■ ; : ' . - .. - '-i ■■■■■■ - . - 






278 


(2) to provide services not given by the banks, and (3) 
to assist borrowers in the region by competing down 
interest rates and other costs. The principle behind an 
institution carrying out these purposes is probably that 
the resources of the government backing its activities 
would enable the bank to fulfill its objectives adequately 
and with public support. 

The first problem in forming such an institution is 
its method of organization. A Grown or independent corpora¬ 
tion beginning operations with a fixed capital appropriation 
would have the advantage of autonomy but would be restricted 
in its scope at first. The advantages and disadvantages of 
operating as a government department have been noted 
previously. Regardless of the form of organization the 
government must decide to what extent it will support its 
institution without discriminating against individuals or 
groups within the region. 

In Alberta the provision of regional credit requirements 
would ostensibly take the form of extending those agricul¬ 
tural loans not given by the banks, and loans to new or 
small industries. To date the Treasury Branches have not 
been able to carry out the first of these objectives 
because of their restricted lending ability and the extensive 
service already provided by the banks through the Farm 
Improvements Loan Act. The second objective has been 
carried out on a limited scale by the Treasury Branches 
through loans to the Marketing Board groups and the Alberta 


, • a . : ■ •: .' * •. ; j . : ; } 



. 




■ .r ; ’ ■ . ■ : ... c- ■ ' ~ i 


■ ' .. r ■ • 


. ■ .. " o' i ., ■ ■; I.. . 

• • • - 

, 

. 

. 



' i. ■ ... ;• . 


.. . 


•T. 






. . ‘ . ; . J . ' 

. 


=C'T tiV' o.ud OS’ ErtfcOl •li'J 






279 


Industrial Corporation, Probably the banks have through 
sheer volume surpassed the Treasury Branches in this 
assistance to industry; the Industrial Development Bank of 
Canada alone had $1,357,627 loans outstanding in Alberta 

Q 

in September 1948, Although other factors have influenced 
the Treasury Branches J inability to fulfil this purpose 
it illustrates the inherent difficulty of even a provincial 
government bank in competing against national institutions. 

Provision of services not given by banks has been 
undertaken by the Treasury Branches on a geographical 
basis through the agencies. Conceivably services could 
be expanded in another direction by granting loans for 
projects beyond the scope of the banks, e.g., for fixed 
assets, loans on the basis of security not acceptable by 
the banks, or by generally giving larger loans to smaller 
firms or individuals than those obtainable from the banks. 

A step in the direction of capital loans has been made 
through the Alberta Industrial Corporation, but acceptance 
of different security has been more than offset by Treasury 
Branch reluctance to grant unsecured loans. The third 
purpose in reducing costs to the borrowers within the region 
has, as we have seen, been carried out on a limited scale 
by the Treasury Branches. 

Besides coping with the strictly financial problems of 
conducting activities on a regional basis a provincial 

9: Alberta Facts and Figures , 1950, p. 352. 










. 



• . ■ * ' 

. 

„ 

■ ' 

. 

• t 

. 




. 


■ 

- • 

, 



■ " i. , ■ ‘ r •• . ' 






• ' 'j... 









280 


government bank is bound to be subject to the influences 
of politics. Firstly, there is the obvious factor of 
criticism from opposition parties. This possibility, as we 
have seen from the experience of the Treasury Branches, tends 
to create overcaution in operations. Secondly, the govern¬ 
ment banking institution may have to face the internal 
political factor in various forms. To begin with, the 
government bank may be directed into unsound courses for 
the sake of a political doctrine, or it may be restricted 
in its scope for the same reason. We have seen how the 
latter condition has apparently applied to the Treasury 
Branches in the social credit attitude towards bond invest¬ 
ments. Another facet of internal politics is the problem 
of patronage and its effects on the efficiency of the 
institution. Patronage might take the form of appointment 
of inefficient party supporters to the institution, pressure 
to grant loans to party supporters, or establishment of 
branches in districts for political reasons. An indirect 
method of patronage would be for the government to grant 
contracts to companies or individuals to offset the 
possibility of their default on loans from the provincial 
bank. Of course, there is no way of determining whether 
or not these conditions apply, or have applied, to the 
Alberta Treasury Branches. A temptation which has character¬ 
ized government banks in the past - the lavish granting of 
loans to the government - has so far been avoided by the 


- 


■ 

. 

t . 

■ < ; ' • . . v, 

. ... . • • : . 

-. - t ' c • *. : * .. ' ;o ’ •. . J - : jo 

' 

;. 7 . ■' u ... . .: . ,. .. .: n ; • : • - • ; < ;..I 

i 1 jrx ^:;jyxOv c 

% - ' • ' ’ i. 

‘ 

. 

= / .x - • t !L - ic 

. 

■ ■ ' . . ' - .. - 

. 

■ 

‘ 

.... . . •. , X -x-;ao 

* , : 

* ' o > . ... 

.. . .. . . 

■ . ' ---■- .. . c. ' ■. -t - ^ . 




281 - 


Treasury Branches. 

As an underlying influence the political background 
of the Treasury Branches is significant because they were 
originally formed to fulfill a political platform. In this 
way their existence is more intimately attached to the 
political fortunes of the Social Credit administration than 
some of the standard provincial government bodies* As a 
result of their past connection with Social Credit 
objectives the Treasury Branches may, in fact, or in the 
opinion of some people, face an uncertain future if the 
present government is defeated. An impression that the 
long-run future of the Treasury Branches is uncertain may 
have contributed to difficulties of obtaining managerial 
and executive staff members, and it may have Influenced the 
extent of general public support. At the same time, the 
Treasury Branches are presently operating on non-doctrinaire 
lines, and in view of the extent of their public support a 
different provincial government might hesitate to abolish 
them entirely. 

It is worthwhile here to conjecture only sketchily 
upon the potentialities of a provincial bank competing 
with a branch banking system in a predominantly agricultural 
region. The activities of such an institution in carrying 
out the three purposes of provision of regional credit needs, 
services not given by the banks, and competing down of 
interest rates, would depend on (1) the extent of its public 
support, (2) the extent to which it could stand losses. 


. 


. 

# 

, 

p 

' 

■ ■ ■ * ■ : 

. . ' : 

. ' ■ r • • i: • ..1 

, . - ■ • . ‘ ■ 

: ' 1 . W <' 









282 


In a period of economic stability at a fairly 
prosperous level, the provincial bank, if historical 
tradition is assumed, would have to contend with general 
public support for the existing banking system. With this 
support and its backing of assets the banking system could 
provide for regional needs and give a wider range of 
services than could the provincial bank. Furthermore, 
losses due to crop failures or other causes could be met 
without strain by the banks, while the provincial bank, 
particularly if it had overextended itself to carry out 
this function, might have to call on public funds. With 
overall public support unlikely under stable economic 
conditions the provincial bank would not be in a position 
either to grant advances or to provide for local needs on 
a large scale without overextending its capacity. If it 
did overextend its capacity and encountered losses, the 
provincial institution would be subject to eager charges 
of mismanagement from opposition parties and the government 
would be faced with the alternative of diverting public 
funds to make up the losses or possibly of abandoning the 
institution. 

Under stable conditions, then, the provincial bank 
would be confronted with the problem of operating strictly 
within the bounds of its resources, thus playing a small 
role in the economy, or playing a larger role subjecting 
itself to unforseen losses it could ill afford. The 


A •- • 

<. . A ... • / • •• : J \ . : ... ;■ • .‘iC 

. .. 

. - 

. 

■ 

. 




- 


■ • - V ■ • :• j. .• 

. 

• ' ' ... 

' 








.... i 

'. . A . • v .' . :■ , rA- • *. . v 




. 







283 


Alberta Treasury Branches have chosen to operate under 
the first condition and it seems likely, in view of 
prairie tradition in prosperous times that they will face 
a trend towards stabilization and/or a steady diminution 
of public support. However, the Treasury Branches, in 
recognition of this trend, may take more active measures 
to increase their depositors through somewhat more 
generous loaning policies or other incentives to deal with 
them. A long-run increase in depositors through such 
measures, combined with increasing managerial experience, 
could result in the Treasury Branches becoming a real 
competitive factor with the chartered banks in Alberta® 

Under conditions of depression it is possible that in 
the first stages while the banks were contracting their 
activities the provincial bank could for a short period 
ease the local situation by granting advances to hard- 
pressed sectors of the provincial economy. The extent to 
which this reverse policy could b© carried out would depend 
on the ability of the provincial bank to undertake bad 
risks or non-repayment, and the resources the government 
would be willing to contribute towards such a policy. If 
the government was in a financial position similar to that 
of 1935 its assistance in this direction would decidedly 
be limited® Even with ample funds available the question 
arises whether or not the government could best utilize 
its resources during depression through expansion of the 


. ;" t v i . t ■ ... . ■ " 1 hoc o o . 'tlx e ■ 

■ : ;v . : ■ , :-/ ; v t r . z"oo ' c 4 xq v,' o.oljs.o •- ,.d •. ..Vr..*. r:q 

J 

. .. . • ■- . .. : , - * ' ' ■ . ■ ‘ • •' • 

, ■ -id 1 ' 

:•? ■:,.*?.[ f £ : lj -j ' :... -43 b osouJ o I Oj 

?■ - :-..i o. . 

. - -.■ « 

. . j .'... ; ... . -.. ' - - - * 

. 

a : k . 0 . . ‘ ' 6 i ' - P 

• . . ■■■■. -• - o 

. 

~ . :t - . - r s r', L *U * oo $ o >:'■» 

■ ■' ■ 5 ' :;.'IOv v .. 

c 

■6 oJ H; - Oc Vu;;:: Lot *0!. X r/ C/Xv: "H'i'S 'lO &O0 0.0 

. . : ; ..... . . 5 - - ■ - 

• ■ - 

. . 

. 



284 


provincial bank’s activities. Subsidization or support 
of agriculture and industry through advances from the 
provincial bank would not be tackling the root of the 
problem: how to restore effective demand for goods and 

labor. Faced with the political necessity of showing 
tangible results the government would probably use the 
provincial bank merely as an administrative agency in 
distributing grants or non-repayable advances for direct 
relief measures. Even if the provincial bank gained a 
large number of depositors from the banks it is doubtful 
if the institution could, under depression conditions, 
risk using the increased deposits as a basis for expanding 
advances* In its secondary role the provincial bank could 
act as a check against the banks completely withdrawing 
their facilities from the region. 

Finally, if it can be assumed that human nature 
profits by past experience, it is likely that future anti¬ 
depression measures on an autarchic provincial scale will 
be obsolete. In the event of future trends towards 
recession it is probable that the national government will 
undertake vigorous action to bring about recovery on a 
nation-wide scale. Provincial or regional schemes for 
recovery, resulting in such an institution as the Alberta 
Treasury Branches, were primarily the result of the central 
government’s failure to undertake recovery measures on an 
effective scale. If the national government adequately 


„ ." ' Iv I ' t? r .. i V O f i 

. '. •• ■ • j • .* -• : ■ . '1 , 

■ ... J ’ •. o ■ . ;i': ? .C ./ v; \-:q 

* 

\ . - . ’ ■ . :• . . 

- ’ 

* 

. .■■■;" *■< ■- ' .. . .. .',o ,.. : - , 

■ 

.. .. , . : ' :. ' . ■>. . ■: 7 , V. ■. ...;"{ 

.. . <i >J s ■;? . /u ' ■: -iq 

. : - . . -a . . tJr'z .. .. . • .. ii: ::1 , : . j. a ■ ■■ sd 

. . - - 

■ .. ionlvcr . I . " '- . 

-. ..' ■; i. . . 

- . .... <... ' . . 

t. 

■ 








285 


meets the challenge of a future depression the impetus 
for isolated regional recovery programs, and the 
institutions resulting from such schemes, will have 
disappeared. 



•. .. « 


■ 

t ’ L t-,. I;/ ; J J ?,L O - I - 

' ■ . , .v. : v r , \: ; 1 ;i 

: ■ : 









ta 

» 

e*f 

tb 

<4-> g* 

Q g^ «g 

sir 

U<r 

>0 g3 
7 s 


« 

i 

<-* 


•as 

•c! 
® ® 
4 r M 

.9-a 

9l 

a I 

.S* 

<u 

j2*+3 
® >» 

m 



§>!l^®s 3 S 

agcjgpJSj, to^gcj *5j, ^ 

S S i ° ® * i 8,2-g g Si £ ®£ g 

® a, o +j ja ffl+i o^ rt S . ._ 

X £ 52o3e+>_ _S® 


C3'H-Mt-SH+J(D I I -rj 

mi«i in 

.agio's 12 ® 

* C-j ^ < 1 ) <“! S_J « . 


X 3 


«|a”li:sg !lj 


w be 3 S §)&®££^ 

S'* tJ G w ° t 2 O 3 3 

fto jS-~ g^ajmSSn-es* 

O § a b'i « S S.-B S-S 5- ■ r 

— «■> J 


2 T 3 ? o > 

„ «.V) ,3 > > 

j ^ :>> ., £ 3 

W M'S) W ’S ° 
- M c ^ >» 


&-Q 

- w 03 • 

>=a-S 


IS» 

O ^ 

cj *3 G 

§ £ ® 

-.■e t 


o »s z w 

«^'c3°a3-'g'o^ ft -S g’tJ ® M $ 
bo^ w (D^H ^ bC 4J> -S *2 T3 3 ^ 

«SobooS®a22ci.S«a^S 

X-P.S ft 3 -ft % +3 OJ > 73 S 

° btS 3 -p O^ ^ScS^l^gcij 

0i s-i i >.S o Hw'or 
«•§ § ®^S £ g M 8 «g J 4 ^. 

sisJ^i*® S.g|Ssa.s„**^^ 

^J-sg-l§^f 

ag ir*s*°f|^llK«' a Il-3 

j-i«4-irQ'y®®3^' :3 ®HtJ_,bo O_(D bfioog 
HI O'H afl M O _i_'H03Ti O H> 

?h >3 O'rt^i^M ° ® •■ be+j ® 

3 ® o o m ft:£ :£; 3 3 3 ® >> o o 'ft o ® 

‘ ^ y S 3 m % S S M Oi eSTi-3-3 S 

a “'s.g.-s a a+J 

g f! i “-ti S O-S a)-®s«'0 

e+>'2'~ Zkll -s S'S 3.3 o o 


® >> 
x a 

-^-ft 
fl ® 
oT - 

a§ 

3 « 

;s 

3.3 

§>* 
a .g 

.5? p 

M 00 


■4J C, 

g a 
s« 

® Frt 
£ ® 
be.2 


- ?H , 

H i 



T3 

® >. 
-M ,5* 
3 3 
O rrt 
® 

X to 



2‘g 

® s 2 's-s - « a ^ lj 

^^gooES o> . ^ 

boxJ -H r/( ^ H J <d jn 
^ co (V) ^ J 5 jh ^ 

bo 


. «i S-P -P 3 32 

- “ « 5 -S ° g « °^2 

S - o/nPi^ <z> 5 

NH S'’3#. ® ft | g“.s ® 
oS,fi ^|-g g|^ 

3^ a gg S’s s i 

3 §&^-a a^Ullg® 

P3 "43 ^ 


t 5 M!i!lli|S?!!l 


h § Iain'S Si al S-25 S 


Sh X 3 
0) 0) 
a-p 


>> 

r 1 ^3 

M 

f (1) CO 


i.s 


Witness Provincial Treasurer 

be used in cases where the merchant is a corporation.) 
































































TREASURY DEPARTMENT 




2 




S 

z 


H 

55 

W 

£ 

55 

55 

05 

O 

<! 

H 

55 

£ 

O 

Q 

U 

< 

S 

05 

55 

H 

05 

O 

g 

> 

02 

02 

05 

C 

02 

© 

s 

Q 



II 


IS 












APPENDIX "A" 


A REVIEW OF SOCIAL CREDIT ECONOMIC THEORY 

















APPENDIX "A" 


A REVIEW OF SOCIAL CREDIT ECONOMIC THEORY 

DOUGLASITE THEORY attributed the flaws in existing economies 
to a chronic deficiency of purchasing power* The means by which 
individuals in a capitalist economy are deprived of their share 
of the community’s wealth (their "purchasing power") originates 
in the financial system through its control by the banks of the 
credits issued against the community’s wealth* 

Financial credit issued by the banks, according to their 
estimates of the ability of the borrower to pay back money, 
ensures the dependency of the producers on the banking system 
because they require bank credit to cover their costs of production* 
Wages and salaries (and therefore purchasing power in the 
economy) are in turn dependent on these loans obtained by 
producers from the banks* But producers must get back through 
the prices they charge for their products enough money to pay 
back the bank, plus interest, plus their own profits* Not only 
do prices of all commodities exceed purchasing power distributed 
to the community through salaries and wages;when the producer 
pays back his loan, that money is used to cancel off his debt to 
the bank and the system is short that much more purchasing 
power* 

The deficiency of purchasing power as it occurs through 
the operation of an industial system dependent on the banking 
system was explained by Douglas through the "A plus B Theorem"* 

The A plus B Theorem purported to show how the purchasing 
power gap arose through "factory costs*"(1) 

According to the theorem, factory costs fall into two 
categories; 

"Group A: All payments made to individuals (i.e* wages, 
salaries and dividends), and 

Group B: All payments made to other organizations (i.e* 
raw materials, bank charges, and other external costs.) 

"Now the rate of flow of purchasing power to individuals 
is represented by A, but since all payments go into prices, 
the rate of flow of prices cannot be less than A plus B* Since 
A will not purchase A plus B a proportion of the product at 
least equivalent to B must be distributed by a form of purchasing 
power which is not comprised in the description grouped under 
A." That proportion of the product equivalent to B is distrib¬ 
uted among producers by loan credits (bank overdrafts) or 
export credit, both of which are paid back to their sources 
without reaching the consumer* 

The statement that "A must be less that A plus B" appears 
to be a truism but it may not necessarily be a truism if A means 
two different things* 

A in the first instance represents payments to individuals 
as purchasing power from the entire system* But A plus B seems 
to refer to the pricesthat the individual has to pay with his A 


(l) Mairet, Philip, The Douglas Manual * New York, 1934, p*6& 



















-ii- 


payments* If this is so, then A plus B consists of final or 
"retail" payments* If the first "A" represents total payments to 
consumers, and the second "A" (combined with the " plus B") 
represents the final A payments of the retailer, then A is not 
likely to be less than A plus B within a certain periodv’It could 
be argued that A is less than A plus B because of varying 
degrees of consumer saving out of the general A payments, but 
Douglas does not state this case nor does he imply it 0 

If we interpret "A plus B" as all the payments in the 
system, then the fact that A is less than A plus B is not 
significant because payments to consumers do not have to cover 
all payments for capital goods, although a certain proportion of 
the prices paid on consumer goods may eventually go to pay off 
debts on capital goods* 

According to Douglas, a shortage of purchasing power for 
goods produced in a certain period exists even when savings 
equals investment. His purchasing power deficiency arises, 
in part, from the savings side of the equation, not from an 
adjustment of investment to the level of savings, but from the 
dependency of investment on bank credit in lieu of savings* 

The savings that is done by individuals for investment constitutes 
the transferring of claims on existing goods to future goods, and 
the only way investors can get their money back is through the 
prices charged for these goods* The Withdrawing of purchasing 
power from existing goods to invest in future ones only results 
in a deficiency of purchasing power in the present period, 
and the return which investors demand on their money results in 
further increases in prices and a larger gap in the future* (3) 

On the other side of the equation Douglasite theory is 
concerned with investment as it affects the "B" payments * 

Because of increasing mechanization, investment in capital goods 
industries results in a reduction in the proportion of wages and 
therefore purchasing power, resulting in greater depreciation 
charges through the "B" payments and an increase in costs still 
further beyond purchasing power* 

Douglas has a point here from the short run point of view. 
During a severe depression large sums of depreciation charges and 
sinking appropriations do tend to accumulate as unused funds 
in the system* Under such conditions, even when these sums are 
deposited in banks increasing the latter’s bank cash, there 
probably would not be an expansion of credit* It is unlikely 
during a depression that these funds would be invested in company 
stock, although they might be invested in existing bonds with 
high interest rates* At the same time a certain amount of 
investment might be undertaken in company stocks in the 
expectation of increases in prices or higher dividends when 
recovery returned or in bonds in the expectation of selling them 
at higher prices in the future to compensate for a fall in 
future interest rates* 


(2) See Cole, G.D.H*, (ed) What Everyone Wants to Know About 
Money London, 1933 P*353 









-iii- 


However, even during a depression there will be a certain 
rate of replacement of equipment (although under depressed 
conditions each firm will keep its depreciation funds in idle¬ 
ness longer, and the size of replacement when it does occur will 
tend to be small), and it seems likely that the "B" payments for 
replacement would mean a larger outlay of M A M payments through 
wages than Douglas had envisaged* The chief criticism of his "B" 
payments factor has been that most "B" payments for raw materials 
etc., although they are made among firms, tend eventually to 
become "A" payments as they are distributed downwards throughout 
the system. Also, in a longer period if capital construction is 
taking place at a rate that is greater than replacement of existing 
equipment, there will be a tendency towards increases in purchasing 
power indirectly as additional machinery makes production of goods 
cheaper and prices lower. 

To meet the criticism that overlapping of advance payments 
throughout the economy makes it possible for the system to operate 
without a permanent "purchasing power gap" Douglas has concentrated 
on the general relationship between both A and B payments on bank 
credit. This approach, based on "flows" of payments rather than 
"spheres" of payments, indicates that the flow from consumers to 
the production system must be greater than the flow to the con¬ 
sumers because the producers must charge more than the distributed 
costs to pay back their bank loans. The money supplied to the 
public in advance of production is taken back in increased prices 
(to repay loans) once the production has been achieved. Repayment 
to the banks means cancellation of purchasing power as the debts 
are crossed off, only increasing the shortage still further. A 
large proportion of funds for investment, then, arised not from 
savings, but from the inexhaustible supplies of credit from the 
banks. The result of this process is the eternal indebtedness of 
the industrial system to the banking system. 

In his account of the banking mechanism Douglas has mis¬ 
interpreted the intrinsic nature of a banking transaction; the 
bank’s indebtedness is immediate while the debtor's indebtedness 
is in the future. Repayment of loans ensures continuity of bank¬ 
ing operations and the receipt of these payments aids the bank in 
meeting its immediate obligations. The maintenance of certain 
levels of bank cash from day-to-day depends to a large extent on 
the repayment of loans as well as routine cash deposits, the 
selling of securities and other transactions. 

(3) Douglas, C.H., Social Credit . London, 1935? PP 8^-85 
Note the development of a rudimentary period analysis: 

"..o'There are more goods in the world at each successive interval 
of time because of the financial saving, and its application to 
production, while the interest, depreciation, and obsolescence, 
on this financial saving has to be carried forward into the prices 
of production during a succeeding period." 

Also note the assumption that savings go directly into investment: 
"Each pound saved would be a pound withdrawn from consumption 
and nut into production ." (p.85) (italics mine) 








-iv- 


The limitations of bank credit depend on the bank’s estimate 
of risks involved, the condition of the economy generally, and the 
ratio of existing deposits to bank cash* Douglas was getting 
nearer to the truth when he said that bank loans depend on 
estimates of the debtor’s ability to pay. But he could not go 
on to the next step and say that banking operations tend to 
follow existing economic conditions by enhancing the movement 
of general business optimism or pessimism in one way or the 
other.Douglas, in trying to show that banks do the controlling, 
reverted to the assumption that bank credit is indefinitely 
expandable. 

If banks were continually destroying credits through 
repayment of loans, as Douglas claims they do, it is difficult 
to see how there could at the same time be an indefinite 
expansion of credit. The tendency would rather be in the direction 
of a stationary volume of credit if the repaid money was 
returned to circulation without being used as a basis for loans, 
or a contraction of credit if the money stayed in the banks as 
’’destroyed purchasing power,”. 

If there were a permanent gap between prices and purchasing 
power it is also difficult to understand why there would not 
be a trend towards constant contraction of production as 
entrepeneurs attempted to reduce their prices (in competitive 
industries) or their output (in oligopolistic industries) to 
the level of purchasing power available to buy all their goods. 

The gap between savings and investment could be interpreted as 
a ’’purchasing power gap.” One might say that a ’’deficiency” 
arises because investment has fallen off and unemployment has 
followed. As a result of the fall in incomes, however, savings 
are reduced and brought into line with the investment of the 
period. 

Institutional developments have shown that the retaining 
of sinking and depreciation funds, which Douglas deplored, has 
helped to free industry from dependency on the banks. Further¬ 
more these sinking funds are seldom kept as idle balances. 

With the exception of those retained for short-term or 
seasonal requirements these balances are usually lent to banks 
in the form of interest-earning deposits, or to the government, 
other institutions or individuals in the form of long or short¬ 
term securities. In either instance a large proportion of the 
funds will eventually find their way back into the economy, 
directly or indirectly, as new investment and/or as ”A” 
payments to individuals. The increasing size of industrial 
firms has also made it possible for them to move to the right 
hand side of the ’’MacMillan Gap” where they can obtain funds in 
the money market without going to the banks. 

Douglas’s remedy for the situation as he described it must 
achieve two purposes: it must provide the consumer with sufficient 
purchasing power to obtain all his needs, and it must stimulate 
production to provide these requirements by injecting purchasing 
power into the system in such a way that it will not enter into 
coasts and raise prices. This objective will be met in two ways: 

(1) the achievement of a ”Just Price” by reducing the prices of 
goods below costs, and (2) the distribution of a national divid¬ 
end (4) which will reach the consumer outside the productive 








■V— 


system* 

A Just Price will be effected by government decree arbit¬ 
rarily reducing prices to increase consumer purchasing power, 
while producers will be compensated by special credits to make 
up the difference between the old and the new prices* Two problems 
are evident: (1) how to compute the Just Price, and (2) how to 
compensate producers so that they will not end up with higher 
costs and prices? 

As an arithmetic ratio the Just Price is based on the 
assumption that "the price at which (an article) can be 
effectively distributed..*bears the same ratio to the cost of 
production that the total consumption and depreciation of the 
community bears to the total production." (5) The Just Price then 
is Total National Consumption X Financial Costs* Two difficulties 
Total National Production 

are apparent:(1) the period over which the Just Price would be 
determined: i*e*, the problem of computing it day by day, matched 
by the ineffectiveness of the Price if computed over a longer 
period, and (2) the use of retail prices in a previous period 
as the basis for computing the price in this period would 
make the reliability of the figure dubious* 

A more basic criticism arises out of the use of the Just 
Price in keeping with its objectives* If the Just Price was 
inaugurated during a depression when the denominator made up of 
investment was low, and the numerator made up of total national 
consumption was high by comparison, then the fraction by which 
prices were to be reduced and new money created would approach 
and possible equal one* (6) If, on the other hand, Douglas means 
by "production" potential output or potential capacity (as he 
hints his discussion of the Just Price) the fraction becomes so 
nebulous as to defy computation* 

Under this system compensation to producers without causing 
inflation would be achieved by paying them a subsid?/" of non¬ 
repayable credits, in nonlegal tender, without charge, and 
subject to cancellation once they had been used . The credit 
would be issued by the banking system, or Treasury, as a 
temporary expedient and it would be cancelled once it had 
served its purpose* (7) If this issue of credit threatened to 
increase the price level further credits would merely be cut off; 
this would not lead to depression because the Just Price would keep 
consumption up* 

The national dividend is essentially a long-run concept 
related to the Douglas theory of the leisure state. As techni¬ 
cal progress reduces labortime necessary for producing a high 
standard of living, the national dividend will be used to replace 
wages and salaries* In his "Scheme for Scotland" (8) Douglas 


(A); Not to be confused with Pigou's national dividend* 
(5); Mairet, P* Op* Git* , p* 94* 


(6); Cole, G.D.H., Op. Cit * p.375 







I 










-vi- 


based the national dividend on the "whole of the capital 
assets" of the country, plus the "commercial capitalized 
value of the population," The initial national dividend would 
then be an "arbitrary figure" of a certain percentage of this 
capital sum* The dividend would be distributed by drafts on 
government credit issued to individuals, and it would also 
take the form of "assisted prices" similar to that of the 
Just Price* 

The national dividend could be introduced in the short run 
by reducing wage rates by 25% "where such reduction does not 
involve a loss to the wage-earner exceeding 20% of the sums 
received in the form of national dividend," (9) Douglas’s con¬ 
cept of two spheres of payments is the basis for his assumption 
that the issue of a national dividend would not increase prices. 
The special compensatory credits issued to producers could 
never be turned into purchasing power outside the productive 
system; stimulation of production if required, would come from 
the effects of the national dividend and the lower Just Prices 
on consumption, and the effects of the availability of special 
credits on investment. Inflation would be impossible because by 
definition the Just Price is below costs* 

Presumably in the operation of this system the enormous 
turnover of goods, resulting from the fact that everyone in the 
community had ample purchasing power, would compensate for the 
lower profits derived from the lower scale of Just Prices, But 
the receipts from goods would then flow mostly into profits 
leaving large surpluses of funds in the system, because saving 
for investment would no longer be necessary when special 
credits were always obtainable to cover production costs. If 
the surpluses were used for investment and paid out in "B" 
payments they would eventually find their way to a proportion 
of consumers—i,e* those xvho were still employed— as purchas¬ 
ing power. The government would then be faced with the 
alternative of cutting the dividend issued to some groups, or 
reducing the dividend generally creating hardship for those groups 
that did not receive the additions in income through the "B" 
payments. The government could possibly prevent additional private 
investment from surplus funds by requesting that all proceeds 
over a certain amount allowed for profits would be turned in 
for government bonds or for special credits. Removal of these 


(7) cf, Douglas’ testimony before the MacMillan Committee, 
Question 4439 et seq. See bibliography at end of this section. 


(&) Douglas, C.H., Op Cit» pp.203-212 
(9) I bid p.211 














-vii- 


funds via taxation would be the antithesis of true Douglasism 
which regards modern taxation as legalized robbery” (10) 

If the issue of special credits to producers was confined 
only to the covering of the difference between the Just Price 
and the old price the opportunities for inflation would be just 
as great. If the producers were covering their own costs with 
or *dinary tender or currency, even through wages were reduced 
25% those payments to factors of production and raw materials 
would eventually find their way back into the system. Further¬ 
more such payments would likely lead to a severe maldistribution 
of income* The payments would be less apt to find their way to 
wage-earners (with the reduced wages), rather they would tend 
to go to owners of factors of production, distributors, etc,, 
and the remainder would probably remain as profits in the hands 
of the producers* Only if Douglas*s assumption of separate 
spheres of payments is a reality could his system operate 
successfully* 

The need to increase purchasing power, and therefore 
consumption, as a deterrent to depression is implicit in modern 
monetary-fiscal policy* Transfer payments cannot be regarded 
as exactly the same thing as a national dividend because they 
represent redistributed income to a large extent* But the 
issuance of $nething similar to national dividend during a 
severe depression might be undertaken without causing excessive 
price increases® 

As noted above, Douglas rejected two conventional methods 
of increasing purchasing power: (1) the budget deficit, and (2) 
redistribution of income through taxation* He rejects the first 
because it would either increase debt or increase prices as 
money or credit was issued, and the second because it is "robbery,” 
If the dividend was issued In the form of special credit, as most 
social credit theorists have advocated, there arises the problems 
of general acceptance, redeemability into currency, and distribution 
among groups* 

A dividend issued on the basis of a formal public debt 
would depend for its success on what groups were holding the 
debt* If the recipients of the dividend were also holders of the 
debt its purpose would be defeated* However, if the holders were 
banks or insurance companies a public distribution of a dividend 
might be feasible, particularly if interest payments on the 
debt were subject to high income tax* If the dividend w’ere issued 
by mass printing of money, the question of its effects on public 
confidence in the government and its money, movement of the inter¬ 
nal price level, and repercussions in the foreign exchange 
market would have to be considered* A national dividend issued 
by redistribution of income through taxation would be indisting¬ 
uishable from transfer payments* 

Regardless of the form in which the dividend was issued 
one of the chief considerations would be its distribution* The ob- 


(10) Mairet, P* Op, Git* p.33* However, Douglas does state that: 
”1 do not think robbery is its (taxation) primary object*” 





-viii- 


ject of issuing the dividend would obviously be to increase 
spending* If it were distributed on a general scale it would tend 
to increase spending inversel^r as the proportion of high incomes 
in the community, or directly as the community 1 s propensity to 
comsume, Given the propensity to consume a larger increase 
in spending would probably result if dividends were distributed 
inversely according to the size of incomes* It is also possible 
that the dividend would be a conditional payment, such as to 
unemployed persons only, according to age groups, occupation, 
and so on. Reference by social credit theorists to the dividend 
as an "unearned increment of cooperation" and subsequent ref¬ 
erences to the payment (particularly in Alberta circles) as 
being to bona fide citizens only, implied that conditions of 
payment might be tempered by other than economic factors. 

It is conceivable, then, that some variation of a national 
dividend could be applied in a depression provided Douglas’s 
lower price idea is discarded. The issuing of a national dividend 
combined with a policy of reducing prices would be difficult to 
carry out, and it would tend to work against business psychology. 
Douglas overlooked the expectation of higher prices in the future 
as a factor in bringing entrepeneurs out of their shells encour¬ 
aging them to invest and produce again. There is the argument 
that expectations of greater turnover, even at lower prices, 
would be effective in promoting recovery. But this would entail 
the adoption of Douglas’s complicated system of Just Price and 
credits that would not enter into costs» And even these measures 
would guarantee a lower price level only if their underlying 
assumptions applied to the real world. 

The main difference between Douglas’ solution for 
depression and the Keynsian viewpoint is that Douglas has 
separated purchasing power from its dependency on employment* 
According to Douglas, attempts to provide full employment are 
incompatible with technical progress which is rapidly reducing 
the man-hours of work through the replacement of manpower by 
machinery. He dismisses a more equitable distribution of income 
because of goods that constitute our high standard of living 
would not be available if income were equalized with the 
existing amount of purchasing power* (11) 

Douglas also rejected the socialist solution of 
abolishing private ownership of the means of production. The 
value of private ownership, says Douglas is based on the 
individual’s ability to make a profit and his power "to make 
prices for (his) product in excess of the costs," (12) Remove 
the entrepeneur’s powers to set his prices and he still retains 
his incentives for efficient administration. The socialists, 
according to Douglas, regard the problem as an administrative 
one; once administration is under public control they believe 
they have solved the problem of prices and distribution. In the 
opinion of thesocialists, of course, Douglas was not reaching 
the essence of the problem, that is, the maldistribution of 
income through the existence of private property and private 
profits. The Marxists particularly, emphasized this factor 

(11) : Mairet, P., Op. Cit * p. 60 

(12) : I bid p.$5 Douglas’s assumption that the entrepeneur 
independently creates his own price might also be questioned* 







1 









-ix~ 


through their doctrine of surplus value, the accumulation of 
profits, and their interpretation of the business cycle. 

Two other brief comparisons might be mentioned. Douglasite 
economics had similar motives to the fascist corporate machinery 
in that they both would attempt reorganization of the capitalist 
system by controlling finance and at the same time retain the 
profit motive. Fascist theory stressed extensive controls 
through the corporate state rather than Douglas 1 s method of 
controlling the issue of credit. From the long ruJa viewpoint 
Douglas’s theories run parallel to those of the technocrats. 
Douglas*s national dividend and the leisure state resulting 
from the application of "solar energy" are similar in nature to 
the achievement of technocracy and the distribution of purchasing 
power in enery or "erg" units. 

Alberta modifications of Douglas’s ideas arose out of the 
particular needs of the province during the thirties, and the 
interpretation by William Aberhart and his followers of the 
theory and practice of social credit. The theoretical innovations 
introduced by Mr. Aberhart were contained in his exposition of 
social credit in terms of four basic fundamentals: (1) the 
cultural heritage, (2) the basic dividend, (3) the non-negotiable 
certificate, and 14) the unearned increment, (13) Only one of 
the four fundamentals was an innovation in itself: the non- 
negotiable certificate; the other variations in the theory 
originated from Mr, Aberhart*s interpretation of, or methods of 
applying the other Douglasite terms. 

Like Douglas, Aberhart*s exposition was based on the idea 
of the cultural heritage—- the intrinsic right of the citizen 
to a share in the accumulated technology and assets of the 
community— to be realized by the payment of a national, or 
basic, dividend. The adaptation of social credit ideas to the 
depressed thirties is shown in Aberhart*s interpretation of 
the basic dividend. According to Aberhart the basic dividend 
will: 

r \ ..provide for the bare necessities of food, clothing, and 
shelter for every bona fide citizen whether he works or does 
not work and he shall not be required to pay it back or work it 
out. The only stipulation will be that the recipient must co¬ 
operate in every way possible. Those who work will be given 
their salaries, wages or commissions over and above the basic 
dividends,^ (14) 

Douglas had forseen the dividend as eventually being the 
chief source of income for most of the population. The Alberta 
dividend, although smaller than Douglas’s estimate for Scotland, 
was designed from the beginning to replace to some extent 
imcomes wiped out by the depression, and it was to be issued in 
varying amounts according to age groups* (15) The method suggested 

(13) : Aberhart, William, Social Credit Manual (Social Credit as 
to the Province of Alberta), Calgary, 1935, 64 pp* 

(14) : I bid p.14 

(15) : See Aopendix A/l Aberhart * s $25 per month would have 
amounted to $300 a year compared to Douglas’s estimate of £300 
or approximately $1,200 if the rate of exchange was £1: $4a 
cf, Douglas, Social Credit , p.212* 















-X- 


by Douglas in his plan of applying the dividend was to reduce 
arbitrarily wages and salaries by 25 %; obviously such measures 
were not practicable in the Alberta of the thirties* Yet, the 
Alberta dividend to be introduced during a depression was 
considerably smaller than Douglas’s estimate for Scotland, 
perhaps because of the smaller estimated total production for 
Alberta per capita on which to base a dividend compared to that 
of Scotland, or perhaps because Mr. Aberhart realized the limit¬ 
ations of social credit on a provincial scale. Basic dividends 
were to have been issued to each citizen without increasing the 
provincial debt by means of the non-negotiable certificates as 
a provincial form of exchange for use within the province only,(16) 

The basic dividend is also described by both Douglas and 
Aberhart as the "unearned increment of cooperation." (17) The 
unearned increment itself was defined as the increase in price 
not earned by the owner or the producer of goods. To avoid its 
identification with surplus value or socialist ideas Douglas 
explains: " the unearned increment rests inalienably on a basis 
of capital, not of labor," (13) and Aberhart says it accrues 
from the association of the people within the bounds of the land 
controlled by them." (19) Aberhart also refers to the unearned 
increment as the "price spread." 

Aberhart introduces his theories of taxation and the Just 
Price in terms of the unearned increment. The basic dividend 
is to be supplemented by an " automatic price control system... 
to fix a Just Price." (20) This "automatic" system will consist 
of " a commission of our best experts from every sphere of life... 
assembled (to) decide upon a fair and just price for all goods 
and services used in the Province." (21) Unlike Douglas’s 
original ratio, Aberhart’s Just Price was to have been computed 
as follows: "We begin with the price as shown by the incoming 
invoice. To this we add commission, overhead, unearned increment 
and so forth, and we thus fix the Just Price." (22) In practice 
it is doubtful if the consumer would benefit from this modific¬ 
ation of the Just Price; to obtain the cooperation of producers 
the commission would tend to confirm existing prices and the 
producers and wholesalers might have ample opportunity collect¬ 
ively to pad their invoices. If the government arbitrarily 
enforced certain rates of Just Price some producers would be 
discriminated against. 

Aberhart went one step further than Douglas and devised a 
"compensating price"..."to help make consumption balance and 
control production." (23) Presumably the compensating price 
would be a very short run market price to meet day-to-day 


(16) : See Chap, 11 above, 

(17) : Mairet, Op. Cit, p.104. Aberhart, W.. passism, 

(13): , Ibid. . P«104 

(19) : Aberhart, W., dp.Cit, p.17 

(20) : , . » Ib/cT p*19 

*21): I bid , p.21 

(22) : I bid. p,35 

( 23 ) : I bid, p.21 

(24) : I bid, p.21 


















-xi- 


conditions as they occurred* The compensating price, then, was 
Marketing Price: Total Consumption X Just Price**** The difference 
Total Production 

between the Just Price and the compensating price will be made up 
to the retailer or consumer much in the same way that the basic 
dividends are issued and recovered*" (24) Aberhart indicates 
that the Just Price will merely be a confirmation of existing 
prices, particularly if it is based on invoices, and that the 
"compensating price" will be more in the nature of a Just Price 
as Douglas saw it* Compensation to producers will take place 
in much the same manner as Douglas’s method of special credits* 
Continuity in the flow of credit to producers and retailers 
will, be attained as follows: 

'(The basic dividend credit, and other incomes) must be 
expended by the end of the year following the receipt of the same**. 
Surplus credit may be used to purchase government (provincial) 
bonds*.* All producers will be allowed temporary supervised credit* 
Directions should be given from time to time as to the products 
most needed...the state must be prepared to issue credit with¬ 
out interest to producers and distributors;(25) 

Throughout his writings Douglas remained vague as to how 
the basic dividend would actually be financed; generally he 
implied that it would merely be through the creation of addit¬ 
ional credit based on some method of capitalizing the ratio 
of population to the country’s assets, or as in the Scottish plan, 
by an arbitrary figure* In his plan for Alberta, Mr* Aberhart 
reached a relatively simple solution, and in so doing he moved 
to his most distant point of deviation from Douglasism* In 
effect, Aberhart says that hewould have financed the basic 
dividend by taxation: 

;/ 0n account of the increased turnover through dividends, 
salaries, commissions..*it is felt that the producer and distrib¬ 
utor will be able to carry on their business with a closer margin 
of profit or commission on turnover* Thus the province will be 
able to collect a levy that will provide that basic dividend to 
distribute to various citizens*' <26) 

This tax, in the form of an "unearned increment levy" would 
be employed to finance the basic dividend and to adjust Alberta 
prices to outside markets or prices on goods shipped to Alberta 
to those within the province* If Alberta goods were being ship¬ 
ped to markets where prices were higher, Alberta producers "would 
receive the Just Price and a large share of the extra price above 
it* An unearned increment levy would be collected." (27) Con¬ 
versely a levy would be added to cheaper goods coming into Alberta 
to bring them up to the Alberta Just Price 0 

Further explanation of the operation of his taxation 
system is offered by Aberhart in his discussion of social credit 


(25) : Aberhart, Wm, Op* Cit* p.23 

(26) : I bid, p. 29 










-xii- 


in terms of sixty questions: 

^QUES.ll: If the price of wheat on the world market was 550 
and our Just Price was 600 how would we be able to export our 
wheat? 

ANS*: The Government would allow the farmer a bonus of 

50 on his wheat and they would collect it back by an unearned 
increment levy on the imports (into Alberta) thus balancing 
imports with exports* (28) 

QUES.13: Will the primary producer, the farmer, not have 
to bear the whole of the unearned increment levy in the recovery 
of the basic dividends? 

ANS*: No* The unearned increment levy comes out of the 

price spread***(and) is a direct levy on the consumer*.*The 
unearned increment levy constitutes a part of the Just Price 
and therefore will not be taken from the producers and distrib¬ 
utors, but from the consumers who have been given the dividends 
with which to purchase.''(29) 

And: "The unearned increment would be collected on 

each transaction thus making the levy very small." ( 30 ) 

Aberhart’s description of the unearned increment levy as a 
means of financing the basic dividend appears to be confused, 
particularly with regard to the shifting and incidence of the tax* 
At first, he implies that the producers and distributors would 
have to pay the levy from their receipts then, in Question 13, he 
regards the levy as being a consumers’ tax* It seems that he has 
inherited Douglas’s confusion on separate spheres of payment 
to some extend* Aberhart apparently attempts to clear up the 
basic idea behind the unearned increment levy in his last 
statement above. The levy according to this statement would be 
similar to a sales tax, only instead of being collected from 
final retail sales it would be collected with each transaction 
from wholesaler to retailer to consumer. Perhaps his description 
of it in Question 13 as a consumers’ tax would be correct in the 
absence of enforced controls preventing the tax from being 
carried through to the consumers in higher prices* 

If the unearned increment levy was applied solely to 
consumers the basic dividend would become nothing more than a 
transfer payment with the incidence on those consumers who in 
turn received a large proportion of their incomes in dividend 
credit* The distribution and recovery of such credits would 
probably be considerably less equitable than the distribution of 
transfer payments by means of progressive income taxes, inher¬ 
itance or corporation taxes on large firms* 

In regard to saving in Mr* Aberhart’s social credit economy 
it would be carried out by means of provincial bonds* 

7/ Credit used in purchasing the Bonds would be at once 
distributed in one of these four methods: 

(1) through compensating price discount(i*e. lower prices) 

(2) through public works programs 

(3) increase in the rate of just wages v 

(4) increase in the basic dividend per month* (31) 

Aberhart, Wm. Op* Cit* p*36 
I bid p*37 
I bid p*39 
I bid, p.41 

Aberhart W* Op* Cit a p 45 


(27) : 

( 28 ) : 
(29): 
(30J>: 
(31): 













-xiii- 


The method of distribution in No. 2 appears to be cont¬ 
radictory to social credit criticism of public works as a means 
of combating depression but the difference in social credit 
public works would presumably be that they would not go to 
increase the public debt but would be financed by special credits,, 

It is worth noticing, however, that Douglas’s objectives 
in applying social credit to Alberta were similar to those of 
Aberhart, In his Interim Report to the UFA govt, in May 1935, 
Douglas as ’’chief reconstruction adviser” stated the objectives as 
^(1) A drastic reduction of taxation, particularly upon 
real property. 

(2) A maintenance dividend as of right, possibly small at 
first, and graded so as to be a maximum after middle 
age. (italics mine) 

(3) Measures designed to produce a low price level within 
the province, with adequate remuneration to the prod¬ 
ucer and trader, 

(4) Development of internal resources based rather upon 
physical capacity than upon financial considerations. 

All of these objectives can be attained, and can only be 

attained, by access to control of the local credit.''( 32 ) 

Immediate steps towards realizing these objectives would, 
according to Douglas, be three: 

/# (1) The systematic provision of a news circulating system 
under the unchallengeable control of the province, particularly 
in regard to radio facilities of sufficient power to cover a 
wide geographical area, 

(2) The organization of some Credit Institution, either 
under the Dominion Bank Act, or otherwise, which will give access 
to the creation of effective demand through the credit 

system, on principles already well recognized and established, 

(3) Systematic organization directed to the accumulation of 
what may be termed ’’foreign exchange,” i.e., effective demand 
not subject to attach as being recognisable as having been 
created within the province a "(33) 

Although Douglas’s suggestions how to apply social credit 
in Alberta were not expanded by him beyond this point it is 
evident from the Report as a whole and his correspondence with 
Aberhart that he contemplated more drastic action than had the 
Alberta premier. It is significant that Aberhart’s repeated 
entreaties to Douglas to formulate a social credit program for 
Alberta were met, according to their published correspondence, 
with evasion and demands for near-dictatorial powers, resulting 
finally in Douglas’s resignation as reconstruction adviser and the 
dispatch of two Douglasite followers to Alberta from the U.K. 

At the Same time, Douglas’s measures apparently appealed to the 
rank-and-file Social Credit members in Alberta. The influence cf 
his proposals, combined with those of Aberhart, may be traced in 
the Alberta legislation of 1936-193$ outlined in Chapter II above. 


(32) Douglas, C.H., The Alberta Experiment: An Interim Survey, 
London, 1937 pp.l00-10l« 

(33) I Bid, p.llS 













BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR APPENDIX "A” 


l fl Books. 

Mairet, P* (editor), The Douglas Manual t New York, 1934, 

Coward McCann, 122 pp. A collection of exceipts from Douglas’s 
writings* 

Douglas, C.H. Social Credit (3rd ed.) London, 1935, Eyre and 
Spottiswoode, 212 pp.Contains a section on Douglas’s social 
philosophy as well as his economic theories* 

Douglas, C.H». Economic Democracy , published by Cecil Palmer, London 

London« _, Credit Power and Democracy % Cecil Palmer* 

« The Control and Distribution of Production, 

Cecil Palmer. 

_ _ i The Monopoly of Credit « Chapman and Hall, London 

, Warning Democracy, C.M. Grieve, London. 

Cole, G.D.H., (editor) What Everyone Wants to Know About Money, 
London, 1933, Victor Gallancz Ltd 0 , 544 pp. cf. Chapter Vlll: 
Gaitskell, H.T a N 0 , Pour Monetary Heretics . The Labor Chancellor 
of the Exchequer gave Douglas’s A plus B Theorem a thorough 
going-over during his academic days. 

Hiskett, W.R*, Social Credits or Socialism London, 1935, 

Victor Gollancz Ltd. 222 pp* A socialist critique of Douglas. 

Also contains the evidence given by Douglas before .the MacMillan 
Committee on Finance in May 1930* 

Lewis John, Douglas Fallacies . London, 1935, Chapman and Hall Ltd., 
135 pp* A Marxist critique of Douglas* 


Douglas C.H., The Alberta Experiment: An Interim Survey . 

London, 1937, Eyre and Spottiswoode, 220 pp. Douglas’s view of the 
Alberta Social Credit experiment up to the spring of 1937* 

Contains as appendices a copy of Douglas’s Interim Report to 
the U.F.A. gov’t., and correspondence between Aberhart and Douglas 
from August 1935 to March, 1936* 

Aberhart, William. Social Credit Manual (Social Credit as 
applied to the Province of Alberta) Calgary, June 1935, Western 
Printing and Litho* Co., 64 pp* The famous Social Credit ’’bluebook” 
outlining Aberhart’s theories. 

Executive Council of Alberta, The Case for Alberta, Edmonton, 193$, 
A Shnitka, King’s Printer, 445 pp. The Social Credit interpret¬ 
ation of economic conditions in Canada and Alberta. Contains the 
text of the ’’Credit of Alberta Regulations Act” disallowed in 1937* 

2. Articles 

Irving, John A., The Evolution of the Social Credit Movement, The 
Canadian Journal of Economics and Political Science , Toronto, 

August 194$, pp 321-342* An apt survey of the Alberta Social 
Credit movement up to 1947* Emphasizes the socio-psychological 
elements in the background of the Alberta movement. 






































APPENDIX A-l 


The $25 per Month Basic Dividend 

One of the many controversies that occurred in Alberta after 
the election of the social credit government centered around pay¬ 
ment of the basic dividend. In regard to the amount of the dividend 
the argument was whether the $25 per month had merely been an 
illustrative statement by Mr. Aberhart, or a definite promise for 
the future. 

In the “Blue Book” of the Alberta social credit movement (1) 

Mr. Aberhart considers the $25 a month in varying degrees of cer¬ 
tainty from an illustrative example, to an underlying assumption, 
and finally to a confirmation of it as a definite payment. To 
begin with, he introduces the $25 per month as an example: ”... 
each citizen will receive a pass book in which at the beginning of 
each month will be entered the basic dividend for that month, say 
$25. u (2) Later on, he indicates his approval of $25 as a suitable 
rate: "basic dividends should be $25 a month for every bona fide 

citizen, male or female, 21 years or more." (3) And at this point 
he outlines the scale of payment of the dividend according to age 
for those groups under 21 years: at 16 years the dividend should 
be $5 per month, at 17 to 18, $10 a month, at 19, $15 a month, and 
at 20, $20 per month. He qualifies this statement by two sentences: 
"These figures are merely suggested for Illustration purposes," 

(4-) and "The basic dividend may be changed at the end of any period 
to suit the standard of living them prevalent." (5) Later, in his 
description of the workings of the social credit economy, Mr. 
Aberhart assumed a payment of $25 throughout, for example, "each 
month (the citizen) will be required to present his dividend book 
at the branch State Credit House, when a credit entry of $25 will 
be made. " (6) In his reply to one of the sixty questions directed 

at him by a mythical inquisitor Mr. Aberhart appeared to confirm 
the assumption of the $25 per month as a definite payment: 

QUES. 20: Will dividends always remain at $25 a month? 

ANTS.: No. We believe that the dividends will increase 

as the standard of living increases. We are not in 
favor of increasing the dividends...very rapidly at 
first. We would be more favorable to the distribut¬ 
ion of greater purchasing power by means of public 
works or price discounts. We feel certain that the 
amount of dividends per month, will, however, be 
soon increased above $25* (7) 

The length of time elapsing before payment of a basic dividend 
and realization of other social credit measures was indicated as 
follows: 

QUES. 55: How long would it take you to introduce social 
credit into the Province of Alberta? 


















-ii- 


ANS: That is a difficult question to answer with pre¬ 

cision. Much information will need to be gathered. 
Expert investigation will have to be made. I would 
judge that fifteen or eighteen months might be 
required. ( 8 ). 


(1) Aberhart, Wm. 

( 2 ) Ibid : p. lb. 

(3) Ibid : p. 19. 

(4) Ibid : p. 21. 

(5) Ibid: p. 21. 

( 6 ) —. 

( 7 ) Ibid : p. 47. 

( 8 ) Ibid : p. 62. 


Social Credit Manual , Calgary, 1935 5 64 pp. 
(italics mine throughout) 


P*23. 












APPENDIX B 


A NOTE ON THE T REASURY BRANCH ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 





-i- 


APPENDIX B 

A NOTE ON THE TREASURY BRANCH ACCOUNTING SYSTEM 

Because they represent a section of a provincial govern¬ 
ment department the Treasury Branches 1 accounting system is 
based on a governmental revenue and expenditure approach rather 
than the profit and loss system employed by banks and other 
financial institutions. The differences between banking and 
Treasury Branch accounting systems may be understood from a 
brief survey of their procedure regarding revenues and expend¬ 
itures. 

1* Procedure on revenue : Total revenue collected by 
each Treasury Branch over a quarterly period is cleared to head 
office by debiting branch revenue accounts and crediting 
"branch clearings”. Upon receipt of the revenue transfers from 
Branches the head office credits the amount to each branch in a 
branch ledger. At the same time head office debits "branch 
clearings” and credits corresponding revenue accounts in the 
head office general ledger. So far the revenue received from 
the branches has been credited to corresponding accounts in 
head office, and head office has acknowledged receipt of 
revenue in its own books. The next step is to clear the revenue 
to the Provincial Treasurer, or the Treasury Department. 

Firstly, head office prepares for the transfer of revenue 
by crediting the total amount received from the branches to a 
consolidated revenue account at the same time the individual 
branch revenue accounts in the general ledger are debited. A 
cheque is then issued to the Provincial Treasurer and the cheque 
goes through an involved clearing process through the Depositors 
Trust Account and other channels. 

The cheque issued to the Provincial Treasurer is first 
credited to the province’s General Revenue Fund at the Imperial 
Bank, and the corresponding debit entry is made from the Deposit 
ors T Trust Account at the bank. The Imperial Bank then clears 
the cheque to Treasury Branch, Edmonton (not head office). At 
the Edmonton Branch, where a contra-account is maintained of 
the Depositors’ Trust Account, the latter is credited and the 
cheque is cleared to head office by debiting branch clearings. 

At head office, branch clearings is credited with the 
amount of the cheque and a debit entry is made against ’’Due to 
Provincial Treasurer”. So far the cheque has been passing 
through a series of suspense or clearing accounts. It has not 
yet been charged against the consolidated revenue account ment¬ 
ioned in para. 2 above. The final entry, then, is to debit 
this consolidated revenue account and to credit the cheque to 
the "Consolidated Deficit”, thereby reducing the deficit by the 
amount of the revenue received. Conceivably, after crediting 
branch clearings at head office the cheque could have been 
debited directly to the consolidated revenue account. But this 
would not have reduced the Consolidated Deficit; therefore, the 
last entry is made. 

2, Procedure on expenditure; All expenditures, with the 
exception of interest paid on depositors’ savings accounts, are 






- 


* 

- 

1 . 

. 


c 

. . 

. . ■ 

< , i - ' 

' 

. . ■ . : 

• ■ i 

< 

. 

. 

• 0 , 

. 

- ' 

c 

. ' 

- 

< ■* 

* 






t 


: 


, 













-11- 


paid by cheque issued by the Treasury Department. Unlike banks 
and other commercial organizations who offset expenditures by 
revenue within their own branches, the Treasury Branches credit 
all revenue to the Provincial Treasurer’s General Revenue Acc¬ 
ount, through the channels referred to above; and they have all 
their expenditures, except savings interest, paid by requisition¬ 
ing cheques from the Treasury Dept. 

The procedure on expenditures is as follows: Invoices for 
all payments are submitted by the branches to head office. 

There they are checked and covered by TT vouchers for payment TT 
which are submitted to the Treasury Dept, for issuance of cheques 
after verification by the audit dept. As vouchers for payment 
are acted on, corresponding entries are posted in expenditure 
accounts at head office. Then, at the end of each fiscal year 
the balances in these expenditure accounts are debited to "Con¬ 
solidated Deficit" and credited to "Due to Provincial Treasurer." 
At the same time that the individual vouchers for payment are 
posted to expenditure account in head office, they are also re¬ 
corded in a branch ledger under their respective expenditure 
headings. 

Treasury Branch appropriations from the Provincial Treasurer 
cover all types of expenditure, except those expenses incurred 
for premises, furniture and the maintenance of premises, which 
are paid for all depts of the government by the department of 
public works. At the end of each fiscal year each dept, includ¬ 
ing the Treasury Branches, is charged in the public accounts 
with their share of premises, maintenance costs etc. Mainten¬ 
ance costs include repairs, rent for buildings not owned by the 
government--!.e., approximately 50$-of Treasury Branch premises 
-- light, water, taxes, insurance, telephones, janitors T wages, 
cleaning supplies, fuel etc. 

Deliveries made or services retiered before the end of the 
fiscal year are charged by the Treasury Branches to the previous 
year’s appropriation even though payment may not be made for 
some time after the end of the fiscal year. Goods ordered, but 
not delivered before the end of the fiscal year, are charged to 
the following year’s appropriation although at the time the 
order was placed the purchasing price was charged against the 
current year’s appropriations. For example, if in January the 
Treasury Branches order a car worth $1,300, at the time the 
order is placed the amount is deducted from appropriations, 
making it impossible to use that amount for any other purpose. 

If the car is not delivered until after the end of the fiscal 
year the entry is reversed and payment is made on the next 
year’s appropriation. There is no carryover of one year’s 
appropriation to the next to offset such charges. In practice 
this is overcome by (1) avoiding purchases near the end of the 
fiscal year, i.e., stockpiling supplies in November or December, 
and (2) if the appropriation is exceeded, provision is made for 
overdrafts from the Treasury Department. 

The result is that the Treasury Branches have to hold their 
books open for one month beyond the end of the fiscal year to 
pay for goods ordered and delivered but not invoiced until ofter 
the end of the year. This means that they have to operate two 
complete sets fo books for a period of approximately one month 
after the fiscal year end. Under the government system of acc¬ 
ounting payments for all goods delivered or services rendered 
during a fiscal year must be provided for out of appropriations 



, 

< ' 

c 

. ' 


: < ■ f( 

» • 

■ •- 

* 








. 

< •• 

on r n ■ • ' ( -• 


■ • ■ ■ • 1 i 

. 






• TT n A ■ • 

V 4 c. ° 3 ^ v' v ‘ ''V A < .» 

’ 

* 

:.\v' .. 

; : ■■ ; j nv- ■ , 

t * * 

. • : < - t C ? '• ; 

* 0 . 

■ • : : ' 

V jj= ' . < ■ , ' ;t ; 

A { V ' ■" '-'T . . L -■ ■ ■[;,. : n 

, ;■* .-tf,.: : /" .„■> ... - ... : . : • . 

; f n.-nn ;■ , : n .; 

. 

... C, i„ j ' ■■■ - im; . : i ■ 

* 

. 

< . . 

r< v. ' . ■ ; ' A C t ’■ > 

. 

* 







-iii- 

for that year even though actual payment is not made until after 
the year. Banks do not carry items through in this manner, and 
if necessary they can make their payments in advance. As a 
government department the Treasury Branches cannot make payment 
until the actual receipt of goods or services. 

The dffect of the entire accounting procedure is that in¬ 
dividual branches have no means of maintaining a record of their 
expenditures because all expenditures are made through head off¬ 
ice. Profit and loss statements covering the year must accord¬ 
ingly be prepared by head office instead of by the branches. 
Preparation of these statements must be delayed until head office 
receives figures from the department of public works covering 
the maintenance of buildings, etc. The result of this proced¬ 
ure is that the branches cannot be advised of their individual 
net profit or loss until several months after the end of the 
fiscal year when they receive copies of fiscal statements from 
head office. 

Bank branches, on the other hand, pay all of their own ex¬ 
penditures charging the amounts to expenditure accounts carried 
in their branch general ledgers, then at the end of their fiscal 
year they close out expenditure and revenue accounts to their 
profit and loss account. They then transfer their net profit 
or loss to their head office accompanied by a branch profit and 
loss statement. 

















* 


c 








• i; . eo t 



- •> V>r-< , ! 3i ' ... - T , . , m 

. 

. ■ ( • ■ j -■ ' ^ 

. . 

... . 3 

' 

„ . " r• ■ 

, 




. 















APPENDIX C 


) 

ANALYSIS OF A TREASURY BRANCHES BALANCE SHEET 




- i 


APPENDIX C 

ANALYSIS OF A TREASURY BRANCHES BALANCE SHEET 


TREASURY BRANCHES 

BALANCE SHEET AS AT MARCH 31, 1950. 
ASSETS 


Cash: 

Currency on hand at branches & agencies . $1,411,107.59 

Balances on deposit with chartered banks . 3,770,838.81 

Cash items in transit . 1,746,977.31 


Accounts Receivable 


Loans and advances: 

Government sponsored activities .$1,256,799*98 

Guaranteed by the Province . 1,822,874.03 

Municipalities, school divisions and hospitals. . 499,848.77 

Commercial and industrial. 4,862,858.41 

Housing and home improvement. 242,755*01 

Personal and agricultural . 1,889,093.15 

$10,57^,209.35 

Deduct: Reserve for bad & doubtful debts . 109,936.93 


Inve stment s: 

Dominion of Canada debentures of a par value of 
$17,550,000.00 at cost, less premium written off. 

Fund for bad & doubtful debts: 

Balance on deposit. 

Fund for Contingent Liabilities:. 

Investments: 

Dominion of Canada debentures of par value of 

$492,000.00 at cost. 

Accrued interest . 

Prepaid expenses: 

Insurance premiums unexpired. 8,384.03 

Stationery and supplies on hand. 15,826.42 


Automobiles & equipment less depreciation. 

Furnishings & fixtures at cost. 

Deficit: 

Balance April 1, 1949 . 

Deduct: Surplus for year ended March 31, 1950.... 


$1,714,524.70 

1,904.79 


$6,928,923.71 

105.80 


10,464,272.42 


17,550,000.00 


109,936.93 


492,000.00 

69,100.33 

24,210.45 

39,677.26 

70,540.48 

1,712,619.91 


$37,461,387-29 


































( 



1 



• --W £1 S;$ 



• V - A 




L 




L 



























- ii - 

TREASURY BRANCHES (Cont'd) 
LIABILITIES 


Liabilities to the public: 

Receiver General of Canada .$ 28.05 

Accounts payable. 283.92 

Drafts and money orders outstanding. 1,419,577.19 

Deposits not bearing interest. 14,583,356.02 

Deposits bearing interest, with interest... 

accrued to March 31, 1950 . 16,309,362.75 

_ $32,312,607.93 

Province of Alberta revenue and trust deposits 3,202,471.60 

Deferred credits: 

Unearned interest . 19,325.22 

Interest contingent account. 5*900.53 


25,225.75 

Provincial Treasurer: 

Appropriations for maintenance and operations. 


less revenue remitted. 1*333*541.53 

Appropriations for furnishings and fixtures 70,540.48 
Appropriations for bad & doubtful debts fund 25*000.00 


Appropriations for contingent liabilities find 492,000.00 

_ 1,921,082.01 


$37 A6l, 397-29 




























iii 


TREASURY BRANCHES 

STATEMENT OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED MARCH 31, 1950. 


REVENUE 


Interest earnings on: 

Inve stment s. 

Loans and advances 
Bank balances. 


$ 508,723.92 
438,072.49 
11,880.97 


1958,677.38 


Commissions and exchange earnings . 192,573.26 

* Sundry revenue. 2,990.19 


$1,154,240.83 


EXPENDITURE 


Salaries. 608,287.42 

Interest on savings deposits. 234,687.03 

Maintenance of buildings. 93,372.56 

Agents’ commission. 78,304.88 

Provision for bad 8s doubtful debts. 33,500.00 

Travelling expenses. 32,621.70 

Printing, stationery 8c office supplies. 27,755*15 

Postage, telegraph 8c telephone. 21,939*59 

Advertising and publicity. 9,446.62 

Insurance. 5,887-71 

Clearing house fees. 2,484.4-9 

Freight and express. 2,186.12 

Sundry. 1,872.77 


$1,152,336.04 


Surplus for the year ended March 31, 1950.. 


1,904.79 


Public Accts. of Alta , pp. 232-234 
See also Ibid pp. 222, 45. 


* Derived from sale of bonds sold as agent for Bank of Canada. 










































-iv- 


APPENDIX C 

i 

ANALYSIS OF A TREASURY BRANCHES BALANCE SHEET 


At the end of each month each Treasury Branch submits a 
balance sheet to head office. At head office the balance 
sheets are consolidated with head office accounts to form the 
basis of the public accounts. On the basis of the Public Acc¬ 
ounts of 1950 we will consider the balance sheet item by item. 
Firstly a look at the assets side: 

ASSETS 


Cash 


Tt Currency on hand at branches and agencies" is self explan¬ 
atory. "Balance on deposit with chartered banks" includes the 
Depositors’ Trust Account in the Imperial Bank at Edmonton. 
"Cash items in transit" is the aggregate of cheques and other 
similar items in transit among branches at the time of the 
statement. 

Accounts Receivable 


Represents commissions payable by other departments to the 
Treasury Branches for the sale of licenses, insurance etc. 

Loans and Advances 


For a more detailed breakdown of loans and advances see 
Table Xll. The "Reserve for bad and doubtful debts" figure 
of $109,936 appears to be out of line with the amount listed 
under that heading in Table Xlll. In addition to the $70,000 
plus the $33,500 retained in the reserve as stated in Table 
Xlll, there had been $25,000 charged against the Treasury 
Branch appropriation for the same purpose in a separate account 
in a previous year. The total of the reserve, then, was made 
up of these three figures, i.e. $12$,500. During 1950 $13,563.07 
was written off as bad debts, leaving $109,936.93 in the public 
accounts. The old appropriation of $25,000 for the bad and 
doubtful debts fund appears on the liabilities side, second 
last row from the bottom. 

Investments 

Self explanatory. Investments are made by the provincial 
Treasurer out of funds in Depositors’ Trust A/C. 

Fund for bad & doubtful debts 


See above. This entry on the credit side represents the 
balance of the fund kept for the Treasury Branches at the 
Edmonton Branch. No funds are kept at the head office. 













■ 

„ 

■ 

* 

' 


* 


* 

, 












t 



















* 




< 





































































» 
















< 






, 

( 
















i 





c 










c 






c ■■ • 



















» 

















■ 

* : 

* 


i 








„ 


c 


^ 























. 


t 




















\ 

: i\ ' 





























• 





* 



















































- 




■ 








Fund for Contingent Liabilities 


This entry represents the accumulated total of the consum¬ 
ers’ bonus as implied by the provincial auditor’s comment: T ’an 
amount of $4$0,733.6£ representing consumers’ bonus for the 
months of February 1941 to April 1945 inclusive. This amount 
may be financed from the fund provided for contingent liabilit¬ 
ies. TT The debit entry for this account is the last item on the 
liabilities side. The $492,000 recorded in the Public Accounts 
represents the total amount of consumers’ bonus outstanding in 
the head office Treasury Branch accounts. This cumulative bon¬ 
us figure represented an increase in the liabilities of the 
Treasury Branches to the public for which there was no offsett¬ 
ing asset. That is, as the bonus was earned by depositors it 
was added to their accounts thereby increasing the liability of 
the Treasury Branches to depositors. But at that time no funds 
were made available to the Treasury Branches from the general 
revenue fund to offset this increased liability. Instead the 
cumulative amount was charged to an account in head office gen¬ 
eral ledger. Between 1943 and 1945 three separate appropriat¬ 
ions were passed, totalling $492,000, providing funds to in¬ 
crease assets to offset this liability. If the Treasury 
Branches had discountinued operating before this contingent 
fund was set up there would have been insufficient assets to 
meet all liabilities, the difference being the amount of the 
cumulative bonus. 

Accrued Interest 

The $69,100. 33 represents an amount charged to the app¬ 

ropriation to provide for interest earned on savings accounts, 
but not yet credited to the accounts, i.e. interest on term 
savings accounts is not added until the accounts mature. 

Prepaid Expenses 

The Treasury Branches take out their insurance coverage 
for a period of three years and pay their premium in advance. 

The amount listed represents the unexpired proportion up to 
November 1, 1951* 

Equipment less depreciation 

Cars are depreciated at 25$ during the first year, 15 % 
during the 2nd year, and 10$ for each subsequent year down to 
a minimum of 10$ of original cost. These cars are used by 
inspectors and at branches with sub-branch services. 

Furnishings and fixtures 

If at any time furnishings have to be replaced, their 
cost is charged against that year’s maintenance cost. At the 
time of replacement the furnishings have been fully depreciat¬ 
ed. These items are supplied by appropriation through the Depart¬ 
ment of Public Works, and they are therefore depreciated by 
that Department. 























, 




. 














. 






*’£J' 




; i: : 


' 

* 




5 


* 

- 




„ 

is 

: J ■ ... Vw bellow j 

{ 


■ 

..Bn' . : ..' it : 

Oi 

>: ' ; y ■ .yy . • yj/.i : i',i. 

■ ' 














.* 







* ' s ’ •• 













-vi- 


Deficit 


The consolidated deficit is made up entirely of accumulat¬ 
ed operating costs carried over from year to year since the 
Treasury Branches were established. The low surplus figure for 
1950, which is deducted from the deficit is attributable to the 
$33,500 put aside for reserve against bad and doubtful debts. 

LIABILITIES 


Liabilities to the Public 

The amount owing Tt Receiver General of Canada" is income, 
tax collected by the Treasury Branches from non-resident deposit¬ 
ors on behalf of the Dominion govt, ©n Dominion bond coupon 
interest. "Accounts payable" are those igtems mentioned in App¬ 
endix B under expenditures, made up of goods purchased or services 
rendered within the fiscal year which have not been paid for as 
at the end of the fiscal year. "Drafts and money orders out¬ 
standing" refer to a redemption account maintained for that pur¬ 
pose. When drafts or money orders are sold, the amount is credit¬ 
ed to "drafts issued accounts at the branches pending their red¬ 
emption. 

Alberta Revenue and Trust Deposits 

This sum represents the provincial government deposits 
kept at the Treasury Branches either through current or sav¬ 
ings accounts. 

Deferred Credits 


Unearned interest: When the Treasury Branches make a term 
loan, they add interest to maturity and credit it to revenue at 
the time the loan is granted. If the maturity date is beyond 
the fiscal year the "unearned" portion of the interest is cal¬ 
culated and reversed from the revenue account to this suspense 
account so as to show a true revenue figure. 

Interest contingent account: If there is doubt as to the 
collectability of certain loans, instead of crediting the inter¬ 
est to revenue the Treasury Branches credit the amount to the 
interest contingent account where it is held as asreserve again¬ 
st the debt until ultimate collection or write-off. 

Provinci al Treasurer : Includes total operating and cap¬ 
ital expenditures incurred since inception of the Treasury 
Branches minus the cumulative amount of revenue earned by the 
Treasury Branches and transferred to the Provincial Treasurer. 
This amount differs from the deficit because the cumulative 
deficit does not include capital accounts for equipment, furn¬ 
ishings, stationery etc. The appropriation for bad and doubtful 
debts fund under this account represents $25,000 appropriated 
for this purpose prior to 1949 when the reserve was set aside 
out of Treasury Branch profits. 













{ ) ' 

r 


.JV-S; ■ 


"Vo. : ■; ^ 7 0.!?; 

• 



r. ?■*•' • ;.•) oV oeo • 



* 

, ■ ■ Av r, 0 : 





i ■ ' 






. JV\ . ■ , ■ V . L 



‘ • r. 

: 

; 





; •: A.(.U 





VO 11. P.o ; 



■ V 


; 





' V ,L . ■ r £1.' , ' 









„ 






■ oV Vt ix.l. 






, 









# 








. 

: 

' '■ ■ ? ooo.' 

ZL * : 

- 

* 

z ■ 

: . ■/. I . . J 

. 

SO/.iV 

■ 

' ■ Id : •" r i ; - . • : 

. 

, Vc i. ■■ ;; r' o . 5' 1 J 

. 1 ’V ■ v 

* 










APPENDIX D 


THE ALBERTA BANKING POWERS ACTS OP 1940 AND 1944. 





-1- 


Appendix D 

The Alberta Banking Powers Acts of 19*+0 & 19*+4 

On February 16, 19*+0, the Alberta legislature passed a 
Banking Powers Act which empowered the Lieutenant Governor-in- 
Council "to apply for and obtain from the Parliament of Canada 
the enactment of a statute incorporating the Alberta Provincial 
Bank." (s. 2) The Provincial Treasurer was authorized to pay 
$50Qp00 out of the general revenue fund to provide the basis for 
such an incorporation. (s. 3) Members of the Executive Council 
were to be directors and officers of the bank. 

Purpose of the provincial bank, according to government 
statements was to provide services that could not be provided 
through the Treasury Branches. During the same session, however, 
the government passed the amendment to the Treasury Branches Act 
authorizing them to grant loans, in effect making the latter a 
provincial bank. This point was stressed by opposition members 
in attacking the Banking Powers Act; they contended the bank would 
be a duplication of services with existing banks and the Treasury 
Branches. 

One opposition member said "it was his understanding that the 
government proposed proceeding with the plan and would ask for 
special concessions in the charter, i^hich he said would be turned 
down. The government, he said, would then use the refusal for 
political purposes...He also stated that provincial banks in Canada 
had not been a success.” (2) Upon passage of the Act the Alberta 
government then made two successive applications to the Dominion 
parliament which were rejected by the Commons’ banking committee 
as being unconstitutional. 

In 19*+H- the Act was repealed and a similar statute under the 
same title was enacted by the Alberta legislature. Under this 
legislation the members of the executive council could become 
shareholders in the bank to the amount of $500,000 (s. 2). The 
shares purchased by members of the executive council out of the 
general revenue fund were to be held in trust for the province. 

(s. V). The proposed bank was declared to be subject to the same 
claims and liabilities as an ordinary bank. 

Some indication of the purpose behind the Act was contained 
in a statement by Premier Manning that ’’when a bank charter was 
obtained application would be made to the Bank of Canada for 
issuance of debt-free money,” (3) in accordance with social credit 
principles. In answer to an opposition member's question regarding 
the relationship of the proposed bank to the Treasury Branches, 
the attorney-general, the Hon. Lucien Maynard replied: "If we get 
a bank charter we could transfer the whole Treasury Branch organ¬ 
ization into the operations of the bank charter.” 0+) Applicat¬ 
ion under the second Act was rejected on same grounds as its pre¬ 
decessor. 

1: Statutes of Alberta . 19^0 (2nd session) c.7? and Ibid , 19^,0.7» 
2: Edmonton Bulletin , Saturday.* February 17? 19^0. 

3: Edmonton Bulletin , Friday, March 2*+, 19W* 
h : Ibid (same date). 

























