
University of Alberta Library 


0 1620 3448512 6 


For Reference 


TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 

































©X MBIIS 
IIIUMBSKRSIS 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/socialpoliticaltOOdixo 


SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TEACHINGS IN THE NOVELS OF H.G. WELLS 


by JEAN L. DIXON, B.A., B.ED. 

A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF REQUIREMENTS FOR DEGREE'OF M.A. 
UNDER THE DIRECTION OF J.T. JONES 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1948 










UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recommend to the Committee on Graduate Studies for 
acceptance, a thesis, entitled “Social and Political 
Teachings in the Novels of H.G. Wells”, submitted by 
Jean L. Dixon, B.A., B.ED., in partial fulfillment of 
requirements for the degree of M.A. 












CONTENTS 


Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 

Chapter 5 

Chapter 4 


.. THE MAKING OF H.G, WELLS 

.. WELLS’S SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TEACHINGS, 
1895-1914 


... WAR AND POST-WAR YEARS AFFECT WELLS’S THINKING, 
1915-1929 

... DICTATORSHIPS AND INEFFECTIVE MEN, 1950-1945 


Chapter 5 ... SUMMARY AND CRITICAL ESTIMATE 





Chapter 1 


THE MAKING OF H.G. WELLS 


1950 ... West, Geoffrey, H.G. ,r ells 
193^ Wells, H.G., 


Experiment in Autobiography 













Chapter 1 


?H F, MAKING OF H.G. V/ELLS 

H.G. Wells's Experiment in Autobiograph y, 193^, gives the best 
insight into the making of the man who, for fifty years (1895~19^5)> 
wrote novels, short stories, essays, and history books, with the un¬ 
ceasing purpose of directing men’s minds toward the need for a new 
social order. Herbert George Wells was born in Bromley, Kent, now 
a suburb of London, September 21, 1566, the third in the family. 

His father was Joseph W. Wells, small shopkeeper, ex-gardener and 
cricketer; and his mother was Sarah Neal Wells, trained as a lady's 
maid. He attended lorley's Academy until, at the age of fourteen, 
he became apprentice in a draper's shop. Unsatisfactory as an ap¬ 
prentice, he became a pupil-teacher to an unqualified teacher for 
two or three months, then a chemist's apprentice for a month, 
spent two months as a temporary boarder at a Grammar School, spent 
two more years as a draper's apprentice, taught school, won a 
scholarship to the South Kensington Normal School of Science, re¬ 
turned to school teaching, turned to writing and tutoring for a liv¬ 
ing, and in 1891 married his cousin, Isabel. Just over a year later 
he left his wife, lived with, and later married one of his students, 
Amy Catherine Robbins. Such is the bare framework of facts to 
which we must attach the living, growing mind of H.G. Weils. 

In his autobiography Wells emphasizes mental development 
rather than external events, and he is frank in tracing the develop- 































































































ment of his own social and political beliefs. He says, "Essentially, 
then, a main thread in weaving my autobiography must be the story of 
how I came upon, and amidst what accidents I doubted, questioned and 
rebelled against, accepted interpretations of life; and so went on to 
find the pattern of the key to master our world and release its im¬ 
prisoned promise." ^ With typical self-confidence he continues, "I 
believe I am among those who have found what key is needed." And 
then he repeats again his social purpose, "By an incessant toil of 
study, propaganda, education and creative suggestion, by sacrifice 
where it is necessary and much fearless conflict, by a bold handling 
of stupidity, obstruction and perversity, we may yet cut out and file 
and polish and insert and turn that key to the creative world community 
before it is too late." ^ 

Wells grew to manhood before the dawn of the twentieth century, 
before men questioned established institutions, and talked of insecu¬ 
rity and new orders. Wells says of his mother and father during their 
courtship days, "He and his Saddie walking soberly through the Up Park 
bracken on a free Sunday afternoon, discussing their prospects, had 
little more suspicion that their world of gentlemen's estates and 
carriage-folk and villages and country houses and wayside inns and 
nice little shops and horse ploughs and windmills and touching one's 
hat to one's betters, would not endure for ever, then they had that 

1 Wells, H.Gr., Experiment in Autobiography , London, Gollancz and 

Cresset, 195^/ volume 1, p. 28 

2 Loc. cit. 

5 Loc. cit. 










their God in his Heaven was under notice to quit." ^ 

Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Wells belonged to the upper-servant, tenant- 
farmer class, and they were economic failures from their son’s point 
of view. They were almost always short of funds and ordinary comforts 
of life. Joseph's shop did not pay, and Sarah could neither cook nor 
understand her husband's interests. They lived for many years in a 
basement crowded with secondhand furniture and infested with bugs. 

In 1880, two years after her husband broke his leg, Mrs. Wells ac¬ 
cepted a position as housekeeper at Up Park in order to provide in¬ 
come for the family. Young Bertie's (H.G. Wells) visits to Up Park 
gave him an insight into the ways of life of the upper classes. 

Wells maintains that one of the most fortunate accidents in his 
life was the breaking of his leg at the age of seven. ^ While in 
bed he developed the love of reading, which opened vast new worlds 
to his growing mind, and made him forever discontented with a drab, 
narrow existence which otherwise might have been his lot in life. 

Mrs. Wells showed excessive respect, deference, and blind ad¬ 
herence to all established ideas and institutions, including religion, 
morality, royalty and the upper classes. Bertie revolted against 
these attitudes of his mother. Why, thought he, should the royal 
children have greater comforts and opportunities than he? And yet 


4 Ibid., p. 56 

5 Ibid., p. 76 












he did not believe in the equality of men. 

I have never believed in the superiority of the inferior.... 

If I was in almost unconcealed revolt against my mother's 
deferential attitude to royalty and our social superiors, 
it was because my resentful heart claimed at least an ini¬ 
tial equality with every human being; but it was equality 
of position and opportunity I was after, and not equality 
of respect or reward;...I thought the top of the form bet¬ 
ter than the bottom of the form, and the boy who qualified 
better than the boy who failed to qualify....So far as 
the masses went I was entirely of my mother's way of think¬ 
ing; I was middle-class—"petty bourgeois" as the Marxists 
have it....I believed there was and had to be a lower 
stratum, though I was disgusted to find that anyone belonged 
to it....My thought...has run very close to communist lines, 
but my conception of a scientifically organized, class-less 
society is essentially of an expanded middle-class which 
has incorporated both the aristocrat and plutocrat above and 
the peasant, proletarian and pauper below. 

H.Gr. Wells maintained (1955) that Lenin and Trotsky were essentially 

of the same point of view as he, except that they used communist 

terminology. 7 

The young Wells observed the upper classes from the servant- 

quarters, and for them, as well as for the bourgeoisie, he developed 

a profound respect which was not blind to their faults or to the 

part they could play in building a new social order. 

...it is one of my firmest convictions that modern civil¬ 
ization was begotten and nursed in the households of the 
prosperous, relatively independent people, the minor no¬ 
bility, the gentry, and the larger bourgeoisie....Their 
culture, like the culture of the ancient world, rested 
on a toiling class. Nobody bothered very much about that, 
but it has been far more through the curiosity and enter¬ 
prise and free deliberate thinking of these independent 
gentlemen than through any other influences, that modern 
machinery and economic organization have developed so as 
to abolish at last the harsh necessity for any toiling 


6 Ibid., p. 94 

7 Ibid., p. 95 











. 








. 












.... 
































. 

, 























class whatever. It is the country house that has opened 
the way to human equality, not in the form of a democracy 
of insurgent proletarians, but as a world of universal 
gentlefolk no longer in need of a servile substratum. It 
was the exnerimental cellule of the coming ?,T odern State. 8 

Wells was never a Marxist. 

While at Up Park, Wells read Plato's Republic and was impressed 
by the functional basis of Plato's social classes, and by the idea 
that "the whole fabric of lav/, custom and worship, which seemed so 

invincibly established, might be cast into the melting pot and made 

ii Q 

anew." 

It is interesting to read Wells's 1955 comparison of his thir¬ 
teen-year old, 1879 mind to that of Hitler's Germans. In a summar¬ 
izing sentence he says: 

So much for the Hitlerite stage of my development, when 
I was a sentimentalist, a moralist, a patriot, a racist, 
a great general in .dreamland, a member of a secret so¬ 
ciety, an immortal figure in history, an impulsive fork 
thrower and a bawling self-righteous kicker of domestic 
shins. 10 

Continuing the discussion of his thirteen-year old mentality he says: 

...while my mind was full of international conflicts, 
alliances, battleships and guns, I was blankly ignorant 
about money or any of the machinery of economic life. 

I never dreamed of making dams, opening ship canals, 
irrigating deserts or flying. I had no inkling of the 
problem of ways and means....I think there is no natural 
bias towards bloodshed in imaginative youngsters, but 
the only vivid and inspiring things that history fed me 
with were- campaigns and conquests. In Soviet Russia 
they tell me they have altered all that. 11 


8 Ibid., pp. 155 , 156 

9 Ibid., p. 158 

10 Ibid., p. 107 

11 Ibid., o. 102 












H.Gr. Vella has always been critical of existing educational 
systems. He describes Mr. Morley’s Commercial Academy as "a fairly 
well preserved specimen, only slightly modernized, of the departing 
order of things.” ^ 

The new order of things that was appearing in the world 
when I was born, was already arousing a consciousness of 
the need for universal elementary education. It was being 
realized by the ruling classes that a' nation with a lower 
stratum of illiterates would compete at a disadvantage 
against the foreigner. 15 

The Education Act of 1871 was not an Act for a common 
universal education, it was an Act to educate the lower 
classes for employment on lower-class lines.... ^ 

Wells objected to children being taken from school at the age of 

thirteen or fourteen to be put to a trade. 

Just as the civilizations of the ancients was based upon 
the labor of serfs and slaves, so this industrial civil¬ 
ization in which we are still living is based on the toil 
of masses of people mentally and morally arrested before 
fourteen. The bulk of the population is neither uneducated 
and quasi-animal as its servile predecessor was, nor edu¬ 
cated as the whole mass should be in a soundly conceived 
mechanized civilization. ^5 


The idea of the modern world-state must ultimately de¬ 
termine the curriculum and disciplines of every school 
on earth, but even today only a few teachers apprehend 
that, and in my Henley House days the idea of that social 
and political necessity had hardly dawned....We taught 
no history of human origins, nothing about the structure 
of civilization, nothing of social or political life.... 
we did not even attempt to make participating citizens. 1 ~ 


12 
i l 

15 


The spirit of the old educational order was instructive 
and not constructive; it was a system of conservation, 
and to this day it remains rather a resistance than a 
help to the growing creative will in man. ^ 

Ibid., p. 85 1 16 "lbid.Tp. 525 

Ibid., p. 84 17 Ibid., p. 338 

Ibid., p. 95 
Ibid., p. 133 







. 








Wells felt that examination certificates were considered of far greater 
value than material learned or the use made of it. He graduated from 
London University with a stack of certificates, went teaching, and 
wrote articles on English schools and educational theory for The 
Educational Times . 

Wells, early in life, abandoned the orthodox Christianity of his 

day. A vivid dream of God torturing a sinner in Hell shattered his 

belief in both God and Hell. "At the test of war, disease, social 

injustice and every real human distress, it fails—and leaves a 

cheated victim, as it abandoned my mother. 11 ^ Because it seemed to 

the young Wells that religion did not contribute to his social purpose, 

he denied its value. The type of religion that he later preaches is 

that of a humanized deity working for a new creative world order. 

Wells says of his adolescent rebellion against orthodox religion: 

...I was still half a lifetime away from the full realization 
that if one does not accept the general ideas upon which 
the existing world of men is based, one is bound to set 
about replanning and reconstructing the world on the ideas 
one finds acceptable....! was in rebellion, but it was 
still quite impotent rebellion. ^ 

After a struggle with his conscience, the young Wells joined the 

Church of England in order to make a living teaching school. 

Wells at seventeen, like millions of other young people, became 

what he later called a Socialist in the Resentful Phase. "Something— 

none of us knew how to define it but we called it generally the 


18 Ibid., p. 63 

19 Ibid., p.l67 































. 

















, 




















, 

























§ . . 







Capitalist System—a complex of traditional usage, uncontrolled ac¬ 
quisitive energy and perverted opportunities, was wasting life for 
us and we were beginning to realize as much." u Later, as a student 
at the Normal School of Science, Wells studied and evaluated Marxism,and 
condemned the Marxist idea of class war. He says: 

Overthrow the ’’Capitalist System” (which never was a 
system) was the simple panacea of that stuffy, ego- 
centred and malicious theorist Marx . His snobbish 
hatred of the bourgeoisie amounted to a mania.... 

Marxism is in no sense creative or curative.... It is 
an enfeebling mental epidemic of spite which mankind 
has encountered in its difficult and intricate struggle 
out of outworn social conditions toward a new world 
order. It is the malaria of the Russian effort to 
this day. There would have been creative revolution, 
and possibly creative revoluti 
if Karl Marx had never lived. 

While a student in London, Wells wore a red tie as a symbol of 
socialism, but he soon became critical of the Fabian Society meetings 
which he attended. The Fabian Society was a protest rather than a 
plan. The only idea held in common by members was that the profit 
motive was wrong, and that land and industrial capital should be 
owned by the community. There was no definition of ’’community”, or 
any idea of a competent receiver to take over control and management 
from private hands on behalf of the public. There was an absence of 
experimental and analytical spirit, and there was a dogmatic finality 
of statement. These early socialists did not recognize that the 


on of a far finer type 


20 Ibid., p. 179 

21 Ibid., p. 180 
















change in size and nature of communities demanded larger administrative 
areas. Monetary problems were not considered. The relationship be¬ 
tween public education and social reconstruction was not recognized. 

The socialists, like the rest of society of the day, seemed to believe 
in Providence and Progress, and they seemed to repudiate the idea of 
planning. Although Wells recognized many of these weaknesses at the 

pp 

time, he felt that no one listened to him. In 1955 H.G. Wells says: 

’’Steadily now throughout the world the Socialist idea and its communist 
intensification sink into subordination to the ampler proposition of 
planning upon a planetary scale thrust upon mankind by the urgent 
pressure of reality.” ^ Today world planning takes Socialism in its 
stride. 

Wells began his political thinking as a socialist, but within a 
few years he went beyond the socialist thinking of his day to the idea 
of a world-planned society created through the common efforts of men. 
Human life, he believed, is the raw material with the potentiality for 
undreamt-of freedom and happiness, or for increased cruelties, frus¬ 
trations and ultimate extinction. 

The decision to perish or escape has to be made within 
a very limited time. For escape, vast changes in the 
educational, economic and directive structure for human 
society are necessary. They are definable. They are 
practicable. But they demand courage and integrity. 

They demand a- force and concentration of will and a 
power of adaptation in habits and usages which may or 
may not be within the compass of mankind. 


22 Ibid., pp. 242-266 
2^ Ibid., p. 2 65 
24 Ibid., p. 27 











j 4 


a 
















' 


































- 























■ 





















Speaking of himself and others he says: 

The originative intellectual worker i3 not a normal 
human being and does not lead nor desire to lead a 
normal human life. 5 


In diverse forms and spirits we are making over the 
world, so that the primary desires and emotions, the 
drama of the immediate individual life will be sub¬ 
ordinate more and more, generation by generation, to 
beauty and truth, to universal interests and mightier 
aims. 


A very strong factor in my developing socialism is and 
always has been the more or less conscious impulses, 
and increasingly conscious impulse, to anticipate and 
disarm the smarty and the pusher and make the world 
safe for the responsible and candid mind and the au¬ 
thentic, artistic and creative worker. -7 

But for thousands of generations yet the 11 rat s' 1 will continue to make 

trouble. iC> By 1900, says Wells, when everyone was shirking the 

responsibility of planning for great political reconstruction, he 

recognized the inevitability of a world state, and the insufficiency 

of current parliamentary methods of democratic government. 

At that early date I was somehow already alive to the 
incompatibility of the great world order fore-shadowed 
by scientific and industrial progress, with existing 
political and social structures. I was already search¬ 
ing about in my mind, and in the facts about me, for 
ideas about the political and social will and mentality 
that were demanded by these inevitable material devel¬ 
opments , -9 

Because he felt himself an outsider in public affairs, and independent 

of them, he considered himself completely free to criticize. 

25 Ibid., p. 17 

26 Ibid., -0. 22 

27 Ibid., p.196 

28 Ibid., p.197 

29 Wells, Autobiography , volume 2, p. 65I 








H.G. Well9 says that in hi3 own life there were two great driving 
forces, first the making of a world scheme, second the meeting of 
sexual needs. He fixed his attention on his beautiful cousin, Isabel, 
finally married her and, despite the temperamental discords and 
intellectual differences, he loved her with an irrational jealousy. 

Amy Catherine Robbins, one of his science students, was an under¬ 
standing and a good companion, and from the inadequate relations 
with hi8 wife, whom he still loved, he fled to Amy Catherine. They 
lived together, disavowing the institution of marriage, at least 
until his divorce decree was final and he was free to marry again. 

At one stage in Wells’s sexual development, he believed love to 
be a wonderful thing in itself, but something not to be carried into 
larger aspects of life. ’’Regardless of every visible reality about 
me, of law, custom, social usage, economic necessities and the un¬ 
explored psychology of womanhood, I developed my adolescent fantasy 
of free, ambitious, self-reliant women who would mate with me and go 
their way, as I desired to go my way.” ^0 

There are two phases of love, maintains Wells, and, because an 
individual shifts from one phase to the other, no dogmatic rules of 
conduct can be maintained. There is free love, the beautiful coming 
together and integration of two free bodies and spirits; and there 
is intense personal fixation, with jealous exclusive merging of 
identities prepared to live and die for one another. Wells agrees 


50 Wells, Autobiography , vol. 1, p. 185 







with the advocates of free love insofar as they desire the freedom 
of the individual from social restrictions. But the problem of the 
relations of the sexes is complicated by the existence of the in¬ 
tensified, jealous fixation type of love, and by the absolute right 
of the state to interfere where children are concerned, and by the 
fact that love is a different thing for men and women. For suc¬ 
cessful marriages today there must be a treaty of mutual tolerance 
between the sexes, a modus vivendi, a working agreement. ^ For 
thirty to forty years Wells devoted much mental energy to the prob¬ 
lem of the relations of the sexes. This problem is considered in 
many of his novels. 

H.G. Wells says that he insists on two things in his novels, 
first the importance of individuality and individual adjustment in 
life, second that the novel is, not an ethical inquiry, but the 
rendering of a system of impressions.^ However, the importance 
of the individual and the system of impressions in Wells's novels 
are directed toward the creation of a new social order, the planned 
world-state. He is usually so conscious of his social purpose that 
he pays little attention to the form of the novel, to characterization 
for its own sake, to interesting plot, to accepted techniques. 

His ideas on the purpose of the novel were clearly indicated 
in a paper on "The Contemporary Novel", which he gave to the Times 
Book Club in 1912. 


51 Wells, Autobiography , vol. 2, pp. 4^4-457 

52 Ibid., p. 468 







. 























- 






, 
























































’ 






We (novelists) are going to deal with political questions 
and religious questions and social questions....We are 
going to write about business and finance and politics 
and precedence and pretentiousness and decorum and in¬ 
decorum, until a thousand pretences and ten thousand 
impostures shrivel in the cold, clear draught of our 
elucidations. We are going to write of wasted oppor¬ 
tunities and latent beauties until a thousand new ways 
of living open to men and women. We are going to appeal 
to the young and the hopeful and the curious, against 
the established, the dignified, and defensive. Before 
we have done, we will have all life within the scope 
of the novel. 55 

Wells maintains that the old ’’novel with a purpose' 1 , such as Dickens 


wrote, examined no essential ideas, dealt with established values 
only, and merely attacked specific abuses; while Wells's novels 

54 

incorporate problems of custom and wide social and political change. 
Wells was more interested in the development of ideas, in inner con¬ 


flict, in controversial subjects than in characters or plot. Because 
of his particular interests, he often neglects plot and characteri¬ 
zation for chapters of soliloquy or dialogue, and surprisingly enough 
this intellectual argument usually holds the reader's attention. 

Wells feels that if the novel does not change radically in the 


future it will disappear. 

As mankind settles down into the security of that mod¬ 
ern world-3tate with which contemporary life is in la¬ 
bour, as men's minds escape more and more from the harsh 
urgencies and feelings of a primary struggle, as the 
conception of the modern world-state becomes the common 
basis of their education and the frame of their conduct, 
the discussion of primary issues will abate and the 
analysis of individual difference again become a dom- 


55 Ibid., p. 495 
54 Ibid., p. 496 






inating interest.... I believe we are moving towards 
a greater freedom of truthful comment upon individuals; 
if it survives I think it will become more frankly 
caricature-oomment upon personalities and social phases 
than it is at present, but it seems equally probable 
to me that it will dwindle and die altogether and be 
replaced by more searching and outspoken biography 
and autobiography. 55 

This quotation is interesting because most of Wells's novels are 
written in autobiographical form and emphasize the growth and ad¬ 
justment of the individual in society. 

We have attempted to trace briefly Wells's development to the 
time he began his writing career, and to give Wells's own comments 
on his early development. The strongest driving force in his life 
is the desire for a new world order, based on the common creative 
mind and the free will of human beings. He wants world planning to 
remove the waste and muddling of private enterprise. He recognizes 
the merit of individuals in the middle and upper classes, has faith 
in his own intelligence and ability, and believes too much in an 
aristocracy of intellect to follow Marx in class war. He is a 
world planner rather than a socialist in a narrower sense, and he 
will criticize fearlessly any existing institution or person who he 
thinks is not contributing to the organization of a world state. 
Education and religion are to Wells part of the means of achieving 
and maintaining that better, freer new world, and as such must be 
remodelled. Wells finds the problem of sex and family relations is 


55 Ibid., p. 502 




HsJi 

. 











- 



, 









' 






' 























difficult to solve. Both men and women, he believes, should be freer 
and more understanding in their relations, and somehow jealousy, 
cruelty, hatred and narrowness should be eliminated. Children must 
be treated fairly and educated adequately, but one cannot help feeling 
that Wells considers them a complicating factor in the relations of 
men and women. 

In this thesis we shall attempt to show the important develop¬ 
ments of social and political thought in Wells’s novels, and to note 
any changes in teachings, attitudes or emphases. Political and 
economic teachings, including ideas on the use of education and 
religion; and ideas on familial and sexual relationships will be 
discussed. Wells believed that an adequately planned social order 
and desirable relations between the sexes were basic to the happiness 
of mankind. This thesis will attempt to show that Wells remained 
relatively constant in his purpose of directing men's minds toward the 
creation of a new social order, a World Republic based on the collec¬ 
tive will and intelligence of mankind. He was constant in criti¬ 
cizing contemporary society for its wasteful inefficiency, petty 
restrictions, and hateful injustices. Inconsistencies are apparent 
only in the means of achieving his Modern Republic, and then they 
are not so much inconsistencies as modifications resulting from 
greater experience and maturity. We shall attempt to trace these 
modifications from the Utopias of his early romances to recent con¬ 
demnations of ineffective men and stupid dictatorships; from his op¬ 
timistic faith in the ultimate intelligence of men to create a collec- 























. 

















- 




















f 

























tive society, to his final despair for any future but extinction 
for the human species. 








Chapter 2 

WELLS 1 S SOCIAL ' ITICAI T ;3, 1895-1914 


1895 . The Time Machine 

1896 . The Island of Dr . Moreau 

1897 . 'The Invisible Man 

1898 . The Mar of the Worlds 

1901 . The First Men in the Moon 

1902 . The Sea Lady 

1904 . The Food of the Gods 

1906 . In the Days of the Comet 

1914.The World Set Free 


I 896 ..... The Wheels of Chance 

1900 . Love and Mr. Lewisham. 

1905 . Kioos 

1910 . The History of Mr. Polly 

1909 . Ann Veronica 

1914 .The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman 

1909 ..... Tono-Bungay 

1911 . The Pew Machiavelli 

1950__ West, Geoffrey, H.G. Wells 

1954 ..... Wei1 3 , W.G., Experiment in Autobiography 
















































Chapter 2 


WELLS'S SOCIAL AND POLITICAL TEACHINGS, 1895-1914 

H.G. Wells wrote three kinds of fiction between 1895 a-nd 1914, 
scientific romances, novels of personality, and novels of ideas. 
Evident in varying degrees in all of these are political and social 
teachings. Wells first won a place in the literary world for his 
scientific romances. Of them Wells says in his Experiment in Auto ¬ 
biography , "I suppose that is the natural line for an imaginative 
writer to take, in an age of material progress and political ster¬ 
ility".^, and, "Just as Pope found it easier to discuss natural 
theology in verse, so at this stage, I found it more convenient to 

p 

discuss sociology in fable." Wells's scientific romances are 

♦ 

unique in English literature because their author is unique. For 
magic Wells substitutes scientific patter. There is no serious 
probability in most of his fantastic inventions, but, instead of 
creating a world filled with strange occurrences, he makes one 
invention and uses prosaic detail to make the rest of the world 
seem real. The main interest of the romances is not the fantastic 
elements but the possibilities of development for human beings. 
Wells no doubt enjoyed exercising his imagination, but the pub¬ 
lished results of this exercise are not meant to be purely enter¬ 
taining. Each of the scientific romances has inherent in its org- 


1 Vol. 2, p. 645 

2 Ibid., p. 654 

















anization some teaching of social or political significance. Wells 
does not moralize in these stories, but inasmuch as the primary pur¬ 
pose in his life is the desire to build a better world from an un¬ 
satisfactory one, it is inevitable that that purpose be reflected in 
his writing. He is at this stage using his creative abilities in 
the field of hypothesis rather than practical affairs. 

From his earliest years Wells wanted change, and yet he grew to 
manhood in an age of material progress which he believed resisted 
social change. Wells thought that most men took their world too 
much for granted, while his own inherent rebelliousness at social 
restrictions and economic inefficiencies, and his own scientific 
education opened to him the boundless possibilities of change. In 
his early fiction we find a mood of questioning, a dissatisfaction 
with false securities of life, an intellectual and imaginative ex¬ 
ploration of inexhaustible possibilities; and in his non-fiction. 
Anticipations of the Reaction of Mechanical and Scientific Progress 

upon Human Life and Thought , 1903 , and A Modern Utopia , 1905* we 
find a crystallization of his ideas on the political and social 
changes required in our society. Always there is belief in the 
potential power of science to eventually sweep mankind either to 
destruction or to a greater, better world. 

The Time Machine , 1895, says Wells, was meant to 11 counter the 
placid assumption of the day that evolution was a prohuman force 
making things better and better for mankind”, ^ and in Experiment 


3 Seven Famous "ovels , Introduction, New York, Knopf, 195^ 













j 






in Autobiograahv, he aaya that it was baaed on the idea that the 


human species develops along divergent lines. The fantastic in¬ 
vention is the machine that will travel backward or forward through 
time, and is a revival of an earlier idea of Wells that perhaps time 
ia a fourth dimension, like space. The story itself is interesting, 
and so are the author's sociological explanations of the conditions 
described. The Time Traveller travels into the future to visit the 
sterile world of the year 802, 701. Man through science has tri¬ 
umphed over both Nature and Ian to achieve the perfect world. There 
is no unsolved social problem, for a balanced society with security, 
comfort and permanence has been achieved, and progress has ceased. 

The human species has become specialized into two main classes, the 
Sloi, who above ground pursue a life of pleasure, comfort and beauty 
and the Morlocks who below ground have a life of continual toil. 

There is a wide divergence in physical characteristics, in language 
and modes of living of the two groups. Each group has adapted itself 
to a type of specialized life which no longer requires any intel¬ 
ligence. Both the upper and lower worlds are in a state of degen¬ 
eration, because life is governed by habit and instinct rather than 
intelligence. This degenerate world, says Wells, is the logical 
conclusion of twentieth century man's belief in industrial and 
scientific progress, and yet this world is distasteful to him. 


4 Vol. 2, p. 645 








9 





Man has adapted all nature to his own comfort and has ignored the 
law that intellectual versatility is the compensation for change, 
danger and trouble, that there is no intelligence where there is 
no need for change. Wells inserts an explanation of the widening 
differences between the rich and poor of his day, between Capitalist 
and Labour classes. ^ 

And how will sexual relations and the family life be different 
in this future world? 

Seeing the ease and security in which these people are 
living, I felt that this close resemblance of the sexes 
was after all what one would expect...where violence 
comes but rarely and offspring are secure there is less 
necessity—indeed there is no necessity—for an effi¬ 
cient family, and the soecialization of the sexes with 
reference to their children's needs disappears. We see 
some beginnings of this even in our time....And the in¬ 
stitution of the family, and emotions that arise therein, 
the fierce jealousy, the tenderness for offspring, par¬ 
ental self-devotion, all found their justification and 
support in the imminent dangers of the young....There 
is a sentiment arising, and it will grow, against con¬ 
nubial jealousy', against fierce maternity, against pas¬ 
sion of all sorts; unnecessary things now, and things 
that make us uncomfortable, savage survivals, discords 
in a refined and pleasant life. 

Wells believes that sexual relations as he sees them in 1895 need 
to be modified if better living is to be achieved. 

And the Time Traveller travels another years into 

the future, and except for the lichens on the beach the world is 
lifeless, is bitter cold and deathly still, and only a red rim of 


5 The Time Machine ,(1895) > London, Benn, In collected Essex Edition, 
vol. 16, 1927, pp. 54-55 


6 Ibid., pp. 55-^6 






















































■ 






- 

























































the dying sun remains. What thinking man could read The Time Machine 


and still believe that human society will automatically get better 
and better and rise to ever more glorious heights? Not yet is Wells 
offering constructive criticisms; he is attempting to shatter exist¬ 
ing complacencies. It is well to remember Wells’s early observations 
of human society for they form a basis for the more definite criti¬ 
cisms of his later years. 

Of 'The Island of Dr. Moreau , 1896 , Wells says, M It is an exercise 
in youthful blasphemy...1 did my best to express my vision of the 
aimless torture of creation.” ^ It shows the bestial aspect of human 
life, and as such is another attack on human self-satisfaction. Dr. 
Moreau through vivisection makes animals into human beings, but these 
creatures in time revert back to animalism. There is a magnetic 
realism about the descriptions of the beast folk and a startling 
correspondence between the saying of the Lav; with the rhythmic re¬ 
frain, ”Are we not Men?”, and church ritual. Dr. Moreau explains, 
and we wonder if he is talking about beasts or men: 

They build themselves their dens, gather fruit and 
pull herbs—marry even. But I can see through it 
all, see into their very souls, and see there noth¬ 
ing but the souls of beasts, beasts that perish-- 
anger, and have the lusts to live and gratify them¬ 
selves ... .Yet they’re odd. Comdex, like every¬ 
thing else alive. There is a kind of upward striv¬ 
ing in them, cart vanity, part waste sexual emotion, 
part waste curiosity. It only mocks me.... 8 


7 Seven Famous Novel s, Introduction. 

8 Seven Famous Novels , The Island of Dr. Moreau, p. 119 










The teller of the story returns from this horror island to live again 
among civilized people, and in the faces of his fellow men he sees 
the expressions and motives of the beasts. "I know that this is an 
illusion, that these seeming men and women about me are...perfectly 
reasonable creatures, full of human desires and tender solicitude, 
emancipated from instinct, and the slaves of no fanatic Law—beings 
altogether different from the Beast Folk." ^ "There it must be, I 
think, in the vast and eternal laws of matter, and not in the daily 
cares and sins and troubles of men, that whatever is more than an¬ 
imal within us must find its solace and its hope. I hope, or I could 
not live." ^ In light of Wells’s life and other writings, he 
seems to say here that men have within them the urge to strive for 
something better than a brutish life, the urge to work together for 
common welbeing. This is the beginning of Wells’s idea of the col¬ 
lective will and mind of mankind. 

The Invisible Man, 1897* and The War of the Worlds , 1898 , show 
the dangers of power without moral control, of superior intelligence 
without human sympathy. The War of the Worlds is definitely another 
attack on self-complacency. He describes the "infinite complacency" 
of men before the cataclysm of the War, and at the end of the story 
he speaks of the only benefits of the War: "...it has'robbed us of 

9 Ibid., p. I 55 
10 Ibid., p. 156 














that serene confidence in the future which is the most fruitful 
source of decadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are 
enormous, and it has done much to promote the conception of the 
commonweal of mankind." He describes the superior intellect 

and the more efficient physical structure (mostly brain and hand) 
of the men from Mars. This superiority or higher level of the 
evolutionary process was an adaptive measure necessitated by their 
physical environment and the rapid cooling of their planet. They 
also possess no sex, which is the source of so much earthly un¬ 
happiness. They conquer the earth and its inferior inhabitants 
until they are killed by putrefactive and disease bacteria ? to which 
they had no need in Mars to develop a resistance. Human beings 
survived only because through thousands of years of natural sel¬ 
ection they were better adapted to earthly conditions, not because 
they were superior beings. While the Martians are still making 
havoc of human civilization one of the characters shows how the 
remaining humans must adapt themselves to new conditions. 

We have to invent a sort of life where men can live 
and breed, and be sufficiently secure to bring the 
children up....The tame ones [human beings] will go 
like ail tame beasts; in a few generations they’ll 
be big, beautiful, rich-blooded, stupid—rubbishL 
The risk is that we who keep wild will go savage-- 
■degenerate into a sort of big, savage rat. We must 
save our knowledge and science. ...they won’t hunt 
us down if they have all they want, and think we’re 
just harmless vermin. 12 


11 Seven Famous Novels , Tne War of the Worlds, p. 5^7 


12 Ibid., p. 571 





' j 




















. 


. 

* 






, 


- 

















. 






















There are no chosen people of God in Wells's philosophy, nor is 
there any assurance of the prevailing power of the human species, 
unless through intelligence, conscious striving, and continual 
adaptation to conditions of the universe the species merits exist¬ 
ence. 

The First Men in the Moon , 1901, has not the same sense of 
reality that some of Wells's other fantasies have. It seems arti¬ 
ficial to have most of the satirebn our earthly existence come by 
means of radio messages from a human being stranded on the moon. 
Wells burlea|U33 the effects of specialization. "In the moon... 
every citizen knows his place. He is born to that place, and the 
elaborate discipline of training and education and surgery he 
undergoes fits him at last so completely to it that he has neither 
ideas nor organs for any purpose beyond it." Each creature is 
a perfect unit in a world machine and therefore perfectly happy 
discharging his particular duty. There is a different kind of 
insect-like creature specialized for every possible type of moon 
activity. The majority of the moon people have no sex. The moon 
mothers "are noble-looking beings, fantastically and sometimes 

quite beautifully adorned, with a proud carriage and, save for their 

ii 14 

mouths, almost microscopic heads.... Workers are drugged when 

not needed to work, "...to drug the worker one does not want and 
15 Seven Famous Novels , The First Men in the Moon, p. ^12 
14 Ibid., p. 516 






























































- 














. 


























toss him aside is surely far better than to expel him from his factory 
to wander starving in the streets." The intellectuals have huge 

brains but other parts of them have so atrophied that they require 
constant attendance. 

The erudite with very few exceptions are rapt in an 
impervious and apoplectic complacency from which only 
a denial of their erudition can rouse them. Usually 
they are led around by little watchers and attendants 
....Some of the profound scholars are altogether too 
great for locomotion, and are carried from place to 
place in a kind of sedan tub, wabbling jellies of 
knowledge that enlist my respectful astonishment. 16 

The Grand Lunar of the moon could not understand how men could be 

varied, unequal, with different interests and abilities and still be 

all equally able to rule in a democratic form of government. Surely 

in a world of specialization all men would not be capable of thinking. 

The Grand Lunar also could not understand the purpose of earthly 

wars, or how men could live without one central government for the 

whole earth, or how they could keep any amount of wisdom without 

one common, language. "With knowledge the Selenites grew and changed; 

mankind stored their knowledge about them and remained brutes." ^ 

Here is Wells’s indictment of contemporary society; and a more 

clearly defined statement of Wells’s desire for a world-state and 

a specialized^educated governing class. 

The Sea Lady , 1902, is a romance but not a scientific one. 

In it a mermaid comes out of the sea to obtain the love of an 


15 Loc. cit. 

16 Ibid., p. 515 

17 Ibid., p. 526 










































. 











earthly man, who has decided to marry a conventional woman and devote 

hi3 life to duty and politics. In this realistic and humorous fable 

we see the conflict between science and art, between intellect and 

beauty, between duty and love, between this mundane world and one 

which beckons, dreamy, intangible, and immortal. In descriptions of 

life at the bottom of the sea, or of difficulties in having a girl 

with a mackerel tail participate in society, we see Wells's gibes 

at modern reading, newspapers, social customs and politicians. The 

mermaid in conversation attempts to show that she is real and that 

the life of earthly mortal men is imaginary. 

And all the elements of your life, the life you imag¬ 
ine you are living, the little things you must do, the 
little cares, the extraordinary little duties, the 
day by day, the hypnotic limitations—all these things 
are a fancy that has taken hold of you too strongly 
to shake off....And in the same way you dream all the 
other things are proper or improper or good or bad to 
do. Because you are in a dream, a fantastic, unwhole¬ 
some little dream.. So small, so infinitely small'. 18 

She says of the "other woman": 

And what does she care for the condition of the poor, 
after all? It is only a point of departure in her 
dream. In her heart she does not want their dreams 
to be happier, in her heart she has no passion for them, 
only her dream is that she should be prominently doing 
good, asserting herself, controlling their affairs 
amidst thanks and praise and blessings.... 19 

Comparing the mermaid to the mortal woman, the teller of the story 

says: 


18 The Sea Lady ,(1902), London, Benn, In collected Essex Edition, 
vol. 2l/l927, p. 79 


19 Ibid., p. 81 













She has the quality of the open sky, of the flight 
of birds, of deep tangled places, she has the qual¬ 
ity of the high sea. That I think is what she is 
for him, she is the Great Outside. You—you have 
the quality...of an edifice. 20 

The man concerned makes his decision. 

I'm going to take my place in the ranks in that 
great battle for the future which is the meaning 
of life....I will make a time-table for my hours 
and a rule for my life, I will entangle my honour 
in controversies, I will give myself to service 
as a man should do. Clean-handed work, struggle 
and performance.... I*ve had the dream, but you see 
I keep hold of reason. Here, with the flame burn¬ 
ing, I renounce it. I make my choice...Renunci¬ 
ation L Always—renunciationl That is life for all 
of us. We have desires, only to deny them, senses 
that we all must starve. We can live only as a 
part of ourselves. Why should I be exempt. For 
me, she is evil. For me she is death...only why 
have I seen her face? Why have I heard her voice? 21 

Geoffrey West sees in this story a conflict within Wells himself 

between the propagandist and the artist. Finally Wells decides to 

be a propagandist, to devote himself to the intellectual work of re- 
22 

forming the world. While social purpose does dominate most of 

Wells’s later writings, a c tually he is a combination of both propa¬ 
gandist and artist. His sympathy with love, beauty and human beings 
is.too strong to be entirely subordinated to social reform. 

Wells, in 1905* failed to convince the Fabian Society of the 
need for larger administrative areas in twentieth century civilization. 


20 Ibid., p. 114 

21 Ibid., p. 1^4 

22 V/est, Geoffrey, H. 


Wells , London, Howe, 19:50, p. 267 









In 1904 he relieved his injured feelings in a charming and symbolic 
fantasy. The Food of the Gods . The food that made all life grow to 
gigantic proportions continued to spread throughout the world until 
several human children had eaten it. They were slow growing chil¬ 
dren of a new race, but the great mass of people ignored the changes 
and the great possibilities they offered for human life. The young 
giants were kind and constructive, desirous of doing good things for 
the little people; but they were taught not to use strength, and to 
show proper respect for their betters, and ever-increasing limitations 
were put upon their activities until actual war was waged against 
them. Sensible humanitarian work could not'be done because it 
impinged on private rights or governmental regulations, or local 
prejudice. A time will come when littleness will have passed al¬ 
together from this earth. Littleness and bigness cannot live to¬ 
gether without conflict. The little people want to destroy the big. 

Even if they should destroy us every one, what then? Would 
it save them? Nol For greatness is abroad, not only in us, 
not only in the Food, but in the purpose of all things*. 

To grow and still to grow, from first to last that is Being, 
that is the law of life. What other law can there be? 2^ 

The answer must be in all people eating of the Food, all people 

becoming great. 

This earth is no resting place; this earth is no playing 
■place, else indeed we might put our throats to the little 
people's knife, having no greater right to live than they, 
and they in turn might yield to the ants and vermin. We 
fight not for ourselves but for growth, growth whether we 
live or die, growth will conquer through us. 24 


25 Seven Famous Novels , The Food of the Gods, p. 686 
24 Ibid., p. 688 















Again we have Wells’s faith in the urge inherent in men to strive 
for a bigger better world of human relations. 

In In the Days of the Comet , 1906, Wells ’3 social purpose is 

very clear. He compares the squalid petty, jealous, restrictive 

life of the early part of the twentieth century to the Utopian life 

after the green gas of the comet has swept away man's undesirable 

traits. Mankind does not need to change so much as to have the 

opportunity to develop its finest potentialities. Social purpose 

in this story is beginnirg to dominate narrative and characterization. 

Man after the Great Change attempts to explain the old world. 

...the world of thought in those days was in the 
strangest condition, it was choked with obsolete 
inadequate formulae, it was tortuous to a maze-like 
degree-with secondary contrivances and adaptations, 
suppression, convention, and subterfuges....1 was 
brought up by my mother in a quaint old-fashioned 
narrow faith in certain religious formulae, certain 
conceptions of social and political order, that had 
no more relevance to the realities and needs of 
everyday contemporary life than if they were clean 
linen that had been.put away with lavender in a 
drawer. 25 

He describes the naive young socialist's explanation of the selfish, 
greedy, planless society, and the unfairness of existing social 
classes. He describes the pain, the jealousy, the intolerance of 
passionate love in a world of ignorance and squalid living. After 
the Change men are reasonable and tolerant and loving. The Cabinet 
Council of the British Empire organizes, (Wells at one time believed 


25 Seven Famous Novels , In the Days of the Comet, p. 701 
































































that the Empire was the first step toward a world-3tate) stops the 
horrid war by frankness in international relations, and proceeds 
to govern for the welfare of mankind. The idea of ownership dis¬ 
appears. There is buying and selling without loss to any man, 
and industrial organization without base private gains. Education 
and religion cease to confuse, suggest and hint, and openly seek 
truth and understanding. All men are changed, and foolish, useless, 
bad things burnt. 

We had indeed not eliminated personal love, we had but 
stripped it of its base wrappings, of its pride, its 
suspicions, its mercenary and competitive elements, 
until at last it stood up in our minds stark, shining 
and invincible... .‘The old world theory was that there 
was only one love...men and women went apart in cou¬ 
ples, into defensive little houses, like beasts into 
little pits, and in these 11 homes” they sat down pur¬ 
posing to love, but really coming very soon to jeal¬ 
ous watching of this extravagant mutual proprietor¬ 
ship . 26 

In this new world one man can love several women and one woman 
several men. Home is the world and the world is composed of friends 
and helpers and personal lovers. Wells believes that jealousy and 
selfishness must be removed from human life. While he does present 
the possibilities of such a life, this Utopia seems incredible, 
like the dream of a dreamer rather than the dream of a oractical 


man. 


26 Ibid., p. 855 











For a few years Wells turned from scientific romances to the novel. 
Then in 1914- before the outbreak of war he returned spontaneously 


to his old form in The World Set Free . In an introduction to a 1921 
edition he says, 

It is the main thesis which is still of interest now; 
the thesis that because of the development of scien¬ 
tific knowledge, separate sovereign states and separ¬ 
ate sovereign empires are no longer possible in the 
world, that to attempt to keep on with the old system 
is to heap disaster upon disaster for mankind and per¬ 
haps to destroy our race altogether. 27 

Wells assumes the development of atomic energy., which is used in a 

World War in 19!?6. As a result of subsequent world-wide economic 

collapse the rulers and leaders of mankind voluntarily organize a 

world-state for the benefit of all. His criticisms of contemporary 

society are more specific than in his earlier romances. He says 

of the old world: 

The world was so little governed that with the very 
coming of plenty, in the full tide of an incalculable 
abundance, when everything necessary to satisfy human 
needs and everything necessary to realize such will 
and purpose as existed then in human hearts was al¬ 
ready at hand, one has still to tell of hardship, 
famine, anger, confusion, conflict, and incoherent 
suffering. 28 

There was no means of distributing new wealth. Government was a 
treaty, not a design, which men used to grab every new power which 
should be used for the welbeing of mankind for their own private gain. 


27 The-'forld Set Free , (l9l4)j Introduction, London, Collins, 


28 ibid., p. 57 












The materials and methods of life were changing raoidly, but men 
tried to meet new demands with political procedures, conceptions of 
rights and property and authority and obligation that dated from 
the rude compromises of relatively barbaric times. There was scrap¬ 
ping of unskilled labour but unemployed masses, like Wells, believed, 
still.that somewhere was the intelligence to organize for good and 
order, and eliminate waste, selfishness, and the wide gap between 
lives of rich and poor. 

Wells condemns education of the pre-atomic age. The basia of 
the new universal education is to teach self-forgetfulness, service, 
love. 11 ...these are the means of salvation from that narrow lone¬ 
liness of desire, that brooding preoccupation with self and ego¬ 
tistical relationships, which is hell for the individual, treason 

Po 

to the race, and exile from God.' 1 ' Men, instead of being obsessed 
with the accumulation of property, will have the freedom and desire 
to contribute to the art, literature or knowledge of the race. 
Religion and science alike will work for the universal acceptance 
of the greater state. B I do not see that there is any limit to 
man’s power of self-modification." 

Atomic war ended all war. The power of destruction spent it¬ 
self. It was no longer possible to distinguish between soldier 
and civilian, or for a great general'to marshal concentrated war 
enthusiasm. War had taken the best minds from public affairs and 

29 Ibid., p. 257 


50 Ibid., p. 275 




















proved old methods a farce. The whole world was involved, and subject 
to destruction. Isolation was impossible. The Council of rulers 
found it impossible to restore the old order of things., or to have 
large areas of the globe living differently or failing to understand 
the way of living of the general masses. Monarchy was gone,for it 
was a manifestation of racial and nationalist feeling. The world 
was organized into ten constituencies which elected their government 
representatives for a life term. Every five years fifty new members 
were added, with voting by proportional representation with one 
transferable ballot, and by both sexes. A ruler could be recalled 
by as many votes as had elected him. The work of change was dele¬ 
gated to various committees who possessed the specialized knowledge 
necessary. 

There appears here Wells’s idea of the Collective Mind of the 
race. 11 Every good thought contributes now and every able brain 
falls within that informal and dispersed kingship which gathers 
together into one purpose the energies of the race." "Only the 

extreme individualism of that period jjpre-atomicj , only utter want 
of any collective understanding or purpose can explain that waste." 

In the last chapter in the book the relations of the sexes are 
discussed briefly. "Hunger and fear and this that you make so much 
of, this sex, are.but the elementals, of life out of which we have 




51 Ibid., p. 227 

52 Ibid., p. 26l 





















. 
















































arisen. All these eleraentals...have to be provided for, dealt 
with, satisfied, but all these things have to be left behind."^ 

"I care for your future as intelligences, as parts of contribution 
to the universal mind of the race [not as men and as women) . 

What are Wells's social and political teachings in the romances? 
He is dissatisfied with orthodox education, religion, politics, 
family relations, the means of distributing goods and services, 
and with established class distinctions; and he feels restricted 
by social conventions. At first he strikes at his grievances in an 
imaginative and interesting manner, but with little constructive 
suggestion. Gradually his dream of a new world takes more definite 
form, and his projections into the future come closer to his own 
time, at least to his own century. From the relative fatalism of 
The Time . lachine he moves to the assertion that mankind has con¬ 
trol of its own destiny. Change is desirable and inevitable; and 
human organization must be on an ever larger scale until the whole 
world is encompassed. There must be new ways of organizing and 
thinking to meet new needs, but wherever there is change there will 
be-conflict between traditional ways and new ways. Individualism 
belongs to a past age. In the future there must be a growing 
consciousness of the collective Mind of the Race. Wells becomes 
more interested in human relationships, but he also becomes more 


55 Ibid., p. 267 
54 Ibid., p. 269 









oppressed by the pain, disorder and waste of human society. Like a 
practical man, he seeks remedies and becomes more and more a propa¬ 
gandist. He emphasizes reason and intelligence as he becomes more 
preoccupied in finding a way out of an unreasonable world. 

Daring the years when Wells was writing scientific romances he 
was also writing charming stories of human personality. T he Wheels 
of Chance , 1896, is an account of a young man on summer vacation. 

In the background is an implied criticism of the drab life of a 
draper’s assistant, and of the useless life of some people of the 
upper classes. There is also the criticism made by a not-too-care- 
fully drawn heroine that women are denied their rightful place in 
society. She wants freedom to live her own life, to do something 
noble and dignified, and she finds men ready to take advantage of 
her attempts to be free, and women misinterpreting her desires. "The 
hero and heroine cycle through the countryside, oblivious of the 
interpretation other people put on their relationship. Most of 
all the story is entertaining and its social significance is of 
secondary importance. 

In Love and Mr. Lewisham , 1900, we see the conflict in a man 
of meagre means between a desire for study and career, and the desir 
for love and marriage. ”0n the one hand that shining staircase to 
fame and power that had been his dream from the very dawn of his 
adolescence, and on the other hand—Ethel.” The men of the upper 

55 Love and Mr. Lewisham , (1900), London, Benn, In the collected 
Essex edition, vol. 9* 1927* P« 115 

















. 
































- 














and middle-classes were warned to avoid love until they were inde¬ 
pendent, but the poor marry and struggle for a living. Lewisham 
marries, forgets his schema, finds that glamor fades, and that 
marriage consists also of paying bills and establishing compromises. 
Because he loves his wife, who is incapable of sharing his thoughts 
and ambitions, he gives up his understanding talks with another 
woman. He must simplify his life and leave no room for jealousy. 

Life in the present is more important than world mending, concludes 
Lewisham. 

Kipps , 1905> humorously describes the little things that are 

the daily concerns of the servant and small-shopkeeper level of 

society. Wells in the novel says: 

I have laughed, and I laugh at these two people; I 
have sought to make you laugh....But I see through 
the darkness the souls of my Kippses as they are, as 
little pink strips of quivering living stuff, as 
things like the bodies of little, ill-nourished, 
ailing, ignorant children, children who feel pain, 
who are naughty and muddled and suffer and do not 
understand why. 56 

Social teachings are of a secondary importance in this novel. 

The History of Hr. Polly , 1910, is the story of an ordinary 
man in conflict with his environment, who finally runs away to a 
pleasanter, freer life. Wells takes the opportunity to criticize 
the ineffectiveness of the average Englishman's educational, religious 
and sexual upbringing. He describes again the life of the draper's 


56 Kipps ,(1903)> London, Benn, In the collected Essex edition, 
vol. 2, 1926, p. 555 














■ 










* 


. 






















































■ 































apprentice, which he detested so much himself. He has the imaginative 
Mr. Polly read of a man who advocates a "collective ‘intelligence 1 
“which means in practice that you and I and every one have to think 
about things frightfully hard and pool the results, and oblige our¬ 
selves to be shamelessly and persistently clear and truthful...." 

This unnamed writer deplores the waste, and aimlessness of our rela¬ 
tively unorganized society. He describes the lower middle class as 
uncomfortable, under-educated, under-trained, pitiable, lacking in 
social purpose, destined to be failures because distributing businesses 
can be better organized on large economical lines. Wells*s sympa¬ 
thies are with Mr. Polly; and the ideas of the unnamed writer seem 
to be Wells's own. Mr. Polly learns that change is possible and 
desirable. 

But when a man has once broken through the paper walls 
of everyday circumstance, those unsubstantial walls 
that hold so many of us securely prisoned from the 
cradle to the grave, he hasjkade a discovery. If the 
world does not please you, you can change it ....You 
may change it to something sinister and angry, to some¬ 
thing appalling, but it may be you can change it to 
something brighter, something more agreeable, and at 
the worst something much more interesting. 5 $ 

Mr. Polly concludes: 

One starts with ideas that things are good and things 
are bad—and it hasn't much relation to what _is_ good 
and what is_ bad....I've never really planned my life, 
or set out to live. I happened; things happened to 
me. It's so-with everyone. 59 


57 The History of Mr. Polly , (1910), London, Benn, In the 

collected Essex edition, vol. 1, 1926, p. 15$ 

58 Ibid., n. 180 

59 Ibid., p. 255 





















- 
























- 


























X 








1 - * W 























The History of r. p olly contains few social teachings except that 
changes in society are desirable and possible. 

Ann Veronica , 1909 , caused a storm of protest when it was pub¬ 
lished. It expresses the resentment and distress of women who are 
economically dependent on men not of their own choosing. Ann Vero¬ 
nica rebels against her father’s attempts to keep her at home, and 
against her chivalrous admirer’3 attempts to put her on a pedestal 
above the affairs of this world. No one can understand her going to 
London without being dependent on a man, and yet when she borrows 
money from a friend he indignantly expects the rights of a lover. 

When the world seems against her she participates in a suffragette 
raid on the Parliament Buildings and spends a month in prison. Wells 
does not give a kindly picture of the bitter women who believe that 
men are inferior brutes, and that woman suffrage is the only solution 
for women’s problems. He makes clear that women need economic inde¬ 
pendence. Ann Veronica attemots to conform to what is expected of 
her, but finally declares her passionate love for a man, separated 
from his wife; and they go to the continent together. To the distress 
of 1909 readers they are successful in building a happy home together. 

Wells believes that women should have the same freedom as men, 
and that they should be economically independent of them; that there 
are too rigid rules governing sexual relations; that it is natural 
for a moral girl to fall in love and desire culmination of that love 
with a man of her own choosing. 




















- 





- 









































































Many of the same ideas appear in The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman , 


1914. Lady Harman, the young wife of a wealthy entrepreneur has 
four children, but she is not allowed even the freedom and independ¬ 
ence of managing her own household. Eventually she rebels, seeks 
friends of her own, tries to understand business, and develop a 
personality of her own. The suffragettes, who are bitter, vote-demand¬ 
ing, and unconcerned with the economic independence of women, fail 
her when she seeks their help. Lady Harman breaks a window in order 
to spend a month in prison as an escape from intolerable home con¬ 
ditions. On her release she returns to her husband. He becomes 
jealous of her widening interests and especially of her friendships 
with men. Says Wells, "...the complete emancipation of women will 
come with the complete emancipation of humanity from jealousy .' 1 ^ 

This idea also appeared in In the Days of the Qomet . Wells continues, 

11 It is all amazingly unjust, but to be a married woman she was 

n 4l 

beginning to understand is to be outside justice. Her husband 

died, and with his death a sense of freedom and relief came to her. 

She tells her male admirer: 

It wasn't the particular marriage. It was any marriage 
....All we women are tied. Most of us are willing to 
be tied perhaps, but only as people are willing to be 
tied to life belts in a wreck—from fear of drowning. 

And now I am just one of the free women, who happen 
to own property. I've paid my penalties and my ser¬ 
vice is over....It isn't that I don't care for you, 
that I don't love your company and your help—and the 

40 The v ife of Sir Isaac Harlan . ( 1914 ), London, Odhams', p. £54 


4l Ibid., p* 


259 






































































love and kindness ....Life was jealousy...made up 
of fierce graspings, fierce suspicions, fierce re¬ 
sentments .... 42 

She refuses marriage, but the author implies that she and her ad¬ 
mirer will work and love together as equals. 

Wells takes the opportunity to criticize the merciless nature 
of concentrated big business and its utter unconcern for workers. 

He shows how knighthoods may be bought and governments and news¬ 
papers controlled by judicious placing of funds. He shows the self- 
complacent thinking of the average man of the middle-class. "There 
might be improvements and refinements ahead, but social, political, 
and economic arrangements were now in the main outlines settled for 
good and all." Wells himself comments: "At no time was it a 
perfectly easy task to pretend that the crazy makeshifts of our 
legal and political systems, the staggering accidents of economic 
relationships, the festering disorder of contemporary philosophy 
and religious teaching, the cruel and stupid bed of King Og that 
is our last world in sexual adjustment really constituted a noble 

44 

and enduring sanity...." 

Ann Veronica is a single girl. Lady Harman married, but both 
have similar desires for freedom and understanding and real love; 
both are misunderstood in their motives by both men and women, and both 


42 

Ibid,, 

p. 278 


Ibid*, 

p. 161 

44 

Ibid;, 

p. 161 































' 


















■ 








- » , 





























feel that the force of circumstances is stronger than they. Ann 
Veronica, against convention, professes her passionate love.,and 
receives the understanding and haooiness she desires. Lady Harman, 
contrary to convention, is not passionately devoted to either hus¬ 
band or children, finally escapes the bonds of a jealous, restrictive 
marriage, becomes free to develop her own personality, to do good 
in the world, and perhaps to learn what love, as distinguished from 
proprietorship can mean. 

In Tono-Bungay , 1909, Wells's interests in science, sociology, 
and people are woven together into a single novel. The Sea Lady has 
gone down, to the sea, and Wells has come to high land where he and 
his hero, George Ponderevo, put every phase and level of society 
to the test of intellectual judgment. George Ponderevo ignores 
beauty, art, intuition and other intangible values, and finds that 
society cannot meet the test of rationality alone. 

In describing the growing years of George Ponderevo, Wells 
gives his own critical impressions of lower middle-class life; of 
the upper classes as seen from the housekeeper's quarters, of edu¬ 
cation and religious upbringing, and of a boy's awakening interest 
in sex. He obviously dislikes artificial class distinctions and 
resents a mother's advice, "And you mustn't set yourself up against 
those who are above you and better than you...." ^ He describes 
the Royal Family: "...empty faces of the Royal Family appeared 


45 Tono-Bungay , (1909), London, Collins, p. 55 













and reappeared, visiting this and that, getting married, getting 

offspring, lying in state, doing everything but anything, a wonderful 

good-meaning, impenetrable race apart...." ^ 

Business practices of the times, like those of Sir Isaac Harman, 

are legal, but detrimental to the best interests of human society. 

Uncle Ponderevo talks of cornering the world market on an essential 

drug, and Wells through George comments: "The whole trend of modern 

money making is to foresee something that will presently be needed 

and put it out of reach, and then to haggle yourself wealthy." ^ 

Uncle Ponderevo invites George to join him in commercializing Tono- 

Bungay, a cure-all medicine of little value. George enters the 

business with his eyes open, becomes a financial success and marries 

Marian. Wells describes the methods of the successful business man. 

We made Tono-Bungay hum! It brought us wealth, influence, 
respect, the confidence of endless people....Tono-Bungay 
carried me to freedoms and powers that no life of scien¬ 
tific research, no passionate service of humanity could 
ever have given me.... 48 

We sold our stuff and got the money, and spent the money 
honestly in lies and clamor to sell more stuff. 49 

Uncle Ponderevo has money to play.with and he plays. He buys a 

weekly newspaper and experiments with journalism. He says: 

We got to run the country, George. It’s ours. Make it 
a. Scientific Organized Business-Enterprise. Put idees 
into it. 1 Lectrify it. Run the Press. Run all sorts 
of developments. 50 

He advises subscribing to party funds under the phrase "reciprocal 
advantage". He feels it becomes a man of h is position to have an 

46 Ibid., p. 4l 49 Ibid., p. 156 

47 Ibid., p. 62 50 Ibid., p. 2^8 

48 Ibid., p. l^l 






















































- 


. 



































• ■■ l ■ 

. 






. 
















extra love affair. Wells describes him as a symbol of his age: 

...the man of luck and advertisement, the current master 
of the world. Hundreds of eager little investors fol¬ 
lowed his fortunes and in the end he miscalculated and 
lost everything in the smash. ^1 

Wells through George comments on the crash of the big business enter 
prise: 


What a strange, melancholy emptiness of intention that 
stricken enterprise seemed....What a vulgar magnificence 
and crudity and utter absurdity'.... It struck me suddenly 
as the compactest image and sample of all that passes 
for Progress, of all the advertisement, inflated spend¬ 
ing, the aimless building up and pulling down, the enter¬ 
prise and promise of my age....For this futility in its 
end, for an epoch of such futility, the solemn scroll 
of history had unfolded.... J2 

The whole novel condemns the disorder and planlessness of a society, 
in which Ponderevo, lovable as he may be, can create nothing, invent 
nothing, economize nothing, add nothing of human value, and yet can 
rise to great power and prestige. A new social order cannot be 
created from a fever of trade and money making, and pleasure seeking 
There is a sense of waste and futility, too, in the relations 
of men and women. Sex does not ensure even the continuity of the 
species. George’s friend loves and is loved without establishing a 
home. Between Edward and Susan Ponderevo there is genuine affection 
but no family, no sharing of constructive activity. George marries 
Marian, idea-less, passionless, childless. Of his marriage, (and 


51 Ibid., p. 246 

52 Ibid., p. 515 















- 





















































et the same idea again and again in Wells’s novels) George says: 

Driven by forces I did not understand, diverted alto¬ 
gether from the science, the curiosities, and work to 
which I had given myself, I fought my way through a 
tangle of traditions, customs, obstacles, and absurd¬ 
ities, enraged myself, limited myself, gave myself to 
occupatioiis I saw with the clearest vision were dis¬ 
honourable and vain, and at last achieved the end of 
purblind Nature, the relentless immediacy of her desire, 
and held far short of happiness, Marian weeping and 
reluctant in ray arms. 55 

Marian insists on divorce when George has a passionate affair with 
Effie, who loves and goes her way. They part, realizing how far 
apart are their minds, and yet how much they still love each other. 
Next, he loves Beatrice, spoilt, pleasure-seeking lady, who will 
love but never marry. Sex may be an urgent need, but sexual relations 
are as fruitless as Uncle Ponderevo's financial schemes. 

George emphasizes intellectual judgment, but something intangible 

and desirable in life seems to escape him. 

All my life has been at bottom, seeking , disbelieving 
always, dissatisfied always with the thing seen and the 
thing believed, seeking something in toil, in force, in 
danger, something whose name and nature I do not clear¬ 
ly understand, something beautiful, worshipful, enduring, 
mine profoundly and fundamentally, and the utter redemp¬ 
tion of myself.... 5 ^ 

The intellectual consciousness of man has brought him to a dead end. 

On board a destroyer he says: 

We tear into the great spaces of the future and the 


55 Ibid., p. 165 
54 Ibid., p. I 85 










. 


. 









■ 














































. 


■ 


























turbines fall to talking in. unfamiliar tongues. Out to 
the open we go, to windy freedom and trackless wayB. 

Light after light goes down. England and the Kingdom, 

Britain and the Empire, the old prides and the old de¬ 
votions, glide abeam, astern sink down upon the horizon, 
pass—pass. The river passes—London passes, England 
passes.... 55 

It is a note of crumbling and confusion, of change and 
seemingly aimless swelling, of a bubbling up and medley 
of futile loves and sorrows. 56 

Then on the last page sounds a new note of hope: 

But through the confusion sounds another note. Through 
the confusion something drives, something that is at once 
human achievement and the most inhuman of all existing 
things. Something comes out of it....I do not know what 
it is, this something, except that it is supreme....It 
emerges from life with each year one lives and feels, 
and generation by generation and age by age, but the how 
and why of it are all beyond the compass of my mind. 57 

Industrial, political, and family life are planless, disordered, 
directed toward selfish ends, and yet, instead of complete futility, 
there is in the lives of men a continual seeking for'something better 
and more permanent. 

After exploring the possibilities of the universe in his scien¬ 
tific romances, Wells turns to human personality and human problems. 
He writes his charming novels of personal idiosyncracy, such as The 
History of Hr. Polly , without any attempt to make intellectual - 
consciousness dominant. Then, in 1909 , appears Tono-Bungay , in 
which every aspect of human life is scrutinized critically with 


55 Ibid., p. 552 

56 Ibid., p. 554 

57 Loc. cit. 














rational intellect, and the world ia found wanting. Now, in 1911, 
we have the publication of The New Machiavelli , a repetition of The 
Sea Lady , but this time with greater characterization, a clearer 
picture of British political life in the first decade of this century, 
and more specific social and political teachings. And, as in The 
Sea Lady , considerable sympathy is with beauty and passion. 

In the opening chapter of the novel Wells has the chief character 
Remington, explain about what he is going to write. "Of those 
double strands I have to write, of the subtle nrotesting perplexing 
play of instinctive passion and desire against too abstract a dream 
of statesmanship." 2$ Speaking of statesmanship he observes how 

A 

the constructive power of the world has increased and how powerful 
men, if they willed, could achieve stupendous things. He thinks of 
the progress made in physical and mechanical sciences, in general 
education, which has been achieved by a straggling, and uncoordi¬ 
nated minority of investors, experimenters, educators, writers and 
organizers, "...my imagination grows giddy with dazzling intimations 
of the human splendours the justly organised state may yet attain." ^9 
Of passion and desire and women he says: 

Women were once left outside of statecraft...I began 
life ignoring women, they came to me at first perplex¬ 
ing and dishonouringj only very slowly and very late 
in my life and after misadventure, did I gauge the 
power and beauty of the love of man and woman and 

58 The New Machiavelli , (1911), London, Benn, In the collected 
Essex edition, vol. 5, 1926, p. 10 


59 Ibid., p. 14 


















learn how it must needs frame a justifiable vision 
of the ordered world....Love has brought me to disas¬ 
ter because my career had been planned regardless of 
its possibility and value. 60 

In describing Remington’s boyhood years. Wells takes the oppor¬ 
tunity to present a critical picture of the society he knew so well 
himself, and to trace mental development parallel to his own. He 
describes a growing sense of the waste and planlessness of life 
around him, and of the ideal of order and economy called by different 
people, Science, Civilization, or Socialism. ‘The coming of power 
through the Industrial Revolution was a gigantic wasteful development. 

That age which bore me was indeed a world full of re¬ 
stricted and undisciplined people, overtaken by power, 
by possessions and great new freedoms, and unable to 
make any civilized use of them whatever....Failure is 
not failure nor waste wasted, if it sweeps away il¬ 
lusion and lights the road to a plan. 6l 

A boy stole the boy Remington's knife, and he glimpsed for the first 

time "the simple brute violence that lurks and peeps beneath our 

civilisation." Remington's young mind plays with and evaluates 

different current ideas. Wells strikes again at the self-complacent 

belief in the inevitability of progress through the natural processes 

of evolution. The struggle for existence does not mean that the 

best survive but that the fittest survive. Evolution led to the 

skunk as well as to man. "Life was a various and splendid disorder 

of forces that the - spirit of man sets itself to tame." ® 


60 Ibid., p. 15 

6 1 Ibid., pp. 47-46 

62 Ibid., Ibid., p. 64 
65 Ibid., p. 107 
















' . ■ 





■ 



' 






' 








Wells reacted against the naive clas3-conflict idea of many 
socialists: 

They the workers_, would arise and the capitalist 
system would flee and vanish like the mists before the 
morning, like dews before the sunrise, giving place 
in the most simple and obvious manner to an era of 
Right and Justice and Virtue and Wellbeing... 64 

We were socialists, because Individualism for us 
meant muddle, meant a crowd of separated, undiscip¬ 
lined people all obstinately and ignorantly doing 
things jarringly, each one in his own way....The man 
who owns property is a public official and has to be¬ 
have as such...no one is really private but the outlaw 
....Order and devotion were the very essence of our 
socialism, and a splendid collective vigor and hap¬ 
piness its end...that is an organized state. 65 

He describes his uncle as representative of industrial men. 

...he wanted his own women inviolate but every other 
woman in the world at his call...wanted best cigars 
and best brandy and others to have inferior ones... 
hated Trade Unions because they interfered with his 
autocratic direction of his works, and his work people 
because they were not obedient and untiring mechanisms 
to do his bidding. He was a very naive, vigorous 
human being....He was about as much civilised, about 
as much tamed to the ideas of collective action and 
mutual consideration as a Central African negro... 66 

Remington has a quarrel with his uncle over a trivial matter, but 
the quarrel seems to be the outer expression of the fundamental con¬ 
flict between old and new. It seems to be Wells rather than a 
fictitious character who says: 


64 Ibid., p. 112 

65 Ibid., p. 1^4 

66 Ibid., p. 162 

























- 


























































■ 









...but the underlying reality of our quarrel was the es¬ 
sential antagonism in all human affairs, the antagonism 
between ideas and the established method....The world I 
hate is the rule-of-thumb world, the thing I and my kind 
of people exist for orimarily is to battle with that, to 
annoy it, disarrange it, reconstruct it....We question 
everything, disturb anything that cannot give a clear 
justification to our questioning, because we believe 
inherently that our sense of disorder implies the pos¬ 
sibility of a better order. 6 7 

The political thinking of the adult Remington corresDonds gen¬ 
erally to that of Wells. At first he accepted a modified imperialism. 

I meant to leave England and the empire better ordered than 
when I found it, to organize and discipline, to build up a 
constructive and controlling State out of my world’s con¬ 
fusion. We had, I saw, to suffuse education with Public 
intention, to determine a new better living generation with 
a collectivist habit of thought, to link now chaotic acti¬ 
vities in a very human affair, and particularly to catch 
that escaped, world-making, world-ruining, dangerous thing, 
industrial and financial enterprise, and bring it back to 
the service of the general good. 68 

The Baileys, (whom Wells admits are a caricature of the Webbs of the 
Fabian Society) did not think in Wellsian terms of growing collective 
understanding, but in terms of pseudo-scientific, efficient, admini¬ 
strative procedures. This was one of Wells’s main differences with 
the Fabian Society. 

Wells criticizes the Liberal party for being shirking, sham- 
efficient and self-satisfied, respectable and Fabian-spirited, for 
being composed of confused, sentimental, undisciplined men. He sees 
the socialists as an incompatible lot, dogmatic, seeking to have a 


67 Ibid., p. 180 

68 Ibid., p. I 85 




















































. 








corner on ideas. Yet he says the socialists are growing to realize 
the constructive needs in every man's mind. The only political party 
which would profess socialism is the Labor Party, he says, and then 
it would become but a one-sided irresponsible and non-constructive 
attack on property. "Socialism in that mutilated form, the teeth and 
claws without the eyes and brain, I wanted as little as I wanted any- 
thing in the world." The Conservative party, he saw as resistant, 

militant, authoritative, the unsympathetic party of establishment and 
success; and yet rejuvenated possessing^perhaps, the best hopes for 
building a better world. 

Wells and Remington alike come to emphasize the importance of 

education and collective action. 

As education becomes more universal and liberating, 
men will sort themselves more and more by their in¬ 
tellectual temperaments and less and less by their 
accidental associations. The past will rule them 
less; the future more.... 70 


Was there ever to be in human life more than that 
endless struggling individualism? Was there indeed 
some giantry, some immense valiant synthesis...or 
was this the beginning and withal the last phase of 
mankind? 71 

We want to create a sustained counter effort to the 
perpetual tendency of all educational organizations 
towards classicalism, secondary issues, and the 
evasion of life. We want to stimulate the expression 
of life through art and literature, and its explor¬ 
ation through research. We want to make the best 


6p Ibid. p. 297 

70 Ibid., p. 275 

71 Ibid., p. 282 











and finest thought accessible to every one, and 
more particularly to create and sustain an enor¬ 
mous free criticism, without which art, literature, 
and research alike degenerate into tradition or 
imposture. Then all the other problems which are 
now so insoluble, destitution, disease, the dif¬ 
ficulty of maintaining international peace, the 
scarcely faced possibility of making life gener¬ 
ally and continually beautiful become easy.... 72 

He discovered that the road to' social construction was not through 

the formulae of one political party, but that ideas marched in the 

minds of men. n ...i saw now that every man of intellectual freedom 

and vigor is necessarily constructive-minded nowadays.... 11 75 


Wells and Remington alike move to the conception of government 
by natural aristocracy, with a broad common aim; and believe that, 

”...the most vital activities in which I could engage would be those 
which most directly affected the Church, public habits of thought, 
education, organised research, literature, and the channels of gen¬ 
eral discussion. 11 ^ Their purpose is to enlighten the collective 
mind and stir the collective will. So much for the political ideas 


in The hew hachiavelli . 

"ells portrays sexual consciousness awakening despite secrecies 
warnings and ignorance. All circumstances seem to indicate that 
Remington will marry Margaret and he dees.only to recognize later 
irreconcilable incompatibilities. This is a favorite theme of Wells 


72 Ibid., p. 501 
75 Ibid., p. 292 
74 Ibid., p. 502 







and one which he drew from the experiences of his own first marriage. 

One of the great barriers to human understanding is the 
wide temperamental difference one finds in the values of 
things relating to sex. It is the issue upon which people 
most need training in charity and imaginative sympathy. 

Here are no universal standards at all, and indeed for no 
single man or woman does there seems to be any fixed stan¬ 
dard, so much do the accidents of circumstances and one’s 
physical phases affect one’s interpretations. 75 

One of the tragedies of human society, thinks Wells, is the attempt 

to make rules to govern the relations of the sexes. He emphasizes 

what he calls ’’temperamental incompatibilities". Remington describes 

the differences between himself and largaret in similar terms to 

Wells's descriptions of the differences between himself and his first 

wife. 


I was tough-minded, primary and intuitive and illogical; she 
was tender-minded, logical refined and secondary...loyal to 
pledge and persons, sentimental and faithful....! am loyal to 
ideas and instincts, emotional and scheming.... 76 

Remington, like Wells, develops a passionate love for a girl with 
whom he has been working, with whom there is companionship and intel¬ 
lectual sharing; and while he attempts to be rational, and does 
recognize still a strong attraction towards the first wife, he elopes 
to lead a happy fruitful life with the second woman. 

Both Remington and Wells become feminists in their political 
thinking. Remington attempts to graft the Endowment of motherhood 
to British Imperialism, as Wells attempted to graft it onto Fabian 


75 Ibid., p. 206 

76 Ibid., p. 255 







Socialism. Moreover, the ideas of trained aristocracy and universal 
education lead easily to a consideration of the quantity and quality 
of human births and to the organization of the family. The independ 
ent family unit where the man is master of the wife and the owner of 
the children is not conducive to better families. Wells advocates 
that the State recognize in a concrete way the service of motherhood 
instead of considering it merely the chance product of individual 
passions. A modern woman should be able to choose motherhood volun¬ 
tarily without subordinating herself to an individual man. 

Women are as fine as men;...I want to see them citizens, 
with a marriage law framed primarily for them and for 
their protection and the good of the race, and not for 
men's satisfactions. I want to see them bearing and 
rearing good children in the State as a generously re¬ 
warded public duty and service, choosing their husbands 
freely and discerningly, and in. no way enslaved by or 
subordinated to the men they have chosen....The social 
consciousness of women seems to me an unworked, an al¬ 
most untouched mine of wealth for the constructive pur¬ 
pose of the world. I want to change the respective 
values of the family group altogether, and make the 
home indeed the woman's kingdom and the mother the owner 
and responsible guardian of her children. 77 

Wells in 1914-* forty-eight years of age, was himself becoming 
quite settled within in his own system of thinking. He condemned 
orthodox education, religion, and family life; and he deplored the 
waste and disorder of an unplanned economy. He was convinced of 
the necessity of a world state based on the collective planning 
of a natural aristocracy of intellect. He was a sort of socialist 


77 Ibid., p. 572 








in his analysis of the existing society, but he did not hold with the 
idea of class conflict or government by the working classes. Yet he 
realized that conflict between old ideas and new was inevitable. He 
also saw flaws in the political machinery of democratic governments. 
He saw his role in life as a stirrer of men's thoughts and wills in 
order to direct them toward a planned social order. He believed that 
women should be given economic independence as well as the vote, so 
that they could take their rightful place as citizens on the same 
level as men. He believed that there should be much freer discussion 
and education regarding sexual relations, so that there would be 
greater chances of marital happiness. The Family should be re-org¬ 
anized to give women greater freedom and independence, for as con¬ 
stituted at present it embodied jealousy in sexual life as private 
ownership embodied jealousy in economic life. Wells in The Hew 
Machiavelli has Remington at one time pray, "Break me, 0 God, 
disgrace me, torment me, destroy me as you will, but save me from 
self-complacency, and little interests and little successes and 
the life that passes like the shadow of a dream". Yet Wells, 

repeating his political and social teachings in non-fiction and in 
novels, established and secure in position of author, accepted by 
the world, almost self-complacently pleased that he was not self- 


78 Ibid., p. 260 









satisfied like other men, was rudely shocked and amazed by the coming 


of World War 1, which he had been predicting for several years, 
had to re-organize and re-evaluate his thinking, and, pacifist, 
Datriot in the interests of a new and desirable world state. 


He 

turn 





Chapter 5 


WAR ST-WAR YEARS AFF I!T WELI 1 S THI] ONG, 1918-1929 


1916 . Mr. Britling Sees It Through 

1917 . The Soul of a Bishop 

1913 ..... Joan and Peter 


1925.' Men Like Gods 

1924 . The Dream 

1925 . Christina Alberta*s Father 

1926 . The World of William 01 is so Id 

1928 . !r. Blettsworthy on Rampole Island 


1950 . West, Geoffrey, H.G. Wells 

1984 ..... Wells, H.G., Experiment in Autobiography 
































Chapter 5 


WAR AND POST-WAR YEARS AFP !T 3* S THI 1 1914-1929 

War in 1914 came to most Englishmen as a surprise. Even to 
Wells, who considered himself a thinking, well-informed citizen of 
the world, the actual outbreak of war was a shock. Wells 1 s purpose 
in life had always been to reform the world, but war made him realize 
the urgency of the task. War emphasized in his*mind the instability 
of the existing social order which forced on mankind the choice be¬ 
tween death and destruction.and world-wide co-operation. During the 
war years Wells was disappointed that the moral and intellectual 
forces of the world did not exert themselves in a collective will 
or mentality, and that separate sovereign states continued to be 
militant and demanding. He became thoroughly convinced that only 
education, immediate and dynamic, could save mankind from self- 
destruction. To educate human beings to live together collectively 
became the purpose of Wells's existence during war and post-war 
years. f, My League of Nations Union experience had enforced my 
conviction that for a new order in the world there must be a new 
education and that for a real world civilization there must be a 
common basis of general ideas, that is to say a world-wide common- 
school education presenting the same vision of reality." ^ 

When Wells felt the extreme urgency of the need for better 
education he oroduced fewer fictional works and more non-fiction. 


1 Wells, Autobiograchy , vol. 2, p. 721 




















His greatest non-fictional work is probably The Outline o f H istory , 
1919• He believed that a world history should show, not the rise and 
fall of kings and empires, but the progressive development of the 
human species from nrehistoric individual life through continuing 
mental growth and social organization to present day tendencies toward 
a collective world-3tate. Because he could persuade none of his 
better qualified friends to do so, he undertook the immense task him¬ 
self. The Outline of History was rejected by English schools for 
which it was intended, but overnight it became a best seller. In 
1929 it was followed by The Science of Life , a similar outline of 
the scientific knowledge of the world, and in 1951 by The Work , 

Wealth and Happine s s of lankind , an outline of sociology. These 
three booms, he believed, contained the basic knowledge required of 
a citizen of the world. Another effect on Wells of the impending 
crisis in the social organization of mankind was the dominance of 
propagandist over artist. No longer could he afford the luxury of 
looking at life for its own sake, but he must always portray what 
could be done with life. Wells says: 

Personally, I have no use at all for life as it is, 
except as raw material. It bores me to look at things 
unless there is also the idea of doing something with 
them....It is always about life being altered that I 
write or about people developing schemes for altering 
life....My apparently most objective books are criti¬ 
cisms and incitements to change. 2 

2 Swinnerton, Frank, - octurne , 1917* Introduction by Wells, 
cited in West, Geoffrey, H.G. Wells , p. 215 
















Another result of Wells's education campaign was his attempt to bring 
theology and God in line with his ideas of a world-state achieved 
through the collective will and mind of mankind. He deifies humanity 
and human orogress in an attempt to give the church a constructive 
purpose toward achieving this world-state, 

Mr, Br i tling Sees It Through , 1916, describes the effect of the 
first two years of war on middle-class England. At times the dis¬ 
tinction between Mr. Britling and !r. Wells is slight if any. Wells 
and Britling are writers, self-appointed critics who abuse England 
and yet are inordinately proud of her, who are pacifists in peacetime 
and patriots in time of war. Wells explains this apparent inconsis¬ 
tency in his thinking by maintaining that German militarism and 
imperialism deny any possibility of a collective world-state, while 
the British empire, enlightened and modified, is the first step to¬ 
ward achieving the world-state. Britling, like Wells, feels frus¬ 
trated by his inability to make a real contribution to the war effort, 
and is critical of inefficiencies in the armed services. 

Wells describes the complacency of thinking Englishmen in 1914 -• 

We've grown up with no sense of danger, that is to 
say, with no sense of responsibility. None of us, 
none of us—for though I talk my actions belie me— 
really believe that life can change very fundament¬ 
ally any more, forever.... In England everybody talks 
of change and nothing ever happens. 5 

To shatter this self-complacency Wells has War speak: 


5 Mr. Britling Sees It Through , (1916), London, Oollins, p. 46 






















































I am the Fact and I stand astride the path of life. I am the 
threat of death and extinction that has always walked beside 
life, since life began. There can be nothing more in human 
life until you have reckoned with me. 4 

As he has done in earlier novels V/ells shows that war is no longer 

an isolated event concerning soldiers only. 

War that calls upon every man and threatens every life in 
the land, war of the whole national being, was a thing alto¬ 
gether outside English experience and the scope of British 
imagination. 5 

Mr. Britling explains how war has emphasized the need for a world 
republic. 

No life is safe, no happiness is safe, there is no chance 
of bettering life until we have made an end to all that causes 
war....We have to put an end to the folly and vanity of kings, 
and to any people ruling any people but themselves....That 1 s 
the plain sense of life: the federal world-republic. Why do 
we bother ourselves with loyalties to any other government 
but that? It needs only that sufficient men should say it, 
and that republic would be here now. Why have we loitered 
so long—until these tragic punishments come?...But kings 
and empires die; great ideas, once they are born, can never 
die again. In the end this world-republic, this sane govern¬ 
ment of the world, is as certain as the sunset. 6 

Self-satisfaction disappears as men realize that they must choose 

between world destruction and world co-operation, hopes Wells. 

Mr. Britling finds God, and the God he finds is subservient to 

Wells 1 s social and political teachings. 

After all, the real God of the Christians is Christ, not 
God Almighty; a poor mocked and wounded God nailed on a 
cross of matter.... Some dap he will triumph...But it is 
not fair to say that he causes all things now. It is not 


4 Ibid., p. 156 

5 Ibid., p. 212 

6 Ibid., p. ^4o 










fair to make out a case against him....God is not 
absolute; God i3 finite....A finite God who strug¬ 
gles in his great and comprehensive way as we strug¬ 
gle in our weak and silly way—who is with us—that 
is the essence of all real religion....Whyl If I 
thought there was an omnipotent God who looked down 
on battles and deaths and all the waste and horror 
of this war—able to orevent these things—doing 
them to amuse himself—I would spit in his empty 
face....How can God be a Person; how can He be any¬ 
thing that matters to man, unless he is limited and 
defined and—human like ourselves-with things out¬ 

side Him and beyond Him. 7 

Here is a limited, human, and striving God, a God which seems to be 
a personification or deification of man's finer urges and desires, 
perhaps a glorified picture of Wells's collective mind and will. 
Speaking of God, Wells continues: "The King was coming to his own. 
Amidst the darknesses and confusions, the nightmare cruelties and 
the hideous stupidities of the great war, God, the Captain of the 
World Republic, fought his way to empire." ® 

Both Britling and ' r ells experienced malignant hatred of the 
Germans for a short time, but both later adopted a more rational 
attitude. Britling, in a letter to German parents who have lost 
their son in war, writes: 

Let us make ourselves watchers and guardians of the 
order of the world...If only for love of our dead.... 

Let us pledge ourselves to service. Let us set our¬ 
selves with all our minds and with all our hearts to 
the perfecting and working out of the methods of 
democracy 'and the ending for ever of the kings and 
emperors and priestcrafts and the bands of adventurers, 
the traders, and owners and forestallers who have 


7 Ibid., p. 542 

8 Ibid., p. 570 










































£ 












































































. 






















betrayed mankind into this morass of hate and blood— 
in which our sons are lost—in which we flounder still 

.... 9 

War is black fabric, but a threadbare fabric through which the light 
is beginning to shine. Out of the horrors and destruction of war 
must come world organization, thinks Wells, and the only God that 
can exist must be a God of a world republic symbolizing the best 
attributes of mankind. In this God Britling and Wells can find tempo¬ 
rary comfort. 

Even in hr. Britling Sees It Through , devoted to the effect of 
the war, Wells does not lose the opportunity to describe the tempera¬ 
mental incompatibilities of a man and woman whose marriage, to all 
outward appearances, is happy. n ...the fine bud of love between them 
had failed to flower.... 11 and after several years they became 

allies and worked out a basis for mutual toleration and help. The 
man sought love elsewhere, but in each instance 11 temperamental 
incompatibilities 1 ’ caused him to end the affair. In contrast to 
these apparently common and unsatisfactory sexual relations, Wells 
gives brief pictures of the harmony between more fortunate couples. 

The Sou l of a Bisho p, 1917* laboriously distinguishes between 
the God of the Anglicans and a new God of human progress and world 
co-operation. The discovery of the new God is made gradually by a 
Bishop in the Church of England. The Bishop of Princhester, like 
many other clergymen is innocent and trustful, and has always accepted 

9 Loc. cit. 

10 Ibid., p. 89 













I 












without question the orthodox conceptions of God and of society. A 
labor leader in the industrial diocese voices Wells's criticism of 
the Church of England: 

You see, the church does not talk our language....These 
things [labor disputes] have to be fought out and ham¬ 
mered out....You can't suddenly call a halt in the mid¬ 
dle of the scrap and have a sort of millenium just be¬ 
cause you want it....Of course if the church had a plan, 
if it had a proposal to make, if it had anything more 
than a few pious palliatives to suggest, that might be 
different. 11 

The church does not come to grios with current social problems, thinks 
Wells. 


To relieve mental stresses a doctor gives the Bishop a new potion 
to drink which causes visions. His feeling of security in the creeds 
of the church vanishes and he seeks the true God. The Angel tells 
him that so far as men are concerned, God is not infinite and is not 
Creator. 

Isn't it enough for you to know something of the God 
that comes down to the human scale, who has been born 
on your planet and arisen out of Ian, who is Man and 
God, your leader? He's more than enough to fill your 
mind and use up every faculty of your being. He is 
courage, he is adventure, he is the King, he fights 
for you and with you against death.... 12 

This seems to be Mr. Britling's God, striving with men for a better 

world. The Bishop sees God in human terms. "He stood and smiled 

as a kind man might do; he dazzled and blinded his worshipper, and 


11 The Soul of a Bisho-o , New York, Macmillan, 1917» p. 55 


12 


Ibid., p. 12S 














yet it was manifest that he had a hand a man might clasp. 11 ^ And 
after, God is a real presence to him, not a creed. 

The dissatisfied Bishop wants to leave the Church of England 
but is reminded that he has no right to indulge in moral and intel¬ 
lectual integrities. His family and friends consider him established 
in a comfortable ecclesiastical career, and his parishioners believe 
him a part of the edifice which supports their faith. The Bishop 
seeks God in a second vision, because he wants to know how to serve 
God and how to save the world from conflict, confusion and war. The 
Angel tells him that God will soon be manifest throughout the world, 
that the common man is ready for his coming. The vision reveals men 
in different parts of the world realizing that war is futile and that 
only the co-operation of men will bring the Kingdom of God on earth. 
The Angel says: 

You see they all turn in one direction, although 
none of them seem to dream yet that they are all 
turning in the same direction. They turn, everyone, 
to the rule of righteousness, which is the rule of 
God. They turn to that communism of effort in the 
world which alone permits men to serve God in state 
and city and their economic lives....They are all 
coming to the verge of the same salvation, the sal¬ 
vation of one human brotherhood under the rule of 
one Righteousness, one Divine will....Is that the 
salvation your church offers? l4 


15 Ibid., p. 152 
l4 Ibid., p. 199 












The vision next shows the activities and teachings of churches 
and priests. Wells says: 

Some few men indeed seemed thoughtful, but within the 
limitation of their vows. Everywhere it was church 
and creed and nation and king and property and parti¬ 
sanship, and nowhere was it the True God that the 
priests and teachers were upholding. It was always 
the common unhampered man through whom the light of 
God v/as breaking; it was always the creed and the org¬ 
anization of the religious professionals that stood 
in the way to God.... "God is putting the priests 
aside, 11 he cried, * and reaching out to common men n . 

The churches, do not serve God....They are like great 
barricades on the way to God. 15 

In all ages religion has come from God through broad¬ 
minded creative men, and in all ages it has fallen 
very quickly into the hands of intense and conserv¬ 
ative men... 16 

We want to do right. And right, if you think clearly, 
is just truth within and service without, the service 
of God’s kingdom, which is mankind, the service of 
human needs and the increase of human power and ex¬ 
perience. It is all perfectly plain, it is all quite 
easy for anyone to understand, who isn't misled and 
chattered at and threatened and poisoned by evil priests 
and teachers. 17 

Wells’s social purpose is obvious in the following lines. 

It is no longer a riddle that little immediate things 
should seem of more importance than great and final 
things. For man is creature thrusting his way up 
from the beast to divinity, from the blindness of 
individuality to the knowledge of a common end. We 
stand deep in the engagements of our individual lives 
looking up to God, and only realizing in our moments 
of exaltation that through God we can escape from and 
rule and alter the whale world-wide scheme of individ¬ 
ual lives....God is the last thing added to the com- 


15 Ibid., p. 205 

16 Ibid., p. 2l4 

17 Ibid., p. 240 
















pleteness of human life. To most His presence is im¬ 
perceptible throughout their lives; they know as little 
of Him as a savage knows of the electric waves that 
beat through us for ever from the sun.... 18 

The book ends with the bishop outside of the church believing religion 

is a matter for all people, not a specialty for priests, and he is 

at prayer. 


Oh God! Thou who hast shown thyself to me, let me 
never forget thee again. Save me from forgetfulness, 
and show thyself to those I love; show thyself to 
all mankind. Use me, 0 God, use me; but keep my 
3oul alive. Save me from the presumption of the 
trusted servant; save me from the vanity of. authority. 

19 

This is similar to Remington's prayer in The New 'iachiavelli for God 
to keep him from self-complacency. 

Wells is still the social reformer determined to awaken men's 
minds to the desirability of a world-state for the common good. He 
is as critical of the church and church dogma as ever, but he is 
convinced that every means, including religion, must be used to 
achieve better social organization. He brings religion in line with 
his social ideas by criticizing the existing creeds and church 
structure, and by substituting a vital God of human progress who 
struggles side by side with men of better impulses and thoughts. 

God comes to earth through the common man, who is advancing from 
individualism to collective living. War. instead of the world-state ) 
came to the world because teachers and oreachers and other men 




18 Ibid., p. 299 

19 Ibid., p. 540 











spoke not the word of the true God. 

The book deals largely with the mental and spiritual development 
of the Bishop, but in the background are the temperamental incom¬ 
patibilities of man and wife, and the rebellion of the daughter against 
the orthodox restrictions on her mental and social activities. None 
of Wells's books is free from at least implied criticisms of the reve¬ 
lations of the sexes or of woman's lack of independence. 

In Joan and Peter , 1918, which is a long rambling novel, Wells 
attempts to evaluate British education from infancy through college, 
and to make recommendations for the betterment of education. As in 

The Soul of a Bishop religion is subordinated to directing minds 

. . "■ ■" 

toward the world-state, so here education is subordinated to making 
citizens for the world-state. 

Before looking at educational ideas in Joan and Peter, let us 
see what developments have taken place in Wells's theological think¬ 
ing. Peter, wounded in war, has a vision of the Lord God in a dingy, 
untidy office where He is apparently oblivious to the blood and con¬ 
fusion and meaninglessness of life around Him. Peter explains the 
appalling waste and muddle of life and asks the Lord God why he doesn't! 
manage it better. 

"You don't like it?" said the Lord God without any 
sign of either apology or explanation. 

"Jo," said Peter. 

"Then change it," said the Lord God, nodding his 
head as who should say, "got you there". 

"But how are we to change it?" 

"If you have no will to change it, you have no 
right to criticize it", said the Lord God, leaning back 
with the weariness of one who has had to argue with 











































































































■ 




■ 









each generation from Job onward, precisely the same 
objections and precisely the same arguments. 

"...there isn't anything in the whole of this 
concern of mine that Man can't control if only he 
chooses to control it. It's arranged like that. 

There's a lot more system there than you suspect, 
only it's too ingenious for you to see. It's yours 
to command. If you want a card index for the world— 
well, get a card index—I won't prevent you. If 
you don't like my spiders, kill my spiders. I'm 
not conceited about them...." 20 

In this caricature of God, Wells is clearly telling men to use their 

own wills to build a better world for themselves, and that nothing 

outside of themselves will prevent them—or help them. This God 

seems indifferent to the lives of men. 

Oswald at the end of the book thinks about God and human wills. 

He says: 

Men are wills and parts of a will that is neither the 
slave of the stream of matter nor a thing indifferent 
to it, that is paradoxically free and bound. They are 
parts of a will, but what this great will was that had 
him in its grasp, that compelled him to work, that 
saved him from drowning in his individual sorrows and 
cares, he could not say. 21 

This description of God, or Essence beyond Reality, or Nameless In¬ 
comprehensible is not caricature; but as might be expected in Wells, 
is a-Being which loves justice, the revelation of scientific laws, 
the setting right of disordered things and the League of Nations. 

This is still 1917* We feel that God is becoming more obviously a 
figure of speech which represents the common will of mankind directed 


20 Joan and Peter , Jew York, Macmillan, 1918* p. 5^9 


21 


ibid., p. 592 











towards a common goal. In later books Wells droos even the figure 
of speech. 

Oswald on the eve of the World War 1 considers the education of 

his wards, and realizes that formal schooling is a small part of the 

total education of an individual. 

The best education in the world is still to seek, and 
while he had been getting such scraps of the second 
best for them as he could, the world itself, nature, 
tradition, custom, suggestion, example and accident, 
has moulded them and made them. When he measured 
what had been done upon these youngsters by these out¬ 
ward things and compared it with their deliberate edu¬ 
cation, the schoolmaster seemed to him to be still no 
more than a half-hearted dwarf who would snare the 
white horses of a cataract with a noose of packthread. 22 

Osv/ald tells Peter how the hope of the world lies in Science and in 
the Will of right thinking people.Then he attacks the self- 
satisfaction of Victorians, of men who believe order will arise with¬ 
out collective direction, with everyone unrestrainedly pursuing his 
own individual ends. Peter begins to glimpse what life in the future 
might be. 


I believe as you believe really, in the Republic of 
Mankind, in universal work for a common end—for free¬ 
dom, welfare, and beauty....It seems to me to be the 
commonsense aim for all humanity....But most of this 
world is still deep in its old Fixed Ideas, walking 
in its sleep .... 24 

Osv/ald opens a discussion v/ith the question, "What is education 
up to? '.'/hat is education?" ~- J 


22 Ibid., p. 577 
25 Ibid., p. 535 

24 Ibid., p. 420 

25 Ibid., p. 571 


The answer comes that education 













should fit men for a civilized life of creative activities and good¬ 
will, the political form of which uust necessarily be a world-state. 

A world peace must be more than absence of war, but must contain suf¬ 
ficient opportunity for adventure to use the creative forces of man¬ 
kind. Victory in war will not make the world safe for democracy. 

Only education can do that. Both the Catholic Church and the Church 
of England are criticized for standing in the way of progress, for 
being self-satisfied and stagnant. Education can never be separated 
from.truth and progress. 

"Facts are clean," said Oswald, uttering the essential 
faith with which science has faced vice and priest-, 
craft, magic and muddle and fear and mystery, the whole 
world over. "Facts are clean". 26 

Wells shows the coming of war with world-wide destruction and 

" 

the crumbling of outworn social and political institutions. Joan, 
confused like millions of other people, believes that somewhere, 
unseen, must be wise adults who manage things for the benefit of man¬ 
kind. Wells also criticizes inefficiencies in the army, early British 
imperialism, racial intolerance, social customs. He also gives a 
picture of the wasteful undirected lives of young people before the 
outbreak of war in 1914. 

Wells traces the sexual development of Joan and Peter and dis- 

. 

cusses sex education. 


26 Ibid., p. 521 




















Three-quarters at least of the art and literature of 
the world is concerned with the relations of the sexes, 
and yet here was Joan after thirty centuries or so of 
human art and literature, still debating the elemental 
facts of her being....We have given the young neither 
knowledge nor training, we have restrained and baffled 
them and told them lies...until at last the brightest 
of the young have been obliged to get down to the bare 
facts in themselves and begin again at the beginning.... 
So Joan, co-Heiress of the Ages with Peter, found that 
because of her defaulting trustees, because we teachers, 
divines, writers and the like have shirked what was 
disagreeable and difficult and unpopular, she inherited 
nothing but debts and dangers.... 27 


Joan marries Peter and plans to build houses, usually considered a 

man’s work. Wells indicates that it would benefit the country if 

more women engaged in creative, productive work, instead of spending 

?8 

too much time powdering silly noses to snare silly men. 

Adequate education, freedom and independence of men and women, 
right-thinking, and creative activities must go together to build 
the Republic of Mankind. 

Men Like Gods , 192^, is return to fantasy in its Utopian pic¬ 
ture of life in the great new age, and was no doubt written by Wells 
in a period of relaxation. 

The Dream , 1924, although it is better written, is similar in 
plan to In the Days of the Comet , 1906. A citizen of the charming 
society of two thousand years hence dreams of life in our times, 
which appears to him savage, inhuman days in the bleak dawn of 
c ivil iz ation in the Dark Ages of Confusion. ^ The book contains 


27 Ibid,, p, 494 
S3 Ibid,, p, 581 

29 The Dream , (1924), London, Odhams, p. 466 













. 

























































































Wells's usual criticisms of lower middle-class life; of ineffective 
and restrictive education, religion, vocational opportunities, and 
social customs; and of jealousy, cruelty and ignorance in sexual 
relations. 

Sarnac, the teller of the story, explains the planlessness and 

muddling in economic affairs in the old world. 

In that casual, planless over-populated world there 
were no such things as Security or social justice as 
we should understand these words nowadays....The 
whole world floated economically upon a cash-and- 
credit system that was fundamentally fictitious and 
conventional, there were no adequate protections 
against greedy abuses of those monetary conventions, 
no watch kept over world-production and world-con¬ 
sumption. . .and the fortunes not only of individuals 
but of states and nations fluctuated irrationally 
and uncontrollably....That old world was essentially 
a world of muddle-headed sophisticated children, 
blind to the universal catastrophe of the top-heavy 
and collapsing civilisation in v/hich they played 
their parts.... ^0 

Sarnac expresses Wells's disillusionment in the results of World War 1. 

Of course the World War killed and tortured millions 
of us, impoverished us all and dislocated the whole 
world....The World War arose out of these ignorances 
and misconceptions and it did nothing to alter them. 

After it was all over,the world was a good deal rat¬ 
tled and much shabbier than before but it was still 
the same old mean and haphazard world, acquisitive, 
divided, cantingly patriotic, idiotically prolific, 
dirty, diseased, spiteful, and conceited....A God 
in that man's position might have unified the world 
in the twentieth century and saved it centuries of 
tragic struggle. President Wilson v/as not a God. JI 


50 Ibid., p. p22 

51 Ibid., p. 4l8 








Wells's criticisms of moral codes and religions of his own day- 

are evident in the following quotation. 

We have not so much a moral code now as a moral training, 
and our religion involves no strain on reason or instincts, 
and so it is difficult for us to understand the tortuosity 
and evasions and defences and general furtiveness and mean¬ 
ness of a world in which nobody really understood and be¬ 
lieved the religious creeds, not even the priests, and no¬ 
body was really convinced to the bone of the sweetness and 
justice of the moral code. In that distant age almost 
everybody was sexually angry or uncomfortable or dishonest; 
the restraints we had did not so much restrain as provoke 
people. ^2 

Fanny, ignorant of love, experimented, broke the moral codes, and 
through good fortune rather than good management, found true and 
lasting love. The hero of the story married a girl whom he loved 
and, because he was jealous, divorced. Later, when he tried to help 
her escape from an intolerable marriage into which he had forced her, 
he was shot and killed by the jealous husband. Before this he 
married again himself, an efficient, respectable girl, who made him 
a conventionally good home, but with whom there was little love or 
understanding. The story contains Wells's old theme of jealousy, 
proprietorship and temperamental incompatibilities in sexual relations. 
The nearest Wells has come to solving the problem of the relationship 
of the sexes is to advocate mutual tolerance and compromise, but he 
is convinced that there must be a more adequate solution before there 
can be a free new world. He is also convinced that in sexual re¬ 
lations, as in economics and politics, the recognition of evil and 


52 Ibid., p. 552 








■ v. 








. 


























. 

' 










' 








the will to change it must come first, and the actual means of achiev¬ 
ing the change will follow. 

A Utopian listener summarizes the tragedy of the old way of liv¬ 


ing : 


But the hardness of it! the crueltyl The universal 
heartache! It is not the barbarism I think of, not 
the wars and diseases, the shortened, crippled lives, 
the ugly towns, the narrow country-side, but worse 
than that the sorrow of the heart, the universal un¬ 
kindness, the universal failure to understand or care 
for the thwarted desires and needs of others....Not 
all that world had a giver who gave with both hands 

11 And out of that darkness in twenty short centuries our race has 


come to the light and tolerance the sweet freedoms and charities of 
our lives today 11 . ^ Such is Wells's hope. 

Christina Alberta's Father , 1925* shows how one man, a confused, 
ineffective little laundryman, realized that he was the inheritor of 


the earth, was Sargon King of Kings, the builder of empires. He 
was confined to a mental institution, but Wells shows that if a 
clear mind possessed the same ideas, he would be material for world 


citizenship. In the veins of all people flows some of the blood of 
Sargon, and all men are potentially great men. Everybody ought to 
take hold of all the world and save it and rule it just as Sargon 
did. Each individual has a kingly task to perform, a special con¬ 
tribution to make toward the common good. Other people are to be. 


55 Ibid., p. 465 
54 Loc. cit. 










not followers and disciplos, but fellow kings, awakened and working 
together for the progress of mankind. 

Mr. Preemby, the laundryman, dies, but the soirit of Sargon lives 

on. It is spoken of as a new religion. 

Devizes said to Lambone: 11 Stripped of its theological 
trappings, your new religion is simply a statement of 
this. That our race has reached, and is now receding 
from, a maximum of ind ivid uation . That it turns now 
towards synthesis and co-operation. It will move back 
towards what you call Sargon, the great ruler, and it 
will swallow up individual egotistical men in its com¬ 
mon aims. As already scientific work swallows them 
up. Or good administrative work. Or art..." 55 

Art, science, public service, creative work of every 
sort, these are parts of what you, I suppose, would 
call the race mind, parts of the race life. 7 very man 
who matters is a fresh thought, a fresh idea. He is 
himself still, it is true, but his significance is 
that he comes out of his cast and out of his conditions 
and he flows on to further men. This is the new reali¬ 
zation that is changing all the values in human life. 

...He are passing into a new way of living, into a new 
sort of lives, into new relationships. 56 

Wells is placing greater emphasis on the collective mind of the race 

for he believes that only through it will a better social order be 

achieved. Individualism must give way to collectivism. 

-Through the mouth of Dr. Devizes, Wells expresses further his 
ideas of human society. D.evizes explains the world in terms of mind 
and understanding rather than of labor and material necessity. He 
emphasizes the need'for n: education. 


55 Christina Alberta*s Father ,(1924), London, Collins, o. 244 

56 Ibid., p. 245 




















. 










. 

■ 














. 










He says: 


"Life was one continuous thing, all life was connected 
....The conscious life of most lower animals was in¬ 
tensely individual.... But among men there was now 
a common mind of the race, a great growing body of 
knowledge and interpretations. Man's primary self is 
instinctive and individual. His secondary self is 
social. The deep-lying continuity of life was becoming 
more apparent and finding more and more definite expression 
with this socialization of man. To educate anyone in 
the nroper sense of the world was to make him more and 
more aware of this continuity. The importance of the 
passionate feverish self was then reduced. True edu¬ 
cation was self-subordination to a greater life, to the 
social self. The natural instincts and limitations of 
the primary self were in conflict with this wider under¬ 
flow; education, good education, tended to correct them. 

57 

Wells through Devizes expresses his contempt for the Communist party 

and his praise for communist ideas. 

Communism for him meant a new spirit, a spirit of science 
reorganizing the world upon scientific collective lines, 
but the whole temper of party communism was contemporary. 

It was saturated with the feelings and ideas of existing 
social classes, with the natural resentment of the dis¬ 
possessed. It had the angry dogmatism of desperate people 
not sure of their grin. It needed more of the passion of 
creative self-forgetfulness. Many Communists, he said, 
were simply reversed capitalists, egotists without capital; 
they wanted revenge and expropriation, and when they were 
through with that theywould be left with nothing but 
. social ruins and everything to begin all over again. And 
they were suspicious and intolerant because of their want 
of internal assurance. 58 

Party Communism he saw as a destructive rather than a constructive 

creative force. 


57 Ibid., p. 85 

58 Ibid., p. 188 

























Christina Alberta was struck by the evasiveness of life. People 
spent all their years following a conventional pattern, saying and 
doing what they thought was to be said and done. She wondered if 
the evasive life was the sane life. ’’Was all this originality and 
thinking for oneself and not going with the crowd and so forth, that 
had been her pride and glory, just the way out from the sane life? 
Originality, eccentricity, queerness, craziness, madness; was that 
merely a quantitative scale? 11 ^9 Christina Alberta wanted to be a 
citizen on her own as a man is, and to do a man’s work, whether it 
was conventional or not. She wanted love, but not marriage and not 
children; and she wanted a free personal life with important work to 
do. She was not like the earlier suffragettes who suppressed sex in 
their desire for emancipation, but, like men, she wanted to enjoy 
sex and go on to other things. Of this new type of womanhood Wells 
comments: 

In the past the snecies had needed half the race spec¬ 
ialized for child-bearing and child-rearing; now plainly 
it didn’t. The tremendous and worshipful dignity of 
wife and mother was not for all women any longer. That 
would remain for a certain sort of them to take up if 
they would. But the vast multitude of women were born 
now to miss that. 4o 

Wells implies here what he states definitely in The World of William 
Clissold ' that birth control is necessary to the creation of a 
better civilization. 


59 Ibid., p. 167 
40 Ibid., p. 255 









Men and women, the inheritors of the ages, are to subordinate 
their individual selves to the collective good of mankind, and yet 
as individuals they are to lead lives of freedom and creative acti¬ 
vity . 

The World of William Clissold , 1926, consists of a comprehensive 
account of what one man, obviously H.G. Wells, thinks of the world. 
There is very little characterization and very little plot as Wells 
uses the novel, not for a picture of life, but for a discussion of 
ideas. In it he carefully develops his idea of the collective Mind 
of the Race, he criticizes socialism and communism at length, dis¬ 
cusses the War and Reconstruction, and finally elaborates his plan 
for achieving the world-state'by means of the n Open Conspiracy 11 . 

Mind, says Wells, is growing at an ever increasing pace. There 
are yet no imaginable limitations to that growth. The human species 
was once intensely solitary and individualistic. Now, men desire 
to serve, to co-operate, to construct. The primary form of human 
life is still self-seeking, and there is conflict between the primary 
form and the newer, vaguer, unselfish factor. People are becoming 
more conscious of the fact that they as individuals are contributory 
and subordinate to the common mental being of the race, that this 
race-mind, which is immortal, has more and more to offer to the 
4i 

individual. William Clissold gives a more lengthy discussion 

4l The World of Willia i Clissold ( 1926), New York, Doran, vol. 1, 
pp. 8I-85 














. 









of the same race-mind ideas which were explained in Christina Alberta' s 
Father. Wells believes that men should consciously work for the com¬ 
mon good. 

We shall be happier to extend our motives and desires 
beyond the tragic uncertainties of the purely egotistic 
life. We shall be broadened and steadied by that parti¬ 
cipation, we shall be release'!, we shall be largely re¬ 
leased from the worst intensities of personal desire 
and passion and from the bitter fear and still bitterer 
realization of futility that haunt self-centred minds. 42 

Individuals need not fear the coming of the new collective society. 

They will be passing beyond egotistical conflict and out 
of the age of jealousy, as we are passing beyond super¬ 
stition and out of the age of fear. But they will be 
just as freely interested. They will be far more various 
and individualised. Their form of self-assertion will 
be different, it will have the form of distinctive ser¬ 
vice and distinctive creation, instead of being a blind 
insistence upon formal honour, upon, possessions, and upon 
stereotyped advantages. 45 

Wells maintains that socialism no longer exists in the world. 

All modern thought is now infected by the good ideas of early soc¬ 
ialism, that is by the ideas of collective organization of the basal 
needs of mankind, of a systematic economy of the energy that goes 
now to waste in competition for mere existence, of a complete abol¬ 
ition of forestalling, of obstruction for gain and indeed of every 
sort of profiteering. Wells next discusses the deficiencies of the 
early socialists. They were blind to the necessity for a scientific 
monetary method, for a competent receiver to nationalise the means 


42 Ibid., p. 92 
4^ Ibid., p.115 








of production and distribution, for political reform. They were vague 
on international relationshios and they sneered at the idea of a world- 
state. They also failed to realize that a new stage of civilized so¬ 
ciety would be the work of an intelligent minority; that it would be 
effected without the support of the crowd and possibly in soite of its 

44 

dissent. Today Wells says there is neither a Capitalist system nor 

a Communist system. Present day names and labels lead us astray. 

Socialism which was creative is stunned, and Communism, 
which is the sabotage of civilisation by the disappointed, 
has usurped its name and inheritance....This response 
came [to Marx] from the natural hate of men deeply 
conscious of their own merits and conscious also of so¬ 
cial disadvantages for those whom Fate seems to have 
treated better. 4|p 

The Communists have too little respect for the "intellectual gentry", 
the men of science, art and literature. The creative revolution 
would be further advanced today if Karl Marx had never lived. 

A conflict between old institutions and new ideas is inevitable. 

Wells describes the nature of the-resulting revolution: 

The greater revolution must be a deliberate and not 
a convulsive -orocess. It has to fight against the 
egoist and fool in man, the ancestral, instinctive 
brute, as much in the suspicious and angry mob below 
as in the timid, mean, and violent propertied classes 
above. It has a far greater percentage of possible 
adherents among the educated and able than in the 
crowd...Ultimately this sort of people will acquire 
the necessary force and knowledge to change things 
systematically, and then they will set about doing 
so. Their convictions viil radiate into the general 
mass. They will reshape the general conceptions of 
economic, political and social life. 46 

44 ibid., pp. 157-184 

45 Ibid., p. 180 

46 Ibid., p. 138 
















I believe that ultimately man, collective man, haa to 
aunoreas the sovereign indeoendence of any part of the 
world aa against the whole. He cannot get on very 
much beyond our preaent aort of civilisation until he 
has contrived a world currency, a world control of 
staple production, and world peace—and in fact, a 
world atate. 47 

Every day there must be aomeone pushing the new ideas 
just a little further, clearing up, rounding off, 
maturing, making possible and practicable. This is 
the real Reconstruction. But for the world in gen¬ 
eral they are still inaudible, smothering, unable to 
speak out yet within the swelling, uncomfortable old 
institutions. Then someone says something, definite 
effort is started, the trouble begins. 43 

Wells describes the disillusionment of the war and the period 
of reconstruction. '’...human society is a labour-imposing, labour- 
shifting, property-money complex, and life, the more or less of it, 
only an unpremeditated by-product.” ^ Even during the war bel¬ 
ligerent states would take human lives outright, but seldom property. 
To achieve a better state, there must be a reversal of these two 
values of life and property. 

The Open Conspiracy is the means to achieve the new world-state. 

Humanity is confronted by the necessities and op¬ 
portunities of a great metamorphosis and our wills 
and imaginations are lagging and we are failing to 
square ourselves and prepare our successors for the 
great tasks of our inheritance.... The Open Con¬ 
spiracy is an attempt to harmonise people's lives 
with this metamorphosis and to undermine and remove 
the resistances that may divert its forces towards 
destruction.' ^0 


47 Ibid., p. 135 

43 Ibid., p. 527 

49 Ibid., p. 293 

50 The World of-William Clissold (1926), London, Collins, vol .2 5.568 



















Revolution cannot be successful without ?ower. The chief source of 

power today is modern industry associated with science, and finance. 

Industrialists, scientists, financiers must be the main leaders in 

the revolution, for only they have the knowledge, experience, courage, 

and ability to achieve so great a reorientation of human effort. The 

Open Conspiracy consists of: 

...a simplification by concentration into large organi¬ 
sations of the material life of the whole human community 
in an atmosphere of unlimited candour. It is explanation 
and invitation to every intelligent human being to under¬ 
stand and assist. It is the abandonment of all reserv¬ 
ation in the economic working of the world. It is the 
establishment of the economic world-state by deliberate 
invitation, explicit discussion, and co-operation of the 
men most interested in economic organisations, men chosen 
by their work, called to it by a natural disposition and 
aptitude for it, fully aware of its importance and working 
with the support of an increasing general understanding. 51 

The new world government will be largely social and economic, will 
have hands instead of teeth and claws, will be a world business org¬ 
anization. The young must receive a new education for a new social 
order, and the old schoolmaster must be prevented from hindering the 
progress of civilization. Wells visualizes the - new world: 

We shall put away childish things, childish extrava¬ 
gances of passion and nightmare fears. Our minds will 
live in a living world literature and exercise in liv¬ 
ing art; our science will grow incessantly and our 
power increase. Our planet will become like a work¬ 
shop in a pleasant garden, and from it we shall look 
out with ever diminishing fear upon our heritage of 
space and time amidst the stars. 52 


51 Ibid., p. 574 

52 Ibid., p. 4^ 







Wells describes sex as a driving obsession in the lives of most 

human beings, time and energy consuming out of all proportion to its 

practical results. At one time he thought sex was merely a sensuous 

craving, but later realized that sex spread throughout the whole 

social life. It shows itself in a hunger for mastery over life. 

The desire of a woman to own and dominate a man, or 
the desire of a man to own and dominate a woman or 
women, is only the intense focus of a vastly greater 
nimbus of purpose, to dominate men and women at large. 

It spreads out into a craving for servants, for de¬ 
pendents, for wills that wait on our wills. It branches 
out into a desire for possessions of all sorts; it finds 
a grotesque specialisation in the accumulation of pets.^ 

In the past women were more completely overtaken by the oppression 
of sex than men. Today women have more personal freedom, have more 
leisure, are more energetic, are in a position to be working col¬ 
leagues of men. These changes necessitate a new social role for 
women. 


I am for making boys of them and breaking up these 
mere empty shells and shams of suburban households. 
Let them live in flats and chambers and have their 
men come and go until they find a proper mate and a 
task they can share with him. Let them be educated 
and trained as well as their brothers and put to 
research and business and productive work. Let 
them cease to regard their sex—I will not say as 
a marketable commodity, but as a negotiable right 
for which they may secure a comfortable living. ^4 


55 Ibid., p. 505 

54 Ibid., p. 446 

























- 





































, 
















- 











Women should have freedom, dignity, equal opportunities with other 
citizens. The restrictions of marriage may be removed but there will 
be no end to mating. Men and women will live in couples for longer 
or shorter periods of time, and there will be no standardization of 
relations between men and women, as is attempted today. Social life 
in the future will be ampler, easier, less crowded, less ceremonious 
Th e Wo rld of William Olissold is supposed to be a practical account 
of the present day world with practical plans for the future, but on. 
the topic sexual relations Wells verges on the vague and impracticable. 

Hr. Blettsworthy on Rampole Island , 1928, symbolic and satirical, 
is a return to fantasy. Mr. Blettsworthy is brought up in England to 
believe that all the world is good. His faith in humanity is shattered 
by an unfortunate love affair and by the betrayal of his business 
partner. The evasiveness and confusion of civilized life is seen in 
this description: 

The minds of savages are even more tortuous than they 
are confused; they are misdirected by crazy classifi¬ 
cations and encumbered with symbolism, metaphor, meto¬ 
nymy and elaborate falsifications; it is the civilized 
man who thinks simoly and clearly...everything these 
islanders said therefore meant something a little dif- 
' ferent and everything they set about doing they did 
with an air of really doing something else.... 56 

Blettsworthy describes to the islanders, England as it should be, not 

as it is. 

55 Ibid., p. 465 

56 Mr. Blettsworthy on Rampole Island , Toronto, Doubleday, Doran & 

Gundy, 1923, p. 175 ' 














Men live not on each other but on the "neat and drink 
they combine to produce—like brothers....The land 
spreads wide and the sun shines...practical benefits 
accruing from the good moral tone created by fair 
laws and sound education. I enlarged upon the will¬ 
ing charities, kindly consideration and free service 
that met the needs of the distressed citizen, so 
far as there were distressed citizens...I spoke parti¬ 
cularly of the cleanness and healthiness of the civi¬ 
lized life, of the happiness and amplitude of a state 
of affairs in which everyone was educated to confid¬ 
ence in his neighbour and of the abundance of the 
goods and conveniences our highly organised co-oper¬ 
ations made available for all... 57 

Suddenly a disturbing thought comes that perhaps existing states, 

organizations and institutions are unwilling to change ever or die. 

“My civilized world which marched on assured and gloriously from 

one social achievement to another, appeared while Chit was sleeping, 

a world most hopelessly barred from escaping to any peace, union 

or security. 11 

Evolution did not mean that the best survived, but merely that 
the ones with the most effective weapon, however undesirable in it¬ 
self, survived. A beast might survive and then itself end. Wells 
is again attacking the idea of inevitable progress through evolution. 
Evolution might just as easily lead to a dead end as to a better 
life. War was waged by the islanders according to irrational trad¬ 
ition, law and feeling, with all the ineffectiveness and inefficiency 
with which Wells has charged British war administrations. 

England is clearly written across Wells's description of love 
among the islanders. 


57 Ibid*, p. 189,190 

58 Ibid., p. 206 











































. 










. 









' 

























The feelings of men for women and of women for men upon 
Rampole Island were far harsher, crueller and more dis¬ 
honest, than anything I could have imagined in the days 
of my Wiltshire upbringing....[There was aT see-saw be¬ 
tween desire and repulsion in most of the male savages 
about me. In that clean and civilized world out of which 
I had fallen, love was normally a nretty and gracious 
business, very fruitful of happiness....The common way 
in that better world was the happy development of a 
preference and companionship into an ardour of mutual 
and equivalent desire and the establishment of life of 
the completest confidence, helpfulness and self-sacri¬ 
fice, upon the basis of its consummation. But these 
Islanders...feared and resented the physical attraction 
that drew them together....The love story on the Island 
was never the free and pleasant thing it can be under 
civilized conditions. It was saturated with insincerity, 
poisoned by reluctant submissions and tempered satis¬ 
factions. 59 

Then Mr. Blettsworthy escaped the island and found himself in 
New York. The real World War I was in progress, and he became a 
soldier, hoping that it would bring the world much nearer peace and 
unity. He found more inefficiencies, stupidities, and anachronisms 
in war among civilized nations than in war among the savages on Ram¬ 
pole Island. War ended but the new world did not come. The Sacco 
and Vanzetti case, as an example of the injustice of the world, trou¬ 
bled him. A friend said: 

■ 11 Things like this trial and execution happen every day.... 

It is a stupid social system defending itself against a 
real though feeble attack....If cruelty and prejudice tri¬ 
umphed at last it was only after a long struggle.... If you 
knew more of history and nature you would be less distressed 
by current things. n 60 


59 Ibid., pp. 228, 229 

60 Ibid., p. 552 





But Blettsworthy with Wells continues to look on a world, dis¬ 
organized, confused, aimless. The consolation is that knowledge is 
growing, a collective purpose is growing in power, gradually, but 
day by da^. There is nothing in one brain that cannot be in the 
brains of thousands of other people. At first timidly, and then 
boldly, steps can be taken to plan, to reconstruct, to outlaw war, 
to achieve international control in the collective interests of man¬ 
kind. Old institutions can die, and rapidly with help. Education 
are needed to direct men’s minds tov/ard the common 
goal. Human beings have overvalued the individual and cared too 
little for their kind. But the change is surely coming, when Ram- 
pole Island and our outworn social organization will give way to 
something better, new, free, and creative. 

How did World War 1 affect Wells’s social and political think¬ 
ing? It showed Wells that mankind must choose between v/orld destruc¬ 
tion and world co-operation. The old unjust, unstable economic and 
social system can be replaced if men can adjust themselves to a new 
fora of society. The adjustment can be made only if the individual 
is subordinate and contributory to the collective thinking and work¬ 
ing of mankind. The political organization of such a society must 
of necessity be world-wide. No existing party or class of people 
can bring this new state into existence. It must come from think¬ 
ing people in all classes of society and all political parties. 

Most of the revolutionaries will probably come from industry, fi- 













nance and science, for there lies the creative power of our society. 
Education and religion can both be used to help develop the collec¬ 
tive consciousness, the will necessary to build a world-state, and 
the qualities necessary for world citizenship. Education, scien¬ 
tific thinking, straight-forward action are needed to combat muddling, 
evasion, and deception. Religion is valuable only if God is Cap¬ 
tain of a World Republic, or the personification of human progress, 
but the priests and churches in the past have been effective in pre¬ 
venting that. The Open Conspiracy is an attempt by the best minds 
to bring the diffused creative forces of the world into efficient 

co-operation for the common good. The conspirators must possess 

not 

power to intimidate or defeat those who willAvoluntarily give up 
their selfish powers. The cause of the new social order will de¬ 
mand the finest loyalty of individuals and will ennoble law and 
order. From the best creative minds will come the socialist world- 
state of to-morrow. 

To Wells the will to change is the first essential. The 
details of planned action will follow. For the present education 
is all-important. There is a race between education and catastrophe, 
and at the end of the race is either world-wide happiness or world¬ 
wide destruction. In 1955 Wells seemed hopeful about the education 
iob which he and others were doing. 

Everyday several thousands of fresh minds respond to 
some part of the suggestion we are making; a teacher 
here alters his teaching a little; a reader thinks 







’ 














over a point and argues with a friend; a journalist 
gets a new idea of things and echoes it in an article; 
an orthodox parson suddenly feels insecure. It was 
not to be expected that all at once all the schools 
would experience a change of heart, have a great burn¬ 
ing of textbooks and start off at a tangent towards 
the new learning; nor is it reasonable to complain, 
that among those who advocate a fresh education for 
citizenship the apprehension of what we are driving 
at is usually very inadequate. There is no proof 
that the seed we have already sown has died. On the 
contrary, the signs of vitality increase....The new 
ideology creeps upon the world now. 6l 


We have now traced the development of the social and political 
thinking in the novels of H.G. Wells up to the time that European 
dictatorships and Pascist-Communist conflicts began to herald World 
War II. Wells was intensely conscious of the crisis in human society, 
of the need for social change, and in order to meet the need he 
formulated a theory for practical action. He acts on his own theo¬ 
ries but there is little response from the rest of the world. Sixty- 
four years of age in 1950* he saw that the task to which he had de¬ 
voted his life was far short of achievement, and that relatively 
few years of life were left him to continue that necessary work. 

How eould he best use his remaining years? 


6 l Wells, Autobiography , p. 729 

















Chapter 4 

DICTATORSHIPS AND INEFFECTIVE MEN, 1930-1945 

. 

1955 . The Bulpington of Blup 

1957 . The Croquet Player 

1958 . The Brothers 

1958 . Aopropoa of Dolores 

1959 . The Holy Terror 

194-0. Babes in the Darkling Wood 

1942. You Can*t Be Too Careful 

1946. The Happy Turning 

1946 . Mind at the End of its Tether 


























Chapter 4 

DICTATORSHIPS AND INEFFECTIVE MEN, 1950-1945 

For a few years in the late 1920's H.G. Wells's sense of the 
critical stage in the affairs of men and society relaxes—at least 
catastrophe is not immediately impending, and there is hope that 
intelligent men will, out of their common creative will and mind, 
build a new world republic. The novels of the last fifteen years 
of Wells's life deal largely with dictators and ineffective men. 

The choice between catastrophe and world community again becomes 
more and more urgent in Wells's mind ? until,in 1945 with his own 
death rapidly approaching ? he believes that extinction of the human 
species will result inevitably from man's inability to adapt his 
mind and will to new circumstances. Before he reaches this dismal 
conclusion he faces the reality of totalitarian dictatorships in 
Europe, and the reality of a second World War, and the ineffective¬ 
ness of masses of mankind to prevent these conditions. 

The Autocracy of Mr. Parham , 1950 j is satire and mockery. 

English -nationalism, tradition and militarism are personified and 
are sent boasting, marching and commanding peoples in a manner 
paralleling the Italian dictatorship of Benito Mussolini. Mr. Par¬ 
ham, a conservative, ineffective university professor, during a 
stance suddenly becomes, with immense will and immense power,the 
incarnation of the Master Spirit, the saviour of the British peoples. 

















■ '' 















































. 





























As Lord Paramount ho founds the League for Duty. The executive and 
parliamentary functions of England are his for thetaking because 
people are weary of bickerings and ineffective measures. He attempts 
to get a corner on the manufacture of poison gases, but the manu¬ 
facturers are not co-operative. 

International affairs of the 1920's were frequently discussed 
at dinner parties before Lord Paramount made his appearance. In 
those years nations pretended to work for peace while they actually 
prepared for v/ar. Industrial progress, moral and intellectual ad¬ 
vance were all directed toward destruction. Patriotism was killing 
mental freedom. In the opinion of Mr. Parham the world needed dis¬ 
cipline and order. ^ Germany was of secondary importance, but at 
any cost Soviet expansion had to be prevented. Bankers were not 
villains. Manufacturers of munitions and poison gases were not 
villains, although they dealt in death on a world-wide scale. Mr. 
Parham thought the world needed to be brought back to tradition, to 

classical standards, to ancient and eternal values, to historical 
2 

forms. And certainly he thought that men of science should not 
be allowed to rule the world. Their studies should be under mili¬ 
tary discipline and subject to the Official Secrets Act. Science 
should not be allowed the infect bankers and industrialists with 
the idea of interfering with the traditional ways of banking and 

1 The Autocracy of Mr. Parham , New York, Doubleday & Doran, 19^0* p.75! 

2 Ibid., p. 280 








manufacturing. ^ 

Also at these dinner parties were scientific men and bankers 
who were beginning to talk of the common life and thought of mankind, 
of taking over the government of the world by open treason or con¬ 
spiracy. Mankind as a whole, they said, must be educated to support 
this new life. Poisonous national histories must be scrapped and 
oeoole told what the world might be for mankind. The League of Na¬ 
tions could not build a permanent peace if every schoolmaster and 

cadet corps was training the next generation in the delusions of 

4 

wartime patriotism. If countries and cultures were too small 

and our schools and governments outdated, even though they served 
past needs, they should be scrapped now. The institutions of man¬ 
kind are just a3 fundamental as a pair of trousers, and no more so. 

If the world grows out of them or they become inconvenient, it won l t 
kill anything essential in man to get others. To Mr. Parham this 
was open conspiracy—men plotting openly to subordinate patriotism, 
loyalty, discipline and all the laboured achievements of statecraft 
to some vague international commonweal, some fantastic organization 
of cosmooolitan finance and cosmopolitan industrialism. Then came 
a great speech of the Italian Mussolini. England had need of such 
a strong man, and 'r. Parham became Lord Paramount, the Master 
Spirit. ^ 


5 Ibid., p. 502 

4 Ibid., p. S5 

5 Ibid., pp. 68-83 

















Many things hapoen under the rule of Lord Paramount including 
a war between Britain and America. Lord Paramount recognizes that 
against him in the struggle for the soul of man is a Critical Spirit 
which is continually questioning, restating, evaluating, destroying, 
illuminating. It is fanned by the President of the United States, 
who,.like Woodrow Wilson, condemns sovereign states, repudiates 
nationalisms and war, and yet is himself the leader of a sovereign 
state, and the embodiment of a nation actively at war. Simple 
faith and certain action are giving way to continual investigation 
and scrutiny. 

Wells himself always had faith in the contribution of science 
to a better human society. He has the scientist exolain how some¬ 
thing new has taken control in the world, how a new spirit has to 
contribute to this process of creation, how it comes not from the 
minds of individual men, but out of the common mind of man. The 
scientist summarizes the present stage of Wells's social thinking: 


We are workers of a new dawn, ken of no nation. Hen 
without traditions. Men who look forward and not back. 
Men v/ho have realized the will and the intelligence 
that we obey and oossess in common. Our race has to 
organize the whole world now, a field for this creative 
energy that flov/s through and uses and guides us.... 

You can't begin to imagine yet a tithe of the things a 
liberated human brain can do....Your kingdoms and 
emoires, your morals and ri hts, all you find so love¬ 
ly and solendid, the heroism and sacrifices of battle¬ 
fields, your dreams of lordship, every romantic thing. 


6 Ibid., p. 280 








the devotion of servants, the subjugation of women, 
and the deception of children—all the complex rig¬ 
maroles of your old world will be washed out of men's 
thoughts....Instead of distrusting each other, kill¬ 
ing each other, competing with and enslaving and con¬ 
suming one another, we go on to a world of equals, 
working together under the guidance of realized fact, 
for ends too high for your imagination....It is a 
way of escane from our narrow selves....The choice 
lies between a new life and extinction. 7 

The stance ends in exposure, and Lord Paramount is again hr. Parham, 

ineffective educated Englishman, "with all his vanities, his stores 

of erudition, his dear preposterous generalizations, her personified 

notions and all his obsolescent paraphernalia of scholarly wisdom, 

so feebly foolish in their substance and so hideously disastrous 

8 

in their possible consequences...." 

The main ideas of the novel are familiar. Wells is still di¬ 
recting his efforts toward the world-state, planned for the benefit 
of mankind. Wells believes that there are two conflicting forces in 
the world, the reactionary, restrictive and the critical, creative. 
The new world will be achieved through an open conspiracy of the 
best minds, parts of the common mind of the race. These specially 
able and trained men will come mostly from science and business. 

The masses of oeople will have to be educated to the new way of life. 
Only through education of the majority and open conspiracy of a 
minority'can human society be saved from catastrophe. Reactionary 
forces must not be allowed to use totalitarian means to prevent the 
coming of the new world community of the common man. 


7 Ibid., p. 314 

8 Ibid., o. 328 













































■ 






% 













































For many years the intellectual men of science or business, 
who were to be responsible for bringing a new world order, were the 
heroes of Wells's novels. Now his heroes, if they can be so called 
are dictators and ineffective men, deluded, insecure, clinging to 
traditions or dream fantasies. They come from the masses of hu¬ 
manity, who, without the benefits of new education, will retard the 
coming of the new social order. The characters who represent Wells 
own social and political beliefs are now of secondary importance in 
his novels. Wells condemns the ineffective man and yet pities him 
because he is the victim of poor social environment and poor edu¬ 
cational opportunities. 

The Bulpington of Blup , 1955* is the story of the development 
of the contemporary brain ofan ineffective man. As usual, Wells 
traces the hero's early development to show the effect of relatives 
the church, the school, politics and sex. Wells's description of 
the state of mind of men before World War 1 is in itself an implied 
condemnation of it. 

He dealt with love, he dealt with death therefore, 
purely as factors in his individual dreams, and with 
a good conscience he arranged his System of Values 
so that the general direction of things, oolitics, 
economics, social life, was left to the peculiar 
and generally very unattractive people who saw fit 
to worry about it....In the early part of 1914 there 
were seventeen or eighteen hundred million brains 
in the world, getting along very well after this 
fashion, hardly bothering to make any enquiry into 
the planetary framework of governments, money, trade 
and the like which held them together. These things 
had arrived somehow; these things would get along 





somehow. The statesmen, the monarchs, the priests 
and the preachers, the munition makers and the news¬ 
paper proprietors... jumbled to and fro in the cir¬ 
cumambient system, functioning weaving their magic 
passes, making the modern equivalent of history. 9 

Bulpington cannot escape all the realities of war in his dream world, 
although he continues to glorify himself, and he is vain, greedy and 
lying. But how like the rest of humanity he is, says one character. 
Wells has never praised the masses of mankind nor considered that he 
belonged to them, although he believes that they should benefit from 
the reorganization of human society, and should be given opportunities 
to live finer lives. During the years 1914 to 1913 Wells had no 
sympathy for conscientious objectors to military service, but in 
The Buloington of Blup he presents a sympathetic picture of Bulp- 
ington's friend, Broxted, as a conchie who is also an ardent worker 
for social reconstruction. Wells has had time to see that World 
War 1 did not end war, and that it was not the beginning of a new 
social order. 

Years later a travelling companion tells Buloington about Brox- 
ted’s social and political beliefs, and in them we recognize Wells's 
message to his readers. Broxted is now professor of Social Biology 
at a small college, and is bringing science to close grips with 
social and political problems in a very effective fashion. He be¬ 
lieves that a planned world is needed. Only revolution, reconstruction 


, Macmillan, 1955* PP• I89~i90 


9 The Bulpington of Blup , Toronto 








fro.il the ground up,can save civilization. Human beings will change 
with the right kind of education. The young traveller, humble yet 
conscious of superiority, seems to speak for Wells: "There but for 
the grace of a little honesty in the teachers we had and books we 
read, there in that swam, go you and I." ^ The young man ad¬ 
mits that perhaps the ideal of seeing this world community is only 
a dream—but it is a dream that he and his kind of people [and Wells’ 
stand for. It is a new Stoicism, with the world-state at the end 
of the chapter. If some people keep pegging away at it—telling the 
truth constantly the great human revolution will come. Defeats will 
not matter for they will be only temporary.^ Bulpington con¬ 
tinues to live in his own world of delusions and lies, and when 
sense of his own importance and of eternal values wavers he finds 
whiskey a wonderful restorative. Such is a contemporary ineffective 
man in an age of social disintegration and threatening catastrophe. 

Wells has again shown the need of a world-state achieved through 
a few men making the best use of science and education. But Wells 
is showing the growth and development of the type of man who will 
be forever a hindrance to the coming of the new world community. 

The story of Bulpington's sexual development indicates no changes 
in Wells’s ideas on the relations of the sexes. 

The Croquet Player , 1957, is a charming fantasy, a sort of 


10 ibid., o. 557 

11 Ibid., p. 552-559 






ghost story that is more disturbing than most ghost stories. The 

teller of the story, Georgie, describes himself: "I have soft hands 

12 

and ineffective will. I orefer not to make important decisions." 

He plays croquet and does the crossword section of the daily news- 
paoer. Dr. Fiichatton tells him how he became more and more aware 
of some undefinable lurking evil, that seemed to strike at human 
beings from past ages of the ape and savage. Sometimes that black 
past of fear and hate breaks through the surface and the world 
seems full of resurrected savageries. And at times through the 
story of fear and cruelty and hate come such thoughts as children 
killed in air raids, lightning strikes organized by Communists, 
gross cruelty to dogs, wife-beatings. 

The psychiatrist explains that the story which Finchatton put 

in a sort of fairyland is really the story of thousands of people 

today, and it will be the story of hundreds of thousands tomorrow. 

Man is what he was, still bestial, envious, malicious, greedy. 

Civilization and progress are delusions. 

...civilization so far has been a feeble, inadaptable 
falsity. And now it is found out; Fate has been too • 
much for it. A stunning realization, Sir! And when 
sensitive, unprepared men like our coor friend Fin¬ 
chatton become aware of it, they show themselves too 
weak to face it. They refuse to face a world so ‘ grim 
and great as this world really is. They take refuge 
in stories of hauntings and -oersonal madness—in the 
hope of some sort of exorcism, something they think 
will be a cure....There is no such cure.... 15 


12 ‘The Croquet Player , Toronto, Macmillan, 1957, P* 15 
15 Ibid., p. 90 









Madness is flight. Nature^ answer to overwhelming fact. All over 
the world intellectual men are going mad. The fight against the 
cave man is over us ? in us, and is us, is going against these imagi¬ 
nary selves. The only answer is to face the facts and shape your 
minds to a new scale. 

Only giants can save the world from complete relapse— 
and so we—we who care for civilization—have to become 
giants. We have to bind a harder, stronger civilization 
like steel about the world. We have to make such a 
ital effort as the stars have never witnessed yet. 

Arise, 0 Mind of tan'." l4 

Every newspaper lists atrocities, murders, and horrors all over the 

• world, massacre and torture, wars, air raids, and pogroms. But the 

little man, the ineffective man, goes on attending to daily personal 

concerns ’unconscious of threatening catastrophes. 

"I don't care. The world may be going to pieces. The 
Stone Age may be returning. This may, as. you say, be 
the upset of civilization. I'm sorry, but I can't 
help it this morning. I have other engagements. All 
the same...I am going to play croquet with my aunt at 
half-past twelve today." 15 

In this story Y/e 11s gives a psychiatric approach to the fears 
and the international atrocities of the 1950 1s • This social dis¬ 
integration. and swiftly approaching destruction can be avoided 
only through some giant mental effort which can face hard facts 
and build a hard strong civilization. The primitive is still in 
man, still to be controlled and directed. Progress is 
the will of man. Wells's puroose seems to be to awaken men's minds 


14 Ibid., p. 92 

15 Ibid., p. 98 






to the social crisis facing then, so that something may be done to 
avert catastronhe. Wells's messa , but roach is 

different. 

In The Brothers , 1958* Wells expresses his ideas on the anta¬ 
gonism of Fascist and Communist groups T • >e. He finds many 
similarities between practical Fascism and Communism, and he believes 
that both are equally lacking in the creative spirit necessary to 
build a new, better world. Bolaris, the Fascist dictator, reared in 
European wealth, is actually the twin brother of the Communist leader, 
reared in American poverty. Both men may have thought once, but 
for many years each has been too involved in immediate concerns of 
politics, war, and practical planning to continue to think. Both 
saw humanity being used to no good purpose and wasted. Bolaris was 
indignant at pretentious meanness and muddle, and at liberties being 
restrained by conventional standards. Ratzel was indignant at a 
Capitalist system robbing the masses of working people of the wealth 
and opportunities they should have. Wells shows the rich and the 
proletariat equally stupid, incalculable and lacking in purpose. In 
order to manage affairs efficiently Bolaris sets up himself as dicta¬ 
tor. Ratzel believes, too, in a kind of trusteeship, a Communist 
dictatorship, for the benefit of the people. The Communists have 
many stock phrases,- jargon, which they use to rouse the masses to 
class-war. Behind the dogma is real human•indignation, common to 
people of all political parties. Both Bolaris and Ratzel respect 
competence, discipline, and proper use of property and money; and 




both want freedom from indignation and discontent. Constitutions 
and balances are orovisional thin a which men must use to do what is 
right. 

Wells has each of these leaders realize that behind the catch¬ 
words they stand for the same things. They realize, too, that their 
followers are not educated to the creative work which is needed. The 
positions of both Solaris and Ratzel depend on their continuing the 
destructive civil war, for the unity of each side depends only on the 
threat of death from the other. 

The Left and the Right in any age are Just the two faces 
of the Common Fool,—and nothing more....Both Left and 
Right are defensive, hate systems. Both are obdurately 
dogmatic. Both pretend to be '’scientific" and both 
suporess reason....The further we recede in time from 
them, the more we realize how identical they are. 17 

Bolaris’ inner circle consists of men representing various selfish 
personal interests, such as big money and exploitation, landed 
aristocracy, religion, and militarism. A changed Bolaris, think¬ 
ing now as H.G. Wells, tries to educate them to the need for social 

reorganization for the benefit of the people as a whole. 

»» 

...the eyes of the common man have been opened....They 
will never stand the old conditions again;...They may 
commit infinite follies but unless they get change and 
satisfying change, they will break and perish rather 
than submit, and you and I will go into the boiling 
with them....The only possible reply to a poor rebel 
revolution is going on to a better and bigger creative 
revolution, and that means a new order of things alto¬ 
gether. 18 


16 The Brothers , New York, Viking, 195^, op. 40-75 

17 Ibid., -0. Ip4 

18 Ibid., pp. 105-10.6 






The struggle of Fascist and Communist forces,according to Wells^ 
is a waste of human energies, which prevents the creation of the new 
social order. Sincere, intelligent leaders of all oarties are work¬ 
ing for the same ends, while many persons, uneducated to the pos¬ 
sibilities of a new world, work for orivate, selfish ends. Intel¬ 
ligent people should be working together for the new order instead 
of destroying each other's efforts. This novel also shows the danger 
of personal tyranny inherent in any totalitarian regime. There are 
parallelisms to the Spanish Civil War. 

During the years 19^0 to 19^5 Wells does not seem to give sexual 
and family relations the attention he did in earlier years. However, 
Aopropos of Dolores , 1958* ia a delightful, often humorous account 
of the temperamental incompatibilities of man and wife. One day the 
husband unemotionally, almost unconsciously, murders Dolores by 
giving her an overdose of sleeping tablets. There are no new ideas 
in the story. 

The Holy Terror, 1959* is more than a satire of the dictator¬ 
ships of the 1920's and 1950' 3 « It. orojects this type of government 
into the future and shows both its destructive and its constructive 
aspects. Wells says that every revolution is made of two essentially 
distinct strands, one of innate vindictive insubordination of the 
human animal existing in all decaying or needlessly oppressive 
systems of social control; and one of a creative urge for order and 
achievement in the human mind, finding expression in a progressive 







. 





































' 









































. 





















extension of the scientific method to human affairs and the system¬ 
atic establishment of a new education and lav;. These two strands co¬ 
operated at first in their attack upon their common enemy, the old 
order of things. But once the decadent old order was cleared away 
there could be no co-operation between desires to destroy and desires 
to replace. ^ 

Rud Whitlow, 'aster Director, World Trustee, began life as a 
spoiled child of middle-class British parents, and egotistic and 
frustrated, he spent his life getting back at the world. Rud learned 
from the methods of Fascists and Communists alike, seized control 
of a British fascist-minded, ineffective popular socialist party. 

By means of strong-arm methods, effective publicity, and appealing 
to the Common Man he became Britain’s strong man. "Common Sense for 
the Common Man” was his slogan as he proceeded to eliminate opposition 
and traditional institutions—Christianity, lav;, private property, 
royalty, parliamentary government, the League of Nations, and trade 
unions. Rud brought America and Britain together, and then in a 
world war brought the rest of the world into his world-state. The 
Group planned and carried out their World Revolution, and Rud, Taster 
V/orld Director, eliminated anyone whom he susoected of treason to 
himself. He organized production and distribution, transportation 
and communication, and education, on a world-wide basis, and talked 
to the common men of the world. 


19 The Holy Terror , lev; York, Simon & Schuster, 1939* p. 39^ 















While Rud was motivated by a vindictive desire for personal 
power and personal attention, many of his leading subordinates hon¬ 
estly desired the i^elfare of humanity. Through Norvel, Wells ex- 
oresses his ideas on World Education. 


The Common 'Ian at large had remained mainly ignorant 
even of what was known, and had floundered through 
life in a muddle of prejudices, misconceptions and 
downright delusions....Norvel found himself involved in 
a gigantic extension of the old structures of thought, 
research and instruction, in the education and training 
of vast armies of teachers, in the application of films 
and aerial to school use and the establishment through¬ 
out the world of millions of those community centres 
that manifestly had to replace the schools and home 
instruction of the past....it became plainer and plainer 
to him that to establish even the broad framework for 
the mental reconditioning of mankind, would be a task 
that would demand the sustained devotion of hundreds 
of thousands of workers through some scores of years. 20 

The Common Man was still amenable to the idea of power and would work 

under the authority and protection of a single.individual. Norvel 

and other chiefs in the scientific replanning of human life believed 

that gradually people would v/ork for the intrinsic interest of the 

iob, and some day Rud, the dictator, would give way before the World 

Republic. But more and more Rud resorted to lawless personal rule 

and set himself up as Czar, Leader, God Almighty. The imprisonment 

of the human mind might continue indefinitely if personal tyranny 

21 

were not eliminated. 


20 Ibid., p. 544 

21 Ibid., p. 597 















When Rud died Korvell felt sick at the thought of the millions who 
crawled before him. 

11 1 tell myself I am doing ray share in the making of a 
new mankind. I keep it up that we educators and biol¬ 
ogists are setting out now to breed and educate a race 
of gods—statesmen, toachers, thinkers, poets.... 1 ’ 22 

This?the purpose Wells gives to education. 

Early in the book Wells comments on democracy and the duty of 
men of ability and training toward the human race. 

"Well, anyhow, the practical outcome of all these crude 
democratic ideas, is that men of our quality...excuse 
themselves from the hard and thankless service they owe 
—not to the crowd, but to the race....We shrug our 
shoulders and leave the geese, the hungry sheep, the 
born followers, call them what you will, to the leaders 
who haven’t our scruples. 11 2^ 

The masses devour dead religions, silly newspapers, racial delusions, 
. national patriotisms, and are distracted from public affairs by 
'games, coronations, and public stupidities. 

'* We mustn't destroy the simple faith that is marching 
them to disaster. We mustn’t question their decisions. 

That wouldn't be democratic. And then we sit here and 
say privately that the poor riff-raff are failing to 
adapt themselves to those terrible new conditions^as 
if they had had half a chance of knowing how things 
stand with them." 24 

The new world, thinks Wells, will come through the efforts of a 
minority of thinking, planning men, not through the masses. Rud 
is the organizing force and the oower that was able to wi?e out 
outdated institutions, cramping finance, public and private scver- 


22 Ibid., p. 4^8 

25 Ibid., p. 49. 
24 Ibid., p. 50 






eignties, and make possible the readjustment of social life to new 
physical conditions. 11 A dictator”, says Wells through Carstall, 
’’seems to be necessary whenever there is a broad readjustment of 
human relationships. Apparently a major power system is necessary 
to destroy any minor power system that precedes the readjustment 
or arose out of it.” Hence there must be a dictatorship. But 

no dictatorshi ;o on indefinitely. Lenin knew that but Stalin 

did not. Rud performed his job and Garstall without emotion poi¬ 
soned him in the best interests of the common man; and the various 
men in World Control, in love with their jobs, uninterested in per¬ 
sonal power, continued their work for a better world-state. 

Wells devotes a small part of the book to a discussion of sex¬ 
ual relations. In an age of security and plenty men will be more 
conscious of sex and it will break out in a great variety of forms 
until men learn to devote themselves to creative and constructive 
work. Motherhood should be considered a paid social service just 
as much as school teaching or any other tyoe of beneficial service. 
Wells says of the relations of individual human beings in the World- 
State : 


The World-State will protect individual freedom, from 
conception to cremation. It v/ill protect individual 
freedom from menace and monopolization. It will protect 
the young from any premature decisions they wi'. be un¬ 
able to reverse. It may also presently set about pro¬ 
tecting the young from diseased or defective parentage 
...as beyond what is implied by that much protection, 
it will leave men and women absolutely free to conduct 
themselves as they choose. There lies the scope for a 


25 Ibid., p. 4^5 







free literature, novels, dramas, "oetry, spectacle, 
suggestion, inspiration, exaltation of every sort turn¬ 
ing upon conduct and interpretation. There may be 
cults. We have to prepare for life in unprecedented 
profusion and variety....But the state has to stand 
aside from all that. 26 

Inadequate repression of sex and resulting frustration in Rud him¬ 
self seemed to be Dart of the basis for his antagonism toward the 
world and toward some of his advisors. 

T he Holy Terror shows how dictatorship and war may possibly 

be used to destroy outworn traditions and institutions so that plan- 

♦ 

ning men may create the economic and educational basis necessary for 
a world-state. Wells shows that even with the old order eliminated 
the fullest development of the benefits of the new will come grad¬ 
ually with growth of new universal education. While Wells believes 
that an aristocracy of intellect and training should supersede too 
broad a democracy, he indicates clearly the lawless, restrictive 
characteristics inherent in any dictatorship, and how world-wide 
fascism could enslave millions. His goal in life is still a world- 
state of security, abundance and freedom. 

Babes in the Darkling Wood , 1940, is the story of two young 
people in our confused modern world seeking a better life for them¬ 
selves and for society. It is a fairly comprehensive account of 
modern society, with the added attraction of interesting situations, 
contemporary political and international events, and psychiatry. 


26 Ibid., p. 565 

















Sex, religion and education are thoroughly discussed. Thinking 
is directed toward the new world after World War II. First, hitler 
Germany must be smashed or worn out by a long exhaustive war. Brit¬ 
ain must be cleared of her pro- azi Chamberlain-Halifax government. 
The British Empire has made tremendous advances in incompetence 
since 1918 when it muffed the chance to make a world peace. It 
did not even wake up about Abyssinia, or Spain, or Czechoslovakia. 
World Commissions, with every country in the world a member,must be 
established. All over the world reasonable and common people will 
be in favor of that. Putting the war settlement in the hands of 
international commissions will save the faces of the combatant 
governments, and it will satisfy the immediate need for peace and 
reorganisation as nothing else can do. The world will become for 
all essential purposes a federated Union so far as the functions 
of these commissions go, long before the fact is openly recognised. 
What intelligent people have to realise is that this world can be 
unified by such a series of federated essential world-services, 
without anything in the nature of a World Government or a World 
Parliament ever coming into existence. The more a community knows 
the more it can dispense with power and enforcement, and the more 
the administrators it appoints can be watched and checked. An in¬ 
telligent community can listen to explanations, and take action on 
them without asking anyone to decide for it. The Right Thing to Do 


will be the real dictator for adult mankind. The whole human outlook 



/ 


/ 


















is dominated by the need for an immense revision, expansion, reorg¬ 
anisation of our knowledge-machinery and our mental and moral in¬ 
struction. We have to bring that up to the new scale of life. Re¬ 
ligions must be reborn on a vaster scale. It becomes more and more 
evident that the one important thing in life is this business of 
thought and will, which is going on in the brain. War will pas^. 

We fight now to get rid of a dangerous nuisance. It is not our es¬ 
sential business, even though our world may be blown to pieces and 

we with it. That cannot alter what we are while we are alive, nor 
27 

what we have to do. This is H.Ct. Wells’s 19^0 prognosis for 

international affairs after war. 

You Can’t be too Careful , 19^-2, almost Wells's latest novel, is 
a fierce indictment of the ineffective man, of the corruption of 
values that made possible a society in which could exist unemploy¬ 
ment in the midst of plenty, vain appeasement of gangster states, 
and a stultifying view of the possibilities of human life. The 
central character, Edward Albert Tewler, is a product of his envir¬ 
onment and a living menace to a society which faces either catas¬ 
trophe or a new social order. His case is pitiful, because, if he 
had had a better education, he could have contributed to a new world 
order instead of hindering its coming. 

Wells says that man is an inadequately political animal, inas¬ 
much as he is too often unconcerned with world politics, and yet 


27 Eabes in the Darkling Wood , London, Seeker & Warburg, 19&0,pp-575“ 

595 


































' 

« 






















































his own welbeing is interdependent with the welbeing of everyone else 
in the world. He may attend church sometimes but religion has no 
vital oart in his thinking or behaviour. TT e wants members of Parlia¬ 
ment who believe in lowering tax rates, curbing trade unions, who 
believe that labor is directed by Russian agents, who want peace and 
prepare for war. Wells says: 

Man’s own unregulated and surprising inventions and dis¬ 
coveries have made all the earth one simultaneous com¬ 
munity, and released such a volume of available physical 
and undirected human energy as superannuates all the re¬ 
ligious, traditional, historical methods that have hither¬ 
to kept the species going. Our circumstances demand a 
world-wide moral and intellectual revolution beyond all 
the precedents and possibilities of former times. To the 
very last the Tewlers in any oosition of advantage have 
been sitting upon the safety-valves of expression, of 
warningi information and any adaptation, until what might 
have been a deliberate readjustment has become a violent 
explosion, an explosion that will now either blow Homo 
Tewler far up the scale of conscious being or out of 
the universe altogether. In which latter case we, here 
and now, are the last men addressing ourselves to a pos¬ 
terity which will never exist. 28 

Wells explains that in'all pseudo-democratic countries there is a 
growing antagonism to parliamentary forms of government. Parliament 
is passing out of the hands of an essentially conservative oligarchy 
into those of an incoherently progressive democracy, and the oli¬ 
garchy, through its press lords and its social and business influ¬ 
ences, is developing a spirit of resistance to Parliamentary insti¬ 
tutions, to the taxation and control of enterprise and the ever 
increasing expenditure upon nublic services. The newly enfranchised 


, Seeker *1 Warburg, 19^-2, p, 229 


28 You Can’t be too Careful, London 








masses, awakening to the power of the vote, are reapcrocriating the 

goods of the community bit by bit to a collective use. '‘The Boshie, 

the Jew and the inspired Leader, all essentially imaginary beings, 

were becoming the three cardinal figures in a new mythology of es- 

29 

. starkness and courage." That mythology was 

world-wide but varied in its realisation in different regions of the 
earth. It masked the hard realities of the abolition of distance, 
the ever-increasing release of physical and human energy and the 
gathering resentment of the poor, the exploited and the frustrated 
majority of mankind. These ingredients brewed the fir.al explosion 
of the Old Order. The Tewler mind all over the world did not grasp 
the immensity of the approaching smash. It thought the Huronean 
dictators could be forgiven acts of inhuman cruelty if they did mis¬ 
chief to the Bolsheviks and the Jews, and nut the crucifix in the 
schools. '0 

But none of the people who embody the Tewler mind in govern¬ 
ments and authorities seem able to see a yard ahead of any¬ 
thing they do. They are as capable of starting trouble as 
monkeys with matches, and as little capable of coping with 
the result. 

For the first few months after war was declared in 1959 English Tew- 
lers avoided active participation. 

Wells discusses the possibility of tT omo Tewler developing into 
Homo Saoiens . He says that the Tewler mind function] as philoso 


29 Ibid., p. 259 

50 Ibid., pp. 255-245 

51 Ibid., p. 246 















theologian, teacher, agrees in selling God, Truth and Righteousness 
into the Tewler Soul. Wells maintains that religion is the binding 
system of ideas and practices which holds a community together and 
therefore a healthy community can have only one religion, and a 
world-wide community must have a world-wide religion. '’The religion 
a world community needs is a very simple one. It cannot hold to¬ 
gether without a dogmatic assertion of the supreme duty of outspoken 
truth, of the common ownership of the earth and the equal right of 
man. 1 ’ ^ So long as people accent these fundamental dogmas, there 
will be room in a reasonably educated world for variety in express¬ 
ing and elaborating them. But adds Wells: 

To-day the most evil thing in the whole world is the 
Roman Catholic Church, whose shameless symbol is Jesus 
the Son of Jan, drooping, crucified and done for.... 
it is the organised front of that base heritage of the 
Tewlers, from which we are seeking escape. It had no 
revelation; to claim a revelation is priestly impudence; 
it is the most natural religion possible, mean and mud- 
dle-witted, human to the dregs, uretending to be divine. 

The Communist Party is the identical twin of Catholi¬ 
cism. .. .Inevitably the two work together for the same 
general frustration of human hope. They gratify the 
same resentful craving of the inferiority complex. 55 

These are the two mighty obstacles to a world-wide common educatic 

to lift Homo Tewler above himself. 

The hope of the world lies in Science and education. Science 

is a sample of the process sustained free rati'/:'.: ;at: - , 

process capable of a much wider extension to human affairs in general 


52 Ibid., p. 266 
55 Ibid., 0 . 268 











It gathers prestige as its scope extends, and as the need for ex¬ 
perimental teamwork and raoid interchanges increases, it seems to 
be losing much of its early immunity from interference and perversion. 
The same insubordination which liberated Science may give the next 
stage of human liberation, world understanding and world revolution, 
the .dawn of s apiens . 

...the struggle against Science is not so much an attempt to 
uproot and end something tangible and uprootable, as a world¬ 
wide disposition on the part of the great vested interests 
that overshadow our lives and 3ell us God, government and war 
to-day, to prevent an undesired and unexpected illumination 
reaching the general mass of mankind. 

We have been led to a world community but we have not been given any 
individual or collective drive for an education that will lead to 
that conscious adaptation demanded by the situation. With new methods 
of teaching and communication, education need not depend on out¬ 
moded teachers with outmoded textbooks and methods. Information, 
knowledge-distribution, can be made within the reach of every indivi¬ 
dual within hours, at most days. A gathering number of people are 
resolved upon a world revolution and new ordering of the world. 

They are willfully and dogmatically acting to save the human race 
from destruction and death and if the opposition is equally willful 
and dogmatic in preferring destruction, fighting and killing becomes 
absolutely necessary in the transitional phase. ^ And if the latent 
sapiens in us succeeds in its urge to rationalise life, satisfies 


54 Ibid., p. 271 

55 Ibid., pp. 267-234 








our dogmatic demand for freedom, equality, universal abundance, lives 
of achievement, hope and co-operation throughout this still largely 
unexplored and undeveloped planet, there will be no finality in suc¬ 
cess. There will be other, now unimaginable, problems with which to 
struggle. ^6 

Wells believes that the world still faces the alternatives of 
planning or perishing. The world may still be saved through education 
and Science, and men using their wills and minds to reorganize society. 
Yet Communism and Catholicism are obstacles to educating the Tewler 
mind above itself. All over the world parliamentary governments 
have given way before the mythology of Jew and Bolshevik scapegoats 
and the need for a dictator. This has been oromoted by selfish re¬ 
actionary interests to prevent a society of abundance, security and 
freedom for mankind. Dictators and ineffective men have to be dealt 
with before a world-state can come into being. 

In The Happy Turning , 19^6, Wells turns away from the daily 
efforts of war, from the base and angry conflicts which distract 
from wholesome living, to dream of the delightful world to come. 

Jesus of Nazareth discusses His failure with Wells. Jesus says that 
He had no idea of what the real revolution had to be, and how it had 
to go on between man and man, each one making his contribution. Choos¬ 
ing disciples and being in a hurry were mistakes. He has been gross] 

misunderstood and misrepresented. ^7 Wells’s dream goes on to a 

56 Ibid., p. 295 

57 The Hapov Turning , New York, Didier, 19^-6, pp. 16-21 








condemnation of Homo Tewler , now seen as an ugly, witless, self-pro¬ 


tective sycamore tree. 

They were too stupid to have an idea of the Hew World we 
poor sensitive men dream of extracting from our present dis¬ 
asters. They did not know and they did not care whether 
the world was to be a world at peace or a world at war, liv¬ 
ing underground in nerpetual fear of blitzkriegs or towering 
up to the skies, a world of universal free trade or shabby 
competition. They did not know and they did not care. 5$ 

He finishes his dreaming with: 

So we found ourselves in agreement that the human mind may 
be in a phase of transition to a new, fearless, clear-headed 
way of living in which understanding will be the supreme in¬ 
terest in life, and beauty a mere smile of approval....There 
shines a world beyond good and evil, and there in a universe 
completely conscious of itself. Being achieves its end. 59 


Although the problem of this thesis is to consider the social 
and political teachings in the novels of H.G. Wells, it might be well 
to look briefly at Hind at the Ihd of Its Tether , 1946. This is a 
non-fictional statement of Wells's beliefs written shortly before his 
death, and is relevant to any criticism of Wells's social teachings. 
In summary Wells says: 

The writer sees the world as jaded world devoid of recuper- 
- ative power. In the oast he has liked to think that ’lan 
could pull out of his entanglements and start a new creative 
use of human living. In the face of universal inadequacy, 
that optimism has given place to a stoical cynicism....Men 
must go steeoly up or down and the odds seem to be all in 
favour of his going down and out. If he goes up, then so 
great is the "adaptation demanded of him that he must cease 
to be a man. Ordinary man is at the end of his tether. Only 
a small, highly adaptable minority of the soecie3 can pos¬ 
sibly survive. The rest will not trouble about it, finding 
such opiates and consolations as they have a mind for.... 

But my own temperament makes it unavoidabl e for me to doubt, 

”58 Ibid., pp. 56-57 

59 Ibid., pp. 4o-y0 











aa I have said, that there will not be that small minority 
which will succeed in seeing life out to its inevitable 
end. 40 

Reality, says Wells, has forced him to this nessi 'istic conclusion. 

He feels that the cause to which he has devoted his life, the achieve¬ 
ment of the Worid-State, has failed. For a second time in hi3 life 
nations are bent on mutual destruction, and this time he is not blinded 
to the existence of narrow nationalisms and outworn institutions by 
plans for the United Nations, as he once was by plans for the League 
of rations. id has achieved the shr! and space, 

but since it cannot adapt societjr to these changes, it must perish, 
and some other form of life will become dominant on earth. And yet 
Wells cannot believe it is complete extinction, but feels that per¬ 
haps a small minority will still adapt and survive. 

H.G. Wells was always influenced in his thinking by coutemnorary 
events, but probably never more so than between 1 930 and 194-5. His 
main ideas were already well formulated and thoroughly expressed in 
both fiction and non-fiction. The world-3tate as the form of human 
society was necessitated by the ever-shrinking space and time of the 
world and by the technological advances of mankind. That state 
would rise out of the common thought and will of mankind, exhibited 
first in a minority of able and trained men from all walks of life, 
especially science and business. A new universal education would be 

4o Mind at the End of Its Tether, New York, tidier, 1946, pp. JO-jb 







necessary to bring to the masses of mankind the realization of what 
the new society could lean to them. 

During these fifteen years ’'/ells applies his theories to con¬ 
temporary affairs, for it is his purpose to stir people from political 
lethargy or reaction, and to fire them with zeal for the new social 
order. He denounces traditional institutions and ways of thinking 
in an attempt to show how stultifying they are to human development, 
how opposed they are to a world community planned for the abundance 
and freedom of all men. He i3 dogmatic in his condemnation of Roman 
Catholicism and Communism as obstacles to any creative social effort. 
He shows how unthinking, blundering, ineffective men are the product 
of the old social order, and how leadership must come from an active 
few who have been fortunate enough to get a freer, honester, less 
orthodox education. 

Wells considers the dictatorships that appear in Europe between 
the two world wars, and the growing lawlessness of international af¬ 
fairs, and the increasing antagonism of Communist and Fascist groups. 
u e finds totalitarian governments motivated by selfish, reactionary 
ends, using harsh, inexcusable means for maintaining power. All 
over the “democratic" world is appearing an irrational hatred of 
Jews, and an irrational hatred of Bolsheviks, and an irrational desire 
for a strong-man- leader, promote 

who do not want the masses of people to participate in political 
government or to share collectively in the goods and services of socie 




While Wella admits that violence may at some time be necessary in 
order to clear away the old resisting social system for the new, the • 
violence, tyranny and lawlessness of nations in the 1950's can lead 
only to the destruction of human society and ultimately to the ex¬ 
tinction of the species. The cry "to plan or perish" becomes ever 
more urgent, the ineffective masses and selfish short-sighted men 
of pov/er ever more irksome. Again, through the blindness of men, 
war becomes inevitable, and again, victory becomes a horrible first 
pre-requisite to further creative effort. In time of war as well as 
peace, social values must be questioned and evaluated, and the ul¬ 
timate goal of a world community kept clearly in mind. 

Wells may use fiction and fantasy as a medium, but he is propa¬ 
gandist still, coming to grips with current thought and current prob¬ 
lems in an unceasing effort to solve the greatest crisis in the his¬ 
tory of mankind. Wisely, he does not offer a detailed plan for the 
reorganisation of society on a planetary scale, but, on more certain 
ground, criticizes the existing society as he experiences and studies 
it; and he offers again and again the main principles for the new 
order, and he indicates what abundance, freedom, beauty, creative 
expression such a world can have. It may be idealistic and Utopian, 
but it is what Wells with sturdy self-confidence and optimism stands 
for. And yet that optimism dies before Wells breathes his last, for 
he cannot reconcile his dream, his life '3 work, with the reality of 
the harsh, hopeless destruction which seems to consume the world. 

The teacher fails to see result of his work. Perhaps he expects toouuch 

















'■ 

- 






. 






















































Chapter 5 


SUMMARY AND CRITICAL ESTIMATE 

The Times Literary Supplement , July 19, 19^7 

The New 'English Review , October, 19^7 

Wagenknecht, Edwin, The Cavalcade of the i-nglish hovel 

Brooks, Van Wyck, The World of H.G. Wells 

Slosson, E., Major Prophets 

Maurois, Andr6, Poets and Prophets 

West, Geoffrey, II .G. Wells 


Wells, H.G., Experiment in Autobiography 













/ 


Chapter 5 


SUMMARY AND CRITICAL ESTIMATE 


In this chanter we shall attempt to summarize the political and 
social teachings in the novels of H.G. Wells, to aopraise the ooinions 
of some of Wells’s critics, and finally to estimate Wells's success 
and influence. 

Wells did not consciously choose writing as his life's work be¬ 
cause it would enable him to tell people about a new social order. 

He had tried several occupations without success, and in the 1890's, 
married and threatened with invalidism, he sought some means of mak¬ 
ing a living which would not require steady physical effort. At first 
he wrote for the entertainment of the British newspaper public. With 
improving health and improving finances he turned to the novel and 
social criticism. Wells had always been dissatisfied with society 
as he had experienced it, and, since his student days under Huxley, 
he had faith in the possibilities of social change through science. 
With an imagination to explore those possibilities it was natural 
for him to develop his scientific romances. ly the story itself 

was the dominant interest, and the social criticism of secondary 
importance. At first this criticism was a negative reaction against 
existing ways of thinking. Later it was more constructive and more 
specific. 

The Time Via chine , The Island of r. Woreau, The War of the 







Worlds , The First 'on in the 'loon , and The Pood of the Gods, are defi¬ 


nite attacks on self-coranlacency and belief in the inevitability of 
progress. The Time Machine shows the disaster ahead if human society 
follows its present trends to their logical conclusion. Society will 
deteriorate and die through lack of conscious striving on the part of 
human beings. The Island of Dr. Ioreau shows that man is still to 
a large extent brute, and that progress is made only through conscious 
striving. ‘The Food of the Gods shows the stupidity of being satis¬ 
fied with littleness in administration and thought, and the short¬ 
sightedness of resisting change. The Tirst !en in the 'loon satirizes 
specialization in modern society. The social criticism of In the 
Days of the Oomet and The World Set Free is more definite. There 
is a minimum of scientific patter and a maximum of social inter¬ 
pretation. In In the Days of the Comet the present and f topian 
worlds are vividly contrasted. The World 3et Free expresses the 
main social ideas of the mature Wells, the need for a world-state 
planned for the benefit of mankind, based on the common mind of the 
race, and achieved through proper use of science, religion and edu¬ 
cation. 

The early novels of personality show a genuine interest in peo- 
le as'individuals, rather than as parts of a race-mind or a world- 
state, and because of Wells's power and humor of portrayal, and his 
lack of bitterness or consciousness of social purnose, they are often 
considered his best novels. However, a man can love life and still 
















want# to refora it. ' is of Ihance has an imolieu criticism 

oi the restricted lives of the majority of Englishmen. Love and >Ir. 
Lewisham raises the problem of a young man without money who desires 
both an outstanding career and marriage. Kipos describes lovable 
people, but people who are confused and muddled because of the limi¬ 
tations of their social environment. Tho Pistory of ;r. r olly shows 
an ordinary man in conflict with the limitations of his social en¬ 
vironment, who discovers that changes are, not only desirable, but 
possible through the efforts of men. The social teachings of these 
novels are the implied criticisms of existing society, and the idea 
that change is possible. Wells’s later novels of oersonality are 
explicit in their social and political teachings, because Wells is 
himself more conscious of the urgency of the social crisis. 

Between 1909 and 1914 Wells expressed in fiction his definitely 
formulated ideas on human society. Tono-Bungay shows the planless- 
ness, the disorder, the selfish waste of human society, and it im¬ 
plies that society reorganized could be planned, ordered, beneficial 
to all men and women. This is shown specifically in industry, in 
politics, and in family relations. The Eew nachiavell i is probably 
the novel which best expresses Wells’s social and political thinking 
before 19l4. The be i with a critical description of the 

society in which . 11s grew up. The following ideas r x . :sed 
and elaborated. Progress comes through conscious striving of men 


and women, and not through an automatic functi of the evolutionary 











process. Present society is unolanned, wasteful* and motivated by 
the selfish interests of individual men. Class conflict will never 
achieve a better social order. The evil and brute force lurking 
in our civilization retard the coming of a better society. There 
is a fundamental conflict between old and new. A reformed political 
party and a reformed British Empire might be the first step toward 
a better social order. Education must be universal and liberating, 
emphasizing the ful r r ither than the oast. People must be sorted 
on the basis of intellectual temperament rather than accidental 
association. Individualism must give way to collectivism. Edu¬ 
cation and religion must be used to enlighten and stir the collective 
mind and will. A world order will be the result of the creative 
effort of men and women from many classes and parties. Government 
will be largely by an aristocracy of intellect. 

lla«s ideas of the relation of the sexes are definitely stated 
in Ann Veronica , The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman , and The lev: Wachia- 
velli. Summarized they are as follows. Women should have the same 
rights and freedoms as men. Women should be economically independent 
of men. Women should have the right to choose their mates and to 
express their preferences as freely as men. Marriage should be based 
on harmony and love, not proprietorship. Jealousy and private owner¬ 
ship should be eliminated. Sex education for boys and iris s' 
be available, frank, accurate, and understanding. Society should not 
make rigid rules to govern all sexual relationships. There are fre- 










quently temperamental incompatibilities between the sexes which make 
successful marriage of necessity a compromise, a working agreement* 
Modern husbands and wive9 need a maximum of understandin and co¬ 
operation from their mates. The Gtate should endow motherhood as a 
public service, and make the mother financially independent. The 
home should be the woman’s kingdom and the mother the owner and re¬ 
sponsible guardian of her children. 

These are the main ideas of Wells's social and political think¬ 
ing, formulated.in the beginning years of the centur^. .ost of them 
were considered revolutionary when he first expressed them, and some 
brought storms of criticism and publicity. Many of them are accented 
today, but those which are not accepted cause little stir. They have 
had over thirty years in which to be evaluated and modified. 

World War I brought a change of emphasis in Wells's teachings. 

He had always condemned war, but now he was an ardent patriot. T e 
believed that the shock of war would awaken people over the world 
to the crisis facing human society. Germany must be defeated because 
she represented the narrow nationalism and imperialism of separate 
sovereign states ) Britain must be victorious so she co ! d reorganize 
her empire as a first step toward world co-operation and administration 
Wells put faith in the plans for a League of ations and helped to 
d 

"the war to end war". Except for a momentary lapse Wells felt no 
hatred for the common people of enemy nations, but continued to appeal 





to the common man for world-wide co-operation. Wells' a state of 
mind during the first years of the war is best seen in Mr. Britling 
Seo3 It Through . The shock of actual war and Wells's intense desire 
to see immediately the practical means of achieving a world-state 
are responsible for some changes in his attitude toward war. However, 
A World 3et Free , written before the outbreak of war, shows how 
Wells thought a new world could rise from the ruins of war. Some 
of his suppositions on the nature of modern warfare were oroven true. 

Before World War I, Wells put relatively equal emphasis on dif¬ 
ferent aspects of his social criticism. Now the single issue of im¬ 
portance was mankind's choice between World Chaos and World-State. 

The practical question was the nature of action to be taken im¬ 
mediately to achieve a world-state. The answer was education, and 
as a part of education, religion. The emphasis on the urgency of 
mankind's choice and the importance of education, Wells retained 
until the end of his life. The conscription of religion to the social 
cause was a temporary measure, later reconsidered, and discontinued 
with the end of the war. 

The God of Hr, Britjjjig 5ees It Through and The > i - 1 a, 
Bishoo revealed himself through the minds of common men, not through 
established churches and professional clergymen. He was a finite 
striving God, helping men push tl ipward "fro a beast to di¬ 

vinity , from the blindness of individuality to the knowledge of a 
common end." ^ God was humanity, personified, the Captain of the 

1 The So 1 of 3 . hlf : , p. 299 













World Republic. ted of Joan and Peter was not striving and was 

not personal. :7 is only message to mankind was that if they did not 
like the world as it existed they had the power to change it. Wells 
also described a Nameless Incomprehensible which loved justice, scien¬ 
tific laws, righteousness, and the League of rations. After that 
Wells had little to say of God. He never wavered from the belief that 
the orthodox conception of God and the orthodox church organization 
were barriers to human progress. His brief excursion into religion 
was an attempt to turn that barrier into a creative force. He soon 
turned his efforts again to education. 

Orthodox education faces the past with its narrow nationalism, 
fixed ideas, and outworn institutions. The new education should be 
universal, liberating, facing the future, fitting men and women to 
be creative citizens of the world. Only universal education can make 
either democracy or the world-state possible. Wells not only talked 
about what education should do, but actually wrote three books con¬ 
taining the basic knowledge necessary for satisfactory education, 
and the approach or emphasis desired. He emphasized the development 
of human society, from an intensely individual state to collective 
interdependent living. These three textbooks are The 0 itlin e of 
History , 1919, The Science of Life , 1929, and The Work, Wealth 
and Happiness of Hankind , 1951* 

The World of 'hlliam Olissold probably best expresses in fic¬ 
tion form ~ T .G. Wells’s views in the Dost-war years. In it he 











develops the idea of the Open Conspiracy, in which men of power and 
ability openly plan to revolutionize the world. These revolutionaries 
will come from the fields of science, industry, finance, journalism 
and politics in all countries, and will achieve world-v/ide co-oper- 
stion. They will form the "competent receiver", which will take over 
the administration of the world's economic life, and which was lack¬ 
ing in nlans of early socialists. Through education all people will 
become aware of the new social movement, and individuals will con¬ 
tribute toward the collective good of the world-state. If men have 
the will and desire for a new order they will find the nractical means 
of achieving it. 

During the last fifteen years of Wells's life there were no es¬ 
sential changes in his social and political teachings. His attention 
was now largely on dictatorships and little men, both of which he 
believed were hindering the creative effort necessary to build a 
world-state. He had no love for either Communists or Fascists and 
condemned both for their harsh, negative attitudes toward social 
reconstruction. The choice of planning or perishing wa3 still ur ent, 
but mankind showed little tendency to adapt itself to world organi¬ 
zation. Wells still believed in the power of education and science 
to stir the common will and thought of mankind. He still believed 
that from the middle-classes would rise the leaders with social con¬ 
science and cower necessary to reorganize human society. For nearly 
fifty years Wells had been telling himself and the world how men 




could change their society if they willed; but shortly before his 
death optimism died and he saw the immediate world as it existed, a 
world in which the atom bomb was the latest steo in the inevitable 
destruction of the human species. ’Veils died in despair, but against 
that one last testament of woe. Mind at the End of its Tether , he 
left a mass of literature filled with optimism and hope for the fu¬ 
ture which cannot but insnire millions of readers. 

The critics are divided into two camps on their attitude toward 
the social and political teachings of .G.Wells. One group maintains 
that he threw away the gift of genius when he turned propagandist, 
and that he was sentimental and inconsistent in his social and poli¬ 
tical teachings; while the other group believes that he performed a 
useful function in a chaotic world, and that his teachings were rela¬ 
tively consistent over nearly fifty years of writing. Let us look 
more carefully at the opinions of some of the critics and evaluate 
them in the light of the novels which have been considered in the 
previous chapters. 

An article in The Times Literary Supplement , July 19, 194-7, 
entitled "H.G. Wells—The Seer and the Artist”, is the most unsym¬ 
pathetic criticism of Wells which I have read. We shall consider it 
under eight main points. The first charge is that ’Veils is incon¬ 
sistent and sentimental regarding the World-State, that sometimes 
he thinks it is to be achieved through slow patient effort of masses 









of common people, sometimes through the efforts of a small number of 
voluntary aristocrats, sometimes through tho magic of green gas or by- 
travelling through the fourth dimension. In the scientific romances 
it is true that Utopian states were achieved by fantastic means, but 
I cannot believe that V/ells intended his readers to accept these fan¬ 
tasies as literal prophecies of the way future changes would occur. 
Certainly he wanted to show the possibilities of change for mankind, 
but in these early stories he either had not worked out clearly in 
his own mind the means of change, or it was not his purpose to con¬ 
sider it. I believe that Wells always saw the new social order com¬ 
ing at first through the leadership of a small number of trained and 
able men, and that through education and changing social conditions 
that number would increase gradually until the whole of mankind were 
conscious of the common benefits to be derived from a collective 
state. At no time did he believe that the masses of common oeople, 
or the proletariat,would be r ble for creating a hew social 

organization. He takes every opportunity to denounce Marxist social¬ 
ism. Inasmuch as he tried to' integrate his social and political 
ideas with contemporary events in order to advocate immediate prac¬ 
tical action, his practical suggestions inevitably changed as con¬ 
temporary events changed. At one tine he believed tnat ohe British 
-"moire was the firs: step toward a "-rid-state, at c : J ' ---r t: ' e tr.e 
League of Nations, and later that leadership must come from men of 
science and business because they nossessea .'mowledge and power of 




economic processes. Walls was disap minted in the real politics! 
leaders of his day. These are the inconsistencies of any nan attempt¬ 
ing to think in practical terms in a changing world, and are thus 
valid criticisms only of one possessing o^nniscience. 

The second criticism, that hell 3 did not know what form of govern¬ 
ment he advocated is, at least, partially true, although it is not 
fair to quote the scientific romances, The Time lachino mod The .'h rat 
~!en in the loon as examples. At times Wells 8eemed to advocate fair¬ 
ly well defined classes in society based on ability, one of which was 
the governing class. At others government appeared to be by a freely 
elected.parliament v;ith representatives from different districts of 
the world. ''ells was also urging elections by proportional represen¬ 
tation with the single transferable ballot. He stated definitely 
that our present form of democratic government could never work satis¬ 
factorily until there was a universal renovated education. His new 
state would require the services of experts and world planners mo¬ 
tivated by the desire to serve mankind, and in the beginning would 
have to be governed by a relatively small number of people. There 
would be one central government for the world in order to eliminate 
waste, disorder, exploitation, national prejudice, and in order to 
provide the maximum of service to the people of the world. Perhaps 
V/e 11s felt that government was one of the practical problems of which 
the details could be worked out after men's minds were conscious 


of the need. 







Wells is accused of inconsistency in his attitude toward the 
family. The relations of the sexes is a problem for which Wells never 
felt that he had a solution, although he devoted much energy to it. 

On the one hand he pictured the sordid, jealous, binding relationship 
common in existing society, and on the other a Utopian, anarchic free¬ 
dom from restraint. At other times he considered sex a vestige of 
more primitive days for which there was less and less need in modern 
civilization, but he could not talk his way out of sexual desires. 

In his second marriage he established a fairly orthodox family life, 
in spite of j rentional beginnings. Although Wells gave his ima¬ 
gination free range in his romances I do not think that he seriously 
advocated either the maintenance of the strict Victorian family organ¬ 
ization or a completely careless lack of restraint in sexual relations 
Wells, discussing the subject seriously, as he did in many novels, 
was consistent in advocating greater freedom and economic independence 
for women, freer discussion of sexual problems, less rigid standards 
of conduct imposed by society (although some were necessary for the 
protection of children). He consistently maintained that modern 
marriages were of necessity compromises or working agreements, for 
there almost always existed some degree of temperamental incompati¬ 
bility between husband and wife. 

The fourth point of inconsistency is that Wells lived extra¬ 
vagantly in hope and died in despair, that he lived believing that 
mankind would soon achieve a Utopian world republic, and died believin 









that the human species would in a few months be extinct. I agree 
thQ-t lind at the "kid of Its Tether is in places loosely written and 
difficult to understand, but I cannot agree that it is a complete con 
tradiction of Wells's previous social and political teachings. In 
the first place, Wells never said that any particular state of human 
society would come into existence. Pis orochecies were always quali¬ 
fied. He did say that mankind had the choice between world-chaos 
and world-state, between perishing and planning, and that the choice 
would be shown in the actions of men. TT e believed that human society 
was in a state of crisis, and the very intensity of his own efforts 
showed that he did not think the world-state would come inevitably. 
'- T is so-called* optimism was the only alternative to utter desnair or 
indifference, provided that the original problem was correctly stated 
He made himself believe in the better world of the future,which could 
come only through the efforts of men, until almost the end of his own 
life. Then the results of his life's work seemed nil beside the oro- 
gress made in the large-scale means of destroying human life. The 
idea that the election of the Labour Part;" to power should cheer him 
is irrelevant, for Wells never believed that a new world would come 
through the efforts of one political group. Yet even in 'Ind at the 
End of Its Tether there is a tiny hope that some few men will adapt 
themselves to new conditions and survive. While Wells no doubt did 
die in despair, it cannot be maintained for that reason that he was 


inconsistent in his teachings. Like the scientist, he said that 







certain reactions would follow certain conditions, and the fact that 
people are still alive on the earth today does not disprove hi 3 thesis. 

I think that the author of tho Times Literary Supplement article 
is using good psychology when he says that Wells's beliefs were per¬ 
sonal in origin, that Wells knew what was essential to mankind when 
he saw what was essential to him. Certainly the beliefs of every 
individual are based on a background of oersonal exoerience. Moat 
of Wells's novels include a picture of a lad growing up in the middle- 
class England which Wells knew as a boy. But when the author says 
that Wells was always dissatisfied with society because he realized 
the incompetence of his parents, because he had a feeling of personal 
inferiority and ill health, because he was jealous of the children of 
the Royal Family, because he did not like his own elementary education 
or the draper's shop, he is denying Wells any intelligence or any 
abilitjr to look objectively at society. He is discrediting his social 
and political teachings by saying that is just giving vent to per¬ 
sonal grievances. 

It is not true that Wells was destitute of love for human beings, 
as lis own life and his early novels of personality clearly showed; 
but it was true that in later novels he became so engrossed in ideas 
that-he forgot his individual characters. Some of his propaganda may 
be boring reading, but he has proven that it is possible to write 
interesting, intellectual novels, too. 

The Literary Supplement article lists several prophecies of Wells 





which were not. accurate. Some of them are events taken from his fan¬ 
tasies which are not intended to be taken literally. Others deal 
details of modern warfare, or with important events which Wel-ls failed 
to forecast. The author says that Wells's whole theory of v/ar wa 3 
false because society has not yet been destroyed by war and the popu¬ 
lation of the world is still increasing. He ignores the fact that 
Wells predicted that the distinction between civilian and soldier 
would be of less importance in the future, that wars would be waged 
on a world-wide scale, and that there would be much violence in the 
way of "incidents" before wars were declared. He criticizes Wells 
for believing during the first world war that it was the war to end 
war. A man who attempts to foresee future developments in human so¬ 
ciety can scarcely be called unreliable and inconsistent because he 
fails to make absolute prophecies of specific events. 

The article concludes that We 11s was of no importance as a prophet 
or a politician, and that he threw away his gift as an artist. This 
is a dogmatic statement. It is true that Wells subordinated art to 
his social purpose, but certainly he and apparently millions of read¬ 
ers considered his social purpose important. The fact that propa¬ 
gandist works will become dated does not deny their importance for 
the time in which they are written. ’Wells would argue that a teacher, 
preacher, politician, journalist, or any person with a social message, 
is of greater importance than a person who is interested in art only 
for art's 3ake. Wells is important as an artist and a reformer 





combined, although he may have lost much as an artist because of too 
careless treatment of his medium. 

Hugh Kingsmill in "Literary Notes' 1 in The How English Review , 
October, 19^7, says that Wells had shifted the centre of gravity from 
the individual to the state, had tried various economic Utopias and 
credible religions, and found it easier to write the universe off as 
an unsuccessful experiment than to recast his own philosophy and ex¬ 
plore the soul he had denied for the kingdom of heaven. He also says 
that Wells possessed the illusion of omniscience, filled emptiness 
with facts and thought he had the evidence to condemn the universe. It 
is true that Wells shifted the centre of gravity from the individual 
to the state, but the state was to ma' e possible for the individual 
the maximum of freedom and security. The implication that Wells in¬ 
consistently shifted from one Utopian scheme to another is not borne 
out in his novels. Wells had already explored ity of a 

soul, a kingdom of heaven, and other attributes of Christian religion 
and found them wanting. Writing the world off as an unsuccessful 
experiment is a logical conclusion of Wells's thinking, and yet one 
• h requires more courage th >e and refuge in religious 

teachings. Wells possessed confidence in the ability of his mind 
to handle the facts available to him, and he used the materials and 
tools available to him in making his judgments. 

2 

Wagenknecht, in The Cavalcade of the Engli s h novel , says that 
2 Chapter 26,*H.G. Wells, Realist of fantastic. New York, Holt, 

19^5, pp. 4p8-477 









Wells at one tine wanted to save society by socialise, at another 
time through history, and at still another time through education. ,r e 
does not seem to realize that Wells always wanted to save society by 
the sort of socialism which consists of a planned world-state, and 
that hi story and education are but a means to that end. He says 
that Wells at one time was an atheist, at another had two Gods; 
without realizi Wells’ 3 Gods are human beings personified, and 

are used temporarily as a means of motivating people toward a world- 
stats. He accuses Wells of inconsistency for being a pacifist in 
peace time and a patriot in war time without realizing that Wells 
sees the winning of each specific war as a steo necessary to the at¬ 
tainment of the world-state. 

Andre Maurois, in Poets and Prophets gives a more favorable 
estimate of Wells as a prophet. He concludes that '■/ells’s uncommonly 
wide intelligence was genuinely distressed by the failure of society 
to remodel itself, and that while his writing makes good reading, his 
social teachings are not practical. His new worlds are vague, beau¬ 
tiful, and unreal, and it is foolish to exoect an Open Conspiracy of 
mil1ionnairesand experts, I agree with this viewpoint. Wells is 
most effective in criticizing existing society and in painting a 
dream of the future which someone else will have to develop in more 
concrete, practical terms. But his dream has consistent elements 
which might almost be called a religion—human society can achieve 


5 tr. Hamish Wiles, London, Caswell, 1956, Chapter 2, H.G. Wells, p. 41 







a state of perfection in a world republic organized through sound 
education and goodwill with thousands of Wellses directing public ser¬ 
vices . 

Maurola estimatea Wells'a value to society. He says that Welle 
serves as psychiatrist in a chaotic world because he is serious and 
he is taken seriously, that he demonstrates the absurdities of a so¬ 
ciety which fails to adapt its functions to its powers, that he has 
helped thousands to accept the inevitable transformation of society, 
that by initiating fantastic schemes he prepares minds for more modest 
practical plans, and that through his great imagination he entertains 
and directs minds towards constructive ends. In other words, his 
teachings are often impractical but they have mental therapeutic value. 

Geoffrey West, as biographer of I . . Wells, knew him personally, 
and was in a favored position to understand the degree of consistency 
in his make-up. Vest says that ’/ells's philosophy grew out of a per¬ 
sonal need and desire rather than out of accumulated knowledge.^ "ells 
discarded orthodox religion but he felt the need for a dramatic inter¬ 
pretation of the universe as an orientation for living, a standard 
of right and wrong. His interpretation of society fitted his tem¬ 
perament and educational background. What he did was to develop a 
rational religion for himself, which he believed was soundly con¬ 
ceived, and therefore should be accented by the rest of the rational 
world. Because it seemed rational and contemporary it served to 


4 West, Geoffrey, 


H.G. Wells , p. 274 







stabilize the social thinking of many peool . 

West lists five characteristic veins of thought in which there 
was relatively little change during >ells's writing years. The first 
is that mankind has almost absolute control over his own destiny. 
Secondly, there must be some means by which conscious human intelli¬ 
gence can gain and utilize that control. Thirdly, society is in a 
state of change directed toward world organization to meet the need 
for larger economic units resulting from improved means of trans¬ 
portation. Fourthly, the conflict between tradition and new conditions 
is a continuous process. Lastly, there is a shift in emohasis from 
the uniqueness of individuality to the transcendent self-conscious 
collective Mind of the Race. These five characteristics are evident 
in the novels we have considered. 

West attempts to estimate Wells’s position in 1930. I agree 
with West when he says: 

He establishes a state of mind which rises without difficulty 
—even v/ithout conscious thought—above the barriers of social 
and historical tradition, and which tends to regard change as 
not only necessary but normal and indeed inevitable. He evoked 
a dream and a desire, and from these—lore than from any intel¬ 
lectual conviction—springs the creative will. 5 

Wells’s criticisms are usually more satisfactory than his constructive 
plans for change; certainly they are more specific. But that does 
not minimize his contribution to the creative effort required for the 
new order. It is necessary to have broad goals before specific de¬ 
tails can be worked out as to the means of achieving them. Wells has 


5 Ibid., p. 278 






a relatively consistent and useful social philosophy even though some 
of the applications may not be oractical. 

H.G. Wells, like George Bernard Shaw, ha9 maintained his posi¬ 
tion in the literary world for over half a century, in spite of the 
strong social purpose in his writing. Wells entered the literary 
world easily and was amply rewarded. His inc creased from £JQ0 

in 1895 to over £1000 in I 896 and thereafter went steadily ud. In 
fifty years he published well over one hundred books and pamphlets, 
and many of these were translated into foreign languages. In 195^ 
V/ells said, "As I write here there must be between two and three mil¬ 
lion copies of my own books scattered about the world...." ^ Few 
authors have shown such variety of literary endeavor as Wells. He 
has written scientific romances and textbooks of history and science, 
novels of personality and novels of intellectual argument, short 
stories and essays of social criticism. He has created le of the 
best humor, most vivid characterization, and most imaginative stories 
in the English language. And yet some of his work is carelessly done. 
Haste and too much emphasis on social purpose, rather than attention 
to his medium, may be offered as excuses for some of his mediocre 
wor':. He was energetic, hard-working, and genuine, and he possessed 
great confidence in himself. He once complained that he had access 
to all the great leaders in the contemporary world, but he could 
never get them to put his ideas into practice. He was a popular 


6 Experiment in Autobiography , volume 2, p. J2p 








writer with a large readir >f ordinary folk* The oublication 

of Ann Veronica brought a atom of protest, including", an organized 
attempt to ruin him in the literary world; but instead he says he 
was considered by the young people to be their champion* The Titline 
of History brought protests from academic circles but became a best 
seller in ‘America and Britain. 

Wells, consistently preaching his social ideas, consistently 
critical of existing institutions and leaders, probably had little 
direct effect on them. However, he probably had a good general ef¬ 
fect on a large reading public. Old standards were being questioned 
and discarded. Into the insecurity already existing Wells could 
thrust his definite ideas on society and offer his dream of a world- 
state planned for the benefit of the common man. He could orsoare 
men's minds for the idea of change and development in human sociei 
and direct their thoughts toward constructive social thinking. And 
he could entertain as well as instruct. The direct effect of H.G. 
Wells's social and political teaching is probably in the minds and 
attitudes of oeople, rather than in overt action. His function was 
-to destroy the old and present a vision for the new. 

























































BI3LI0GRAP TT Y 


The following books written by H.G. Wells i 


The Time 'Machine (1895)* London, Benn, In the collected 3 sex 
Edition, vol. 1 6 , 1927 

The Island of Dr. Moreau ( 1896 ), Seven Famous .;ovels , Mew York, 
Knopf, 1954 

The Invisible Man (1897)* Seven Famous Hovels , New York, Knopf, 1954 

The V/ar of the Worlds (1899), Seven Famous Novels, New York, Knonf, 

1954 

The First len in the loon (1901), Seven Famous . ovels , ew York, 
Knopf, 195^ 

The Sea Lady (1902), London, Benn, In the collected Essex Edition, 
vol. 21 , 1927 

The Food of the Gods (1904), Seven Famous .ovels , ew York, Knopf, 

1954 

In the Days of the Comet (1906), Seven Famous Novels , New York, 
Knopf, 1954 

The World Set Free (1914), London, Collins 

The '.heels of Chance (1896), London, Fisher Unwin, 1915 

Love and Mr. Lewisham (1900), London, Benn, In the collected 
Essex Edition, vol. 9* 1927 

Kioos (1905), London, Benn, In the collected Essex Edition, vol. 2, 

1926 

The History of "r. Polly (1910), London, Benn, In the collected 
Essex Edition, vol. 1. 1926 

Ann Veronica (19C N , London, Benn, In the collected Esse 
vol. 18, 1927 

The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman (1914), London, Odhams 






















Tono-Bungay (1909), London, Collins 


The Mew Machiavelli (1911), London, Benn, In the collected Issex 
Edition, vol. 5, 1926 

'■lr. Dritling Sees It Throu gh (1916), London, Collins 

The Soul of a Bishop , New York, ’ T acmillan, 1917 

Joan and Peter , New York, Iacmillan, 1918 

Men Like Cods (1923), Grosset, 1928 

The Dream (1924), London, Odharas 

Christina Alberta’ s Father ( 1925 ), London, Collins 

The '.v'orld of William 01 is so Id (192^), vol. 1, New York, Doran, 
1926; vol. 2, London, Collins 

Mr. Blettsworthy on Rampole Island , Toronto, Doubleday, Doran r ; 
Gundy, 1928 

The Autocracy of Ir, Parham , New York, Doubleday Doran, 19^0 
The Bulpington of Blue , Toronto, Macmillan, 1955 
The Croquet Player , Toronto, Macmillan, 1957 
The Brothers , Few York, Viking, 195& 

Appropos of Dolores , London, Cape, 195^ 

The u oly m error , New York, Simon & Schuster, 1959 

Babes in the Par:-:ling: Mood , London, Seeker & Warburg, 1940 

You Can’t 3s Too Careful , London, Seeker D Marburg, 1942 

The Happy Turning , Mew York, Didier, 1^46 

Mind at the End of Its Tether , ew York, Didier, 1946 


Experiment in Autobiography , London, Gollancz & Cresset, 195^ 


























i 



The following books and articles written about H.G. Wells: 


West, Gfeoffrey, H.G. Wells , Londo Howe, 1950 

n H.G. Welle—The Seer and the Artist", The Tidies Literary Sup¬ 
plement , 19 July, 1947 

Kingsmill, Hugh, "Literary Notes", The r T ew English Review , 
Dctober, 1947, p. 565 

Wagenknecht, Edwin, "H.G. Wells, Realist of the Fantastic", 
Chapter 26, The Cavalcade of the English ovel. 

New York, Holt, 1945, pp7 458-477 

Brooks, Van Wyck, The V/or'id of H.G. Wells , Macmillan, 1913 

Slosson, E., Major Prophets , Boston, Little & Brown, 1917, p. 56 

Maurois, Andrfe, Poets and Prophets , tr. Hamish Miles, London, 
Caswell, 1956, p. 4l 





























