University 

of Alberta Library 

L 

1 

in 



1 

0 1620 3080984 0 



For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


































GU UBBM 

MMIBS1TOIS 
























’IDS UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOME OBSERVATIONS OK THE METHODS OF 
TEACHING GRADE KIKE SOCIAL STUDIES 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE FACULTY 
IK PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE HE(^IRI2£EHTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 


COLLEGE OF EDUCATION 


_ BY 

PETER KEWTOH RUSSEL HOBRISOK 


CALGARY, ALEERTA 


RAY, 1941 







IW 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


LIST OF FIGURES 
I iJTRODUC T ION 


Page 

iii 

1 


Chapter 

I. THE WEED FOR A SOCIAL EDUCATION 2 

Y»hy i<e Feed Social Studies 
What is Social Studies? 

II. OBJECTIVES III SOCIAL STUDIES 12 


ITT, 


IV. 


V 


Wesley and Objectives 
Bining and Objectives 
Frederick, Sheats and Objectives 
Storazand, Levis and Objectives 
Billings and Objectives 
Beard and Objectives 
Swindler and Objectives 
Martin and Objectives 
The Alberta Course 
Our List of Objectives 

METHODS ASD THE TEXTBOOK IM SOCIAL STUDIES 49 

The Weakness of the Textbook Method 
An Alternative to the Textbook 

THE SOCIAL STUDIES LABORATORY 76 

l/hat is 11? 

How to use it. 

THE RESULTS 119 


Can We Attain Our Objectives? 

Is Our Plan Psychologically Sound? 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Unit Outline and Workbook 

List of Magazines 

List of Books 

List of Free Pamphlets 

Record of Radio Broadcast 


135 


Appendix 1 
Appendix 2 
Appendix 3 
Appendix 4 
Appendix 5 


ii 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/someobservations00morr_0 


LIST OF FIGURES 


Page 


I. Social Studies Laboratory 77 

II. Pictures as Social Studies Equipment 80 

IIT. Student Made Maps 94 

TV. Social Studies Bulletin Board 97 


iii 






INTRODUCTION 


My purpose in undertaking this investigation in social 
studies was to check my own procedure in teaching this course 
with procedures and techniques recommended by specialists. 

My method as here outlined is to state the need for 
social studies instruction and to define the term "social stud¬ 
ies'*. Then I have listed a comprehensive statement of object¬ 
ives to be followed. I have shown how these objectives may be 
realized. I have quoted specialists in the social studies to 
prove the psychological and pedagogical soundness of the argu¬ 
ments I have raised in support of fundamental procedures in the 
teaching of social studies. 

In reporting results of my experiences I have gone be¬ 
yond authorities to the opinions of anonymous students who are 
taking this course in social studies now under the methods I 
have enumerated here and who have experienced earlier stages 
of the course under other methods. 


1 


















. 
















V V \ 

' 
















CHAPTER I 


THE NEED FOR A SOCIAL EDUCATION 
Why We Need Social Studies 


Mr. H. G. Wells has stated in graphic language the need 

for that type of education contained in the various social 

studies courses which have been announced by educationists in 

recent years. M . the main battle is an educational 

battle, a battle to make the knowledge that already exists 
accessible and assimilable and effective. The world has mov¬ 
ed from the horse-cart and the windmill to the aeroplane and 
dynamo but education has made no equivalent advance. The new 
brains that are pouring into the world are being caught by in¬ 
competent and unenlightened teachers, they are beTng waylaid 
by the marshalled misconceptions of the past, and imprisoned 
in rigid narrow historical and political falsifications. We 
cannot do with such a world population. We cannot build a 
new civilization out of two thousand million pot-bound minds. 
It is al± poor, damaged material we have to deal with. Such 
cramped and crippled stuff might serve well enough for the 
comparatively unshattered social and political routines of the 
nineteenth century but it will not serve today. It is danger¬ 
ous, as catastrophically inert, as loose sand piled high, and 

always rising higher, over the excavation for a highway . 

. Is there really anything we can call education ....... 

at the present time? Or is what passes for education only a 
sort of systematic softening of the brain? 1 11 H 

In an earlier book^Mr. 'Wells states a similar view. 

He says that it is only since the world war that people have 
begun any serious and sustained attempt to understand the 
state of affairs in this machine world. A few have begun to 
realize that for a new time there was needed a new education. 
The teachers and schools are not wholly to blame. Adult ed¬ 
ucation is needed to persuade the last generation that accept¬ 
ance of a new and living education is necessary. 


1 Wells, H.G., "The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind” 

pp. 7-8. 


11 Wells, H.G, , ”An Experiment in Autobiography”, p. 























. 


• 




. 





































3 


“The present state of affairs is a queer and paradox¬ 
ical one. People leave school and then for the first time 
hear properly of the new history and of the leading ideas of 
modern biology which are essential to a modern ideology. They 
learn for the first time of socialism and of communism, of 
monetary and financial questions, of tariff issues, and of 
all the vast tangle of property and business. All this has 
been kept from them. They have had hardly an inkling of these 
things at school. And yet such things are the very substance 
of the lives these people must live.“l 

Mr. Wells concludes his sweeping condemnation of modern 

education with these words, “Mankind is living too ignorantly 
and casually, and such education as exists is limited, in¬ 
coherent and confused in its statement of reality. That is 
the chief cause of unhappiness in the world today ......... “1 

Another philosopher-historian, Bertrand Russell, has 

condemned the world as being “mad“. He blames the school for 

permitting this madness. He has this to say of the need for 

a training similar to that now given by the social studies 

classes, "Our world is a mad world. Ever since 1914 it has 
ceased to be constructive, because men will not follow their 
intelligence in creating international co-operation, but per¬ 
sist in retaining the division of mankind into hostile groups. 
This collective failure to use the intelligence that men poss¬ 
ess for purposes of self-preservation is due, in the main, to 
the insane and destructive impulses which lurk in the uncon¬ 
scious of those who have been unwisely handled in infancy, 
childhood, and adolescence. In spite of continually improving 
technique in production, we all grow poorer. In spite of be¬ 
ing well aware of the horrors of the next war, we continue to 
cultivate in the young those sentiments which will make it in¬ 
evitable. In spite of science, we react against the habit of 
considering problems rationally. In spite of increasing com¬ 
mand over nature, most men feel more hopeless and impotent 
than they have felt since the Middle Ages. The source of all 
this does not lie in the external world, nor does it lie in 
the purely cognitive part of our nature, since we know 7 more 
than men ever knew before. It lies in our passions; it lies 
in our emotional habits; it lies in the sentiments instilled 
in youth, and in the phobias created in infancy. The cure 
for our problem is to make men sane, and to make men sane, and 


1 Wells, H.G., “The Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind", 

p. 38. 






































• 










. 










■ 














' 





















. 
































































4 


to make men sane they must be educated sanely. At present the 
various factors we have been considering all tend toward soc¬ 
ial disaster. Religion encourages stupidity and an insuffic¬ 
ient sense of reality; sex education frequently produces ner¬ 
vous disorders, and where it fails to do so overtly ? too often 
plants discords in the unconscious which makes happiness in 
adult life impossible; nationalism as taught in schools im¬ 
plies that the most important duty of young men is homicide; 
class feeling promotes acquiescence in economic injustice; and 
competition promotes ruthlessness in the social struggle. Can 
it be wondered at that a world in which the forces of the 
State are devoted to producing in the young insanity, stupid¬ 
ity, readiness for homicide, economic injustice, and ruthless¬ 
ness - can it be wondered at, I say, that such a world is not 
a happy one? Is a man to be condemned as immoral and subver¬ 
sive because he wishes to substitute for these elements in the 
moral education of the present day intelligence, sanity, kind¬ 
ness, and a sense of justice? The world has become so intol¬ 
erably tense, so charged with hatred, so filled with misfort¬ 
une and pain that men have lost the power of balanced judgment 
which is needed for emergence from the slough in which mankind 
is staggering. Our age is so painful that many of the best 
men have been seized with despair : the means of happiness for 
the human race exist, and it is only necessary that the human 
race should choose to use them."l 

We bring the evidence of a third philosophic mind to 
support this statement of a need for a social education. 

Henry Neumann states the urgent need for a socially use¬ 
ful education. To promote his demand for a definite attempt 

to socialize man he quotes Emerson thus: u (We need men) who 
are not content to slip through the world like a footman or a 
spy, escaping by his nimbleness and apologies as many knocks 
as he could, but a brave and upright man, who must find or cut 
a straight road to everything excellent and not only go honor¬ 
ably himself, but make it easier for all who ’follow? him, to go 
in honor and w/ith benefit. "2 

Next, Neumann pleads for the development of the person¬ 
al qualities of manhood in the public schools. Truth, persev¬ 
erance, constructive energy, a horror of mediocrity must be 


1 Russell, Bertrand, "Education and the Social Order" pp. 

246-248 


Neumann, Henry, "Lives in the Making" 






. 

■ 

- 


- . 















' 

























engrained in our school product. In his plea for tolerance 

Neumann quotes the Persian sage Abdu ! l Baha, “Light is good 
in whatsoever lamp it is burning. A rose is beautiful in 
whatsoever garden it may bloom. A star has the same radiance 
whether it shines from the east or the west."1 

There is a need, says Neumann, for the school to pro¬ 
mote the growth of these qualities. 

Professor Alexander Goldenweiser of the Oregon State 
System of Higher Education has thus expressed the need tor a 
social course to take up the lag between technological and 
social progress, “Man has solved the problem of living in nat¬ 


ure ... We live comfortably and could do so even more 

comfortably if certain problems not involved in nature were 
also solved.. Combining theoretical, experiment¬ 


al, and organizational factors, we have learned to construct 
and operate industrial plants which would more than suffice 
for all purposes of need, convenience, comfort and even lux¬ 
ury for all if the human situation were as intelligently and 

competently handled as in the technological one. .. 

’In comparison the human scene has lagged behind. ........... 

The individual, pulled hither and thither by conflicting cur¬ 
rents of influence, economic, political, moral, intellectual, 
is whirling about in bewilderment if not in despair ......... 

In a physical world man has learned to harness, he has become 
strong almost without limit. Now that he has the opportunity 
to become wise and sensitive and good in matters human, he 
has run amuck among other men ; he is suspicious, envious, 
selfish, unsocial, prejudiced, and above all bewildered and 
incompetent. We have, in fact, come to such a pass that it is 
not at all unlikely, as Santayana says, that Civilization is 
perhaps approaching one of those long winters that overtake it 
from time to time} an Ice Age more horrible than any of the 
past because what is congealed in it is humanity itself.“ 

“What confronts us, then, is the problem of society, 
of social life, of man among men, man versus man ......... If 

it is to be democracy and education, it seems that the teacher 
must be the agent, the social sciences the tool, and the 
school the place ......... The school has an opportunity to 

lead. If it fails to seize It, it may find itself unable even 
to follow.“ 1 2 


1 Neumann, Henry, “Lives in the Making” 


2 Stanford University Report, 


Social Education” pp. 

32-34 





































. 






























































r • 


















' 
































These historians and philosophers are not alone in their 

pessimistic attitude regarding the nature of the deficiencies 

of social education in recent years. An educationist, Dr. 

Neal Billings, criticizes modern social education in a spirit 

that parallels the ideas of Mr. H. G. Wells, Mr. Bertrand 

Russell, and Professor Neumann. Dr. Billings writes: “It is 
granted that the existing courses acquaint children with many 
of the main facts of life. But there is evidence that not all 
the important facts are presented nor are the vital inter¬ 
relationships indicated. Not only the facts but the relation¬ 
ships between them must be made clear if we are to produce a 
race of clear-thinking, unprejudiced people.“1 

Dr. Billings adds that the attainment of the goals, tol¬ 
erance and understanding, is essential. He cites numerous in¬ 
stances to prove that tolerance and understanding are needed 
in our social relationships on this planet. 

Professor Hanna of Stanford University also demands em¬ 
phasis be placed on the social aspects of life, “But if the 
American school should desire to provide the leadership for 
socially-useful work of children and youth, school people must 
vastly increase their vision and their techniques. The school 
program must shift its emphasis from the classical and academ¬ 
ic approach to the emphasis on the solution of problems facing 
children and youth, here and now, and it must foresee the pro¬ 
blems of the future. The typical curriculum of the tradition¬ 
al elementary and secondary school and higher institution has 
lacked a vitality and .-meaning for children and youth. School 
tasks have been almost exclusively unrelated to the life going 
on about the young in home and community. These young people 
have accomplished their appointed tasks with as little pain 
and effort as possible and have cheered the approaching vac¬ 
ation. “2 


In Year Book Three of the John Dewey Society the auth¬ 
ors state a great and growing need for a social education. 

They claim that they criticize not in a carping spirit but 
rather from the attitude that true educational needs will be 
met only after attacks on the school’s delinquencies have been 

1 Billings, Dr, Neal, Generalizations Basic to the Social Stud¬ 
ies Course p. 22 

2 Hanna, “Youth Serves the Community, p. 269 









































■ 









. • 






































7 


turned to constructive account. Therefore they state the 

school's delinquencies thus: "What must he said of the 
effectiveness of the American school in view of the negative 
and disintegrating forces at work in the contemporary social 
scene? Has this great institution functioned as an indigenous 
and unifying factor in our wider life, or has it been content 
to play the rather irresponsible role of an undiscriminating 
but obedient servant to all sorts of conflicting social claims 
and interests? Has the school incorporated into its immediate 
mechanism a critical interpretation of the factual conditions 
set forth in the preceding chapters - those powerful cross¬ 
currents of social-economic-political pressure which today are 
shattering the nerves of millions among us and leaving the 
rest with doubtful security and uncertain objects of loyalty? 

Or has this institution been preoccupied with its own intell¬ 
ectual specialisms, leaving the deeper forces of life to enter 
how they may and to shape in untoward ways the more unconscious 
dispositions and outlooks of individuals? Can it honestly be 
said that our schools now serve helpfully to reduce those deep 
clashes of attitude, and interest which so dangerously divide 
us and which at the moment are wreaking such havoc to the emot¬ 
ions and aspirations of our people? Does not the strictest 
candor compel recognition that the school has allowed its rout¬ 
ines and materials to become so crystallized and disjoined from 
life’s raw realities that as a unifying force its effectiveness 
has been abortive and impotent?"! 

The authors, Fredrick and Sheats, have this to say re¬ 
garding the duty of the school in assuming responsibility for 

direction of social progress: "It may well be said that to date 
our schools have been little short of useless and futile as 
instruments for the preparation of an aroused, alert citizenry. 
It may well be that what citizenship we have produced in the 
United States has been in spite of rather than the result of 
cur formal educational system. ........... Acceptance of 

either or both of these assumptions does not relieve the school 
of the responsibility for civic education and the production 
of a higher type of civic participation. If democratic govern¬ 
ment is to be preserved, the school is the only agency with 
the necessary equipment, support, and clientele to do the job. 
Outside agencies - the home, the community, the church - may 
contribute invaluable assistance, but in the last analysis the 
school must assume and rise to the major responsibility. "2 


1 Rugg, Harold (Editor) "Democracy and the Curriculum" 
pp. 155-156. 

2 Frederick ana-Sheats, "Citizenship Education Through the 
Social Studies" p. 27. 






















■ 









. 

■ 

- 















. 




' 
















8 


Regarding the responsibility of the schools in connec¬ 
tion with social problems. Year Book One of the John Dewey 

Society has this to say: “We of today have at our disposal a 
school system contrived to further democratic ideals. That 
system needs improvement along many lines, as we know only too 
well, but even so it stands as a great democratic achievement 
and represents a great potential agency of social service .... 

. We have the schools. They must henceforth do their 

part. The teachers of this land must accept the responsibil¬ 
ity of bringing up a new generation that can and will grapple 
adequately with the new problems."1 

The answer to the demands of these gentlemen for educ¬ 
ational reform seems to be contained in our new social studies 
courses. 


What Is Social Studies? 

As an answer to condemnation, educationists have devis¬ 
ed a new curriculum and the core of that curriculum is social 
studies. 

What is social studies? This question is.answered by 
the 1933. Virginia State Committee on Education. 

“We hold that the scope of social studies is the entire 
field of human relations ie. the unitary comprehensive view, 
as contrasted with the sterile idea of the field as simply the 
traditional subject matter of history, civics, geography etc.“2 

We have a second answer to the same question given by 
A. C. and D. H. Bining. 

“These bewildering problems and the complication of 
modern life present a challenge to the school, and, if that 
institution is to function as it should an educational program 
must be devised and carried out which will prepare pupils for 
their responsibilities and opportunities in order that they 
may take their proper places in society .............. The 


1 Kirkpatrick, Wm.H. , (Editor) “The Teacher and Society 51 
pp. 66-67. 

2 Swindler, ^ _ “Social Studies Instruction 1 2 ', p. 48. 





























■ 




































q 


materials of the social studies provide the basis for making 
the world of today intelligible to the pupils, for training 
them in certain skills and habits, and for inculcating attit¬ 
udes and ideals that will enable boys and girls to take their 
places as efficient and effective members of a democratic 
society. 

Billings gives us a picture of the fusion of subjects 

that now make up the social studies course. Billings writes, 

’’Education which cuts up subject matter into artificial divis¬ 
ions, such as geography, civics, history etc., necessarily 
hampers the possibility of learning needed generalizations and 
facts in a way that can be useful in life.”2 

Then Billings quotes Harold Hugg as follows: “The' or¬ 
ganization of economic, social, political, geographic facts in 
natural relationships in one comprehensive course makes it 
possible for pupils to detect interrelationships which lie at 
the very heart of understanding. Indeed it is only when con¬ 
temporary relationships are seen in their historical setting, 
when geographic generalizations are brought into close relat¬ 
ionship to social, economic and political ones that real under¬ 
standing of the total situation emerges.” 

A third answer is provided by Dr. E.B. Wesley of Minn¬ 
esota University. This author has distinguished between 
“social sciences” and “social studies”. 

To Dr. Wesley the term “social sciences” applies to 
scholarly materials about human beings and their interrelations. 
They result from research, investigation and experimentation. 
They are concerned with detailed,, systematic and logical study 
of human relationships which are of special concern to adults. 
The material of the social sciences are not necessarily tech¬ 
nical or difficult. • Their obligation is to exacting scholar¬ 
ship rather than to the demands of popular reading. The social 
sciences are the storehouses of knowledge rather than suitable 


1 A.C. & D.K. Bining, “Teaching the Social Studies”, p. 3. 

2 Billings, „ “A Determination of Generalizations Basic 

to the Social “Studies Curriculum”, pp. 16-17. 




. 

- 

. 


. 

■ 


















. . lx 









10 


instructional materials for intermediate school students. 

Dr. Wesley pleads for a precise use of terms that will 
discourage the indiscriminate use of "social sciences'' and 
"social studies" as synonyms. To him the social studies are 
portions of the social sciences selected for use in school. 
"The social studies are the social sciences simplified. 1,1 Both 
deal with human relationships hut differ as to purposes. The 
tests of the social sciences are scholarship and social util¬ 
ity, whereas the test of the social studies is instructional 
utility. The social studies must be accurate but they meet 
this requirement when they are faithful portions of the soc¬ 
ial sciences, already proved in scholarship. 

Dr. Harold Rugg, Professor of Education at Teachers' 
College, Columbia University, has given a comprehensive state¬ 
ment of what social studies is. 

"In constructing this course one question has constant¬ 
ly been in the foreground of our thinking: what facts, histor¬ 
ical movements, meanings and principles do young people need 

to study together to understand the modern world? .. 

Therefore historical, geographic, economic, and other mater¬ 
ials are studied in close relationship. Whenever history is 
needed to understand the present, history is presented. If 
geographic relationships are needed to throw light upon con¬ 
temporary problems, those geographic relationships are incor¬ 
porated. The same thing has been done with economic and soc¬ 
ial facts and principles."2 

Professor Rugg continues his statement of what the 
schools must accomplish through the field of social studies, 
in such a manner as to provide an answer through this course 
to the criticisms of Wells and Russell. 


1 Wesley, Dr.E.B., "Teaching the Social Studies", pp. 3-7. 

2 Rugg, Dr. Harold, "The Introduction to Changing Civilizations 
in the Modern World", Int, III to IX. 











■ 

. 

- 



• ■ 


















, 









































11 


Professor Rugg says, ’’The author firmly believes that 
young Americans can be given an appreciation of the signifi¬ 
cance ontemporary problems of living together. Current con¬ 
ditions in America throw into sharp relief the critical need 
of teaching our youth to understand American life and its.re¬ 
lation to the modern world. Our schools are confronted with 
the difficult task of educating pupils to become informed, 
thinking citizens. it is of the utmost import¬ 

ance that schools bend every effort to introduce our young 
people to the chief conditions and problems.which will con¬ 
front them as citizens of the world. That is the essential 
purpose of the unified course in the social studies. Ml 

To those who do not believe the school should endeav¬ 
our to prepare students to meet adult social problems Professor 

Rugg answers, "The foundation of this new course is a series 
of studies of the basic modes of living and the problems of 
modern life, the great movements through which institutions 
and problems have evolved, and the chief concepts and princip¬ 
les which, as history has proved, lie at the root of living 
together."2 

Formerly history, geography, civivs, economics, and 
political science were taught as distinct subjects. Now they 
are united. A defense of this unification is undertaken by 
Professor Rugg. 

"Why one general course rather than the separate stud¬ 
ies of history, geography and civics? Because the chief aim 
is to understand modern life and how it came to be. To under¬ 
stand any institution or condition of life today the mind must 
utilize facts, meanings, generalizations, and historical move¬ 
ments that in the past have been set up as separate school 
subj ects. 


1. Rugg, Dr. Harold, "Changing Civilizations in the Modem 
World", (Int. iii to ix) 

2. Tbid. iiy&. __ 

3. Ibid. 












■ 











. 

* 





















CHAPTER 11 


OBJECTIVES IN SOCIAL STUDIES 

There is a need for a clear understanding of the ob¬ 
jectives in all branches of education. That need is greatest 
of all in the social studies courses. Teachers do teach math¬ 
ematics acceptably according to present standards without 
striving to put into practise fundamental social objectives. 

It is difficult to conceive how social studies can be taught 
at all unless the teacher has a clear-cut understanding of 
both the immediate and ultimate objectives to be attained. 

Dr. Wesley and Objectives. 

Dr. E.B. Wesley of Minnesota University, has given us 
a valuable introductory statement 1 regarding objectives in gen¬ 
eral and also specifically in regard to social studies. 

Dr. Wesley believes that the social studies have suffer¬ 
ed from exaggerated statements of objectives. Enthusiasts have 
claimed that a course in social studies would lead to clear 
thinking, to sane banking, to a new social order. In stating 
the objectives of these courses educationists should not raise 
hopes which cannot be fulfilled. Statements of objectives 
should conform to possible accomplishments. The popularity of 
the social studies cannot endure if the public is encouraged 
to build up exaggerated notions of their efficacy. 

In simple communities it is customary for the children 
to learn the necessary knowledge and skills of life from the 


1 Wesley, Dr. E.B., 


’’Teaching the Social Studies” Chap. 9 
























- 






. 












• • 











. 

. 


















. . . 












13 


parents. But society develops and grows complicated. Formal 
education becomes necessary. Many objectives for that formal 
education are enunciated. Since all possible suggestions re¬ 
garding objectives cannot be followed some ideals come to be 
accepted by a large body of effective public opinion. Out of 
this situation there will emerge some clearly defined object¬ 
ives for the schools in any particular community to follow. 

In a simple society the purposes of the schools are to 
teach the skills that aid additional learning and a small 
amount of indispensable information. But today the schools 
are faced with the problem of admitting new cultural elements 
to reflect, somewhat inadequately, the civilization of which 
they are a part. 

Educational objectives include those purposes of soc¬ 
iety which can no longer be achieved by the home or other 
social agency. An educational objective must: 

1. have the approval of society or those who speak for 
society. 

2. be possible to achieve through instruction. 

3. propose tasks within the capacities of the school 
population. 

4. be accepted and undertaken by the schools. 

The objective might be that of society as a whole but 
unless it meets these four conditions it is not an education¬ 
al objective. 

Educational objectives are determined by the larger soc 
ial objectives which in turn grow out of modern civilization. 
"The schools must, sooner or later, reflect the beliefs, aspir 
















. 


. 

' 


■ 

' .J* 






















. 


































14 


ations, and hopes of the society that maintains them."1 In the 
long run educational ideals must he in conformity with social 
objectives. Since the schools are publicly supported agencies 
it is unlikely that they will run either far ahead of or far 
behind popular wishes. There is not necessarily a conflict be¬ 
tween social and educational objectives. Educational object¬ 
ives are social objectives that have been selected for realiz¬ 
ation in schools. 

What are some social objectives? Dr. Wesley supplies 
a statement of social objectives prepared by The Report of the 
Commission of the American Historical Association on the Social 
Studies. 

1. Rational Planning in - industry 

business 

agriculture 

government 

2. Social insurance. 

3. Universal education for every age level. 

4. Improved transportation. 

5. Local ? state, and regional planning. 

6. The development of parks and playgrounds. 

7. Preventive medicine and universal hospitalization. 

8. The encouragement of the arts and sciences. 

S. A reasoned equality of opportunity. 

10. International cooperation. 

Stated in another form these objectives are: 


"Teaching the Social Studies" p. 162. 


1 - Wesley, Dr. E.B., 






















. 













. 


' 



■ 











. 






. 
































15 


1. To so utilize our resources, materials and technical, as 
to raise the standards of living. 

2. To raise the level of living in order to promote the 
good life for all. 

3. To promote the cultural enrichment of the American peo¬ 
ple. 

4. To subdue acquisitive individualism in order to promote 
utility and beauty. 

5. To combine aesthetics with utility in developing the 
potentialities of American life. 

6. To prevent regimentation in ideas, cultural and invent¬ 
ion. 

7. To preserve individuality and freedom for personal and 
cultural growth. 

8. To fulfill the promise of American democracy. 

9. To cultivate toleration in order to lessen tension and 
to diversify culture. 

10. To promote the spread of accurate knowledge and informed 
opinion among the masses. 

11. To develop an enlightened attitude toward international 
relations, 

12. To emphasize the cultural and economic unity of the world, 

13. To check economic imperialism. 

14. To emphasize the necessity of freedom of expression. 

15. To emphasize the importance of the scientific method. 

16. To infuse the social studies with the best possible plans 
and ideals. 


1 n The Report of the Commission of the American Historical Assoc¬ 
iation on the Social Studies”, Charter 79-81. 












' 






. 


■ 










■ 



* 




■ 

s 








• ■ 



























In 1934 the National Education Association offered a 
statement of desirable social objectives, 

1. Hereditary strength 

2. Physical security 

3. Participation in an evolving culture 

4. An active, flexible personality 

5. Suitable occupation 

6. Economic security 

7. Mental security 

8. Equality of opportunity 

9. Freedom 

10. Fair play. 1 

Each subject of the curriculum seems anxious to bear 
the total burden of objectives. No one course need' or should 
assume the whole burden. A statement of objectives should be 
limited to those which it is possible to achieve in each sub- 
j ect. 

Dr. Wesley has compiled a list of social studies object¬ 
ives recommended by “The Report of the Commission of the Amer¬ 
ican Historical Association.“ 

I. Information 

11. Skill in: 

1. Using libraries and institutions 

2. Using books and materials 

3. Sifting evidence 

4. Analysis 

1 “National Education Association Journal”, (January, 1934) 

pp. 6-10. 





























' 













* 








. 



















17 


5. Observation 

6. Writing 

7. Making maps, charts 

8. Memorizing 

9. Using the scientific method. 

III. Habits of: 

1. Neatness 

2. Industry 

3. Promptness 

4. Accuracy 

5. Cooperation 

6. Economy of time and money. 

7. Patience 

IV. Attitudes of: 

1. Respect 

2. Appreciation 

3. Admiration 

4. Faith 

5. Responsibility 

6. Helpfulness 

7. Sympathy 

8. Patriotism 

9. Tolerance 

10. Fairness 

11. Broad-mindedness 

V. Qualities of: 

1. Independence 

2. Will Power 






* 

. 

. 


. 

. . . 




' 





* 

. 

. ■ 









18 


3. Courage 

4. Persistence 

5. Alertness 

6. Imagination 

7. Initiative 

8. Creativeness 

The ideas of a majority of the authorities that I have 
studied agree that in the social studies courses the main ob¬ 
jective must be to train students to take their places as 
efficient members of society. The needs of society are to de¬ 
termine the courses in the social studies. 

Dr. A.C. Bining of Pennsylvania is an able protagonist 
of this view. He has this to say regarding social studies ob¬ 
jectives, "The social sciences are bodies of organized know¬ 
ledge and thought about human affairs. The social studies, 
while drawing upon the social sciences for their subject matter, 
have as their chief aim the training of boys and girls to take 
their places as efficient members of society. M 1 

He states clearly that worthy and effective citizenship 
is the main objective of social studies. 

"Each subject has its own particular contribution to 
make toward the training of worthy citizens. The social stud¬ 
ies however by virtue of their special content and owing to 
the methods which may be used in teaching them, should contrib¬ 
ute most directly toward that end. 1 11 

Dr. Bining then states two general aims regarding the 

contribution of the social studies to education. (1) "the en¬ 
richment and development of the lives of pupils to the greatest 
extent of their abilities and powers within their environment, 

(2) the training of pupils to take their places in a democratic 


1 Bining, Dr. A.C,, "Teaching the Social Studies in Secondary 

Schools", pp. 27-28) 










' 


. 















. 












19 


society in such a way as to make their country a better place 
in which to live."l 

Dr. Bining includes five specific objectives of the soc¬ 
ial studies: 

1. K nowledge. - M The outstanding objective has been the teach¬ 
ing of facts. 

Bining does not approve of this as the fundamental aim 
especially when the facts are unrelated. However, some facts 
must be learned very thoroughly. 

"It should not be forgotten that a certain amount of 
definite knowledge is essential to good citizenship. Exact 
knowledge and understanding contribute directly to social pro¬ 
gress because they are necessary for clear thinking and reser¬ 
vation of judgment..... In setting up objectives of 

knowledge, certain information should be learned and not for¬ 
gotten ... The power of thinking and reasoning 

cannot be trained without the acquisition of facts. Not only 
are facts necessary for thinking and reasoning, but they must 
be so organized as to form clear associations. Thus, in order 
to reason, a large number of associated facts is essential ... 
......... Judgment also must be based on facts. Unfortunat¬ 
ely in our social studies we are attempting to teach too much."^ 

2. The Development of Reasoning Power and Critical Judg¬ 
ment . - "In order to reason a large body of associated facts 
is essential. To solve a new problem, old experiences must 
be brought to mind and the elements of the old situation, taken 
to meet the response of the new."4 

The difference between learning facts and reasoning is 
made clear by Dr, Bining. Reasoning involves purely mental 
processes of thought but only memorization is involved where 
the student is set the task of learning accepted facts. 


1. 

Bining, Dr. A 
ary Schools", 

.C., "Teaching the Social Studies in Second- 
pp. 37-38. 

o 

Ibid. p. 38. 


3. 

Ibid. p. 38. 


4. 

Ibid. p. 40, 




























— » ■’ • v ■■ .* X •] 

























- 

. 












. 






































20 


’•The social studies must be the chief media to train 
pupils to render social judgments and to draw generalizations 
after sufficient and proper data have been gathered.” 

Dr. Bining follows his statement of this objective 
through to urge that practise in forming critical social judg¬ 
ments in the form of generalizations based on a consideration 
of the available facts in the path to real knowledge. Crit¬ 
ical judgment cannot be bestowed upon a student. It is a cap¬ 
acity he will acquire through examining his facts critically 
and by formulating ideas of his own that can face critical 
judgment by himself and others. 

3. Training in Independent Study .- Dr. Bining writes, ”0ne 
of the most important objectives which must be set up in the 
social studies is the ability to study independently.”1 

This training does not come by exhortation. The de¬ 
velopment of correct study habits is vital. A technique of 
study must be acquired by the pupil under the guidance of the 
teacher. The ability to proceed into independent study marks 
a distinct intellectual advance. 

4. The Formation of Habits and. Skills. - These habits in¬ 
clude a wide range from the formation of the geners.l habit of 
using reference and textbooks intelligently to the habit of 
controlling the emotions under extreme provocation. 

The skills desired include the technique of using 
sources of information in social studies. 

3. De sirable Patterns of Conduct .- Dr. Bining says, ”It 
is necessary to develop desirable patterns of conduct and to 

1. Bining, Dr. A.C., ’’Teaching the Social Studies in Second¬ 
ary Schools”, pp. 40-41. 




























■ 

. 












































. 






















.. . 

■ 










21 


aid in the building up of character* in the lives of pupils in 
order to produce good citizens. 

These patterns must be built up through practise be¬ 
cause experience has taught educationists that the former meth¬ 
ods of moralizing were ineffective. The teacher 1 2 s own attit¬ 
ude towards self-control, patience, sympathy, and self-respect 
will be vital to the child’s attaining of a correct attitude 
toward these qualities of character. 

There is not complete agreement as to what constitutes 
the elements of character. There are, however, general basic 
considerations of right and wrong fundamental to our cultural 
growth• Ideals are essential. Attitudes of loyalty, truth¬ 
fulness, tolerance, cooperation, scientific-mindedness, civic 
gratitude and intelligent optimism should be developed. It 
is important that pupils develop appreciations of the benefits 
afforded to them under our democratic system of life. 

Dr. Bining places on the shoulders of the school the 

blame for much of our present day social vandalism and demands 

specific social objectives in the future: M Our educational 

system has achieved much in producing literate citizens. If 
it is to become a power in American life, however, it must 
produce not only an informed citizenry, but also citizens keen¬ 
ly aware of public questions and problems, critically obser¬ 
vant of the acts of their duly elected representatives, con¬ 
scientious in all their relationships, and possessing the de¬ 
sire to do all they can to bring about the ideals of a truly 
democratic society. The schools cannot ignore present.con¬ 
ditions, with the injustices, vulgarities, and corruption man¬ 
ifest in our modern society. They must train pupils effect¬ 
ively so that the citizens of the future will take a. common 
interest and an active part in good government as well as.ex¬ 
ercise a high and fearless morality in their social relation 
ships. 1,2 


1. Bining, Dr. A.C., "Teaching the Social Studies in Second¬ 
ary Schools", p. 42. 

2. Ibid. p. 372. 
















■ 








• ' ■ 








■ 


. 










. 















Frederick and Sheats outline the qualities that they 

expect the school to instill in its product: "The good cit¬ 
izen must therefore possess a genuine interest in the welfare 
of mankind on a planetary scale and be guided in the express¬ 
ion of that interest by the scientific temper, 

And again: "By the scientific temper is meant ration¬ 
al thought. The attack on issues of the day by our ideal 
citizen will be objective, tolerant, rational, impersonal, and 
determined by the facts in the case. The keynote of the age 
is science. Citizenship must come of age. The badge of mat¬ 
urity is the scientific temper." 

And also: "Interest in the commonweal, guided by the 
scientific temper, perfected by practice in the promotion of 
the common welfare equals good citizenship." 

Again: "The notion of social value should guide the 

choice of content from the several aspects of life. What in¬ 
formation will probably be of most value to citizens of the 
United States as they wrestle with the crucial problems of 
the ages?" 


Frederick and Sheats believe one of the main object¬ 
ives in social studies must be training the students how to 
think. They have listed the advantages and the elements of 
thinking under the caption "Elements of the Scientific Temper. 

V^/hat are the elements of the scientific temper? 

A, Attitudes of: 

1. Respect for facts 

2. Dislike for biases 

3. Respect for accuracy 

B• Information collecting skills: 

1. Reading 

a. Text material; books 

b. Newspapers 


1. Frederick and Sheats, "Citizenship Education Through the 
Social Studies", pp. 11-15. 


2. Ibid. p. 





















■ 




- 
















J 1 
















23 


c. Periodicals 

d. Charts, graphs, tables, cartoons, pictures, maps 

e. Use of library, encyclopedias, year books, etc. 

2. Observation 

3. Listening 

4. Experimenting 

5. Introspection 

C. Ability to organize facts. 

D, Use of facts in thinking: 

1. To solve problems 

2. To draw conclusion by deduction 

3. To draw conclusions by induction 

4. To be original; to think creatively 

5. To make judgments. 

Stormzand and Lewis, and Objectives. 

Stromzand and Lewis state in clear language recent 
views on social studies objectives. These authors state that 
there has been much less change in the statement of object¬ 
ives than one might expect. Study skills are emphasized but 
the retention of the facts for their own sake has been negat¬ 
ively evaluated. In a general way the aims of the past have 
been: general culture 

good citizenship 
college preparation 
study skills 

In general, recent movements in the reform of social studies 
teaching have tended to increase the importance of citizenship 
















. 

, 



- 










■ 














* 













and study skills. A new interpretation has been put upon 
culture. There is less emphasis on college preparation. 

More emphasis is placed upon attitudes and skills : less em¬ 
phasis is placed upon the acquisition of factual information. 

The authors make a ''dogmatic declaration of belief in 
the transcendent importance of the ultimate, lifelong, cult¬ 
ural interests, civic attitudes, and study skills that should 
be the product of all school work in all of the social studies. 1,1 
In the social studies there are great ultimate values. Work¬ 
ing toward these ultimate objectives does not demand that we 
neglect the present day activities and needs of the pupil. 

A conclusion that lies at the basis of proposed reform 
in social studies is: any material or activity that has only 
immediate values has no value at all. In the social studies 
blind emphasis is too often placed on the learning of facts 
for recital or testing. This unfortunate emphasis on facts 
to be memorized has defeated the ends of education. The pro¬ 
gressive educator believes the facts will take care of them¬ 
selves once the interests and the attitudes are achieved. He 
sees in facts a means to an end, a means of promoting interests, 
a means of practising study skills, a means of understanding 
relationships. Social values have been subordinated to a short¬ 
sighted policy of evaluating the student’s work in the social 
studies in terms of immediate academic achievement. The stud¬ 
ent’s place in the community and his equipment for conduct 


1. Stormzand and Lewis, "Hew Methods in the Social Studies", 
chapter 8. 





























. 


' 

- 


. 















. 

. 














. 

■ 







These objectives 


are significant social studies objectives, 
have replaced that of memorizing for the emergencies of tests 
and earning of passes in school. 

The social studies teacher may never know if his teach¬ 
ing has been successful. In the'social studies, more than in 
any other subject, results cannot be evaluated by new or old 
types of testing. No tests have been devised so far to pred¬ 
ict probable future conduct resultant from present skills and 
interests. 

Stormzand and Lewis quote the Report of the Commission 

on Social Studies of the American Historical Association as 

follows: “The competent teacher, while avoiding all forms of 

academic pedantry and distinguishing the significant from the 
trivial, will know that learning is usually a difficult and 
arduous business, will make provision for indispensable drill 
and repetition, and will prepare and administer tests of pro¬ 
gress from time to time; but in it all he will appraise with 
appropriate humility the adequacy of his own judgments and of 
any classroom examinations to measure the long-time social 
results of instruction."1 

If our aims are made to conform to the progressive 
philosophy a change will come over the spirit of our teaching. 
One change of emphasis will show a subordination of fact learn¬ 
ing to the development of permanent interests and individual, 
specific, intense interests. Useless displays of uncultured 
erudition will pass off as scholastic futility. 

In the past, objectives have been placed before the 
teacher as a certain body of subject patter for the student to 
memorize. This was all quite dogmatic. Textbook writers, ad- 


1, Stormzand and Lewis, "Hew Methods in the Social Studies", 
p. 182. 



















' 




, 





































ministrators, organized groups, told the teachers what to 
teach. 

The setting up of broad objectives is a duty that be¬ 
longs to supervisors and training schools. The divisions of 
these set the day to day objectives. These latter must be 
left in the hands of the teacher. 

Stormzand and Lewis include a summary of specific ob- 
j ectives: 

1, To improve the pupil’s reading skills, both in rate and 
c omprehension. 

a. To make him conscious of his limitations as compared 
with average standards for his grade. 

b. To show him definitely how to improve his skill, 

c. To give him confidence in his ability to handle the 
larger unit reading assignments. 

2, To make pupils realize the value of getting a broad per¬ 
spective of a chapter or unit assignment by preliminary 
rapid survey and skimming, 

3, To give practice in the comparison of parallel readings 
and of supplementary materials drawn from different sub- 
j ects. 

4, To develop interests in various types of reading mater¬ 
ial, and in a variety of topics, especially in the field 
of biography, travel, and social problems, 

5, To make a student conscious of, and fairly efficient in, 
a variety of study methods. 

a. How to write a summary sentence for a paragraph . 

b. How to summarize a section or chapter. 

























■ 








. 

I J 









































27 


c. How to outline 

d. How to expand a vocabulary of social science terms 
by the use of textbooks and reference books and how 
to practice himself in the use of such terms, 

e. How to use a table of contents 

f. How to use an index 

g. How to find answers to questions 

h. Row to formulate problems of thought-provoking quest¬ 
ions about his reading. 

i. How to test himself efficiently with the various ob¬ 
jective devices, 

j. How to keep alert in social studies reading for cause 
and-effect relationships and how to reason these out 
if they are not fully expressed in the reading assign 
ed, 

k. When, where, and how to make use of collateral read¬ 
ing references. 

l. An ability to observe intelligently and critically 
the present-day events in one’s community. 

6, How to read a newspaper efficiently 

a. How to skim headlines and select news worth reading. 

b. How' to detect and guard against the partisan bias in 
newspaper editorials, headlines, and stories. 

7* How to use the leading weekly and monthly news magazines 

8. How to use the Readers’ Guide to find information on 

any current issue or problem, 

9, Ability to use such current problems and one’s infor¬ 
mation about them as a source of conversation. 



. 













■ 

* 









' 












































. 








28 


10. Ability to evaluate and choose moving-picture enter¬ 
tainment intelligently. 

11. Ability and desire to select worth-while radio prog¬ 
rams . 

12. Ability to prepare and present effectively a short talk 
to a group. 

13. Ability to preside properly at a formal or informal 
group meeting or discussion^ 

14. Ability to participate in the work of a committee as 
chairman or member. 

15. Ability tp participate graciously and desire to cooper¬ 
ate in such group discussions. 

16. Desire to co-operate with fellow-students, teachers, 
and administrators as a good school citizen. 

17. Willingness to promote community enterprises by partic¬ 
ipating in such ways as are adapted to one’s abilities. 

18. Ability to use a school and public library independent¬ 
ly. 

a. To use card catalogue 

b. To find books 

c. To use all tools of reference 

19. Interest in all accessible museums and art galleries. 

20. Ability to write correctly and with some interest and 
force one’s information and opinions on problems of 
community and civic importance. 

21. An understanding of vocational possibilities after 
leaving school, with interest in several lines of work. 
A conscious program of several worth-while leisure time 


22 . 






























' 


, 


















































O Q 

C- I L/ 


enterprises, including at least 

a. One construction activity 

b. A select line of non-fiction reading 

c. Historical and civic curiosity. 

23. To improve the student’s understanding of those dis¬ 
tinctive terms in the social studies vocabulary which 
are important for the clear comprehension of current 
reading and discussions in the field of civic and 

social events and theories. 1 2 3 

2 

Stormzand and Lewis contend that an immediate object¬ 
ive in social studies is the motivation of interest. The 
study of the social sciences should aim to build up permanent 
reading interests. A progressive course should be given to 
stimulate interest in inspiring personalities and an under¬ 
standing of important civic and political problems of our nat¬ 
ion. The reading of history can be made as enjoyable as the 
reading of fiction. The romance of the struggle of other peo¬ 
ple in other times opens a field that challenges attention. 

However, contact with the facts of the above situations 
must not be grasped as an opportunity for academic cramming. 
The main purpose in using the facts is to secure a clarificat¬ 
ion of understanding, interest, sympathy. When they have 
done this M we need not be greatly concerned if they are for¬ 
gotten beyond recall, even for the emergencies of testing" 

1. Stormzand and Lewis, "New Methods in the Social Studies" 
pp. 188-191. 

2. Ibid. p. 191. 

3. Ibid. p. 191. 




























. 

0 

. 


























30 


Again, "If a pupil should gain a world of fact and yet lose 
his interest in reading, we shall have done him more harm than 
good." 1 For the exaggerated emphasis o.n factual information 
Stormzand and Lewis blame the medieval attitude and practice 
of universities. 

Of all the objectives in social studies none seems to 
be more widely accepted than those promoting good citizenship. 
As evidence, the authors state that of Swindler’s twenty-eight 
compiled objectives, eleven are directly related to some civic 
motive. 

A few special objectives need wider consideration. The 
patriotic and international objectives have not been under¬ 
stood always. Instead of being taught blind and crude hero 
worship of our institutions, students must be assisted to a 
true picture of democratic virtues and defects. 

Unquestioning nationalism is condemned as out-moded in 
the modern world. Jingoistic patriotism as a basis for main¬ 
taining a policy of isolation is a mistake. 

The student should be introduced to an understanding 
of the present-day civic and political problems, to methods 
of investigating these problems, to the formulation of attit¬ 
udes, to the acceptance of specific responsibilities. Under¬ 
standing and participation are essential if the aim recently 
stated by the "Commission on Social Studies of the American 
Historical Association" is to be achieved. It urges teachers 
to recognize the "special responsibilities of the social 

1. Stormzand and Lewis, "Hew Methods in the Social Studies" 
p. 192. 









' 





' 







■ 




























' w 




. 


















31 


sciences in leading boys and girls to a fuller understanding 
and a more effective participation in the complex and dynamic 
social world of material things, persons, institutions, con¬ 
flicts, thoughts, ideals, and aspirations."1 

The question of whether the school may propagate soc¬ 
ial, political or economic points of view is very controver¬ 
sial. For the guidance of teachers the authors state some 
obj ectives: 

1. The teacher has no right to propagate opinions subver¬ 
sive to the constitution. He has the right and the duty 
to promote progress in government. 

2. The social studies teacher should make it one of his 
citizenship objectives to see that students are informed 
on arguments for and against the vital problems of cur¬ 
rent thought. 

3. The teacher of social studies has no right to accept as 
objectives the propaganda of those who would use the 
schools for the promotion of their theories. 

4. The teacher should not directly impose his own ideals 
on the students. Let the students come to their own re¬ 
flective decisions. 

The teacher must abandon his subject-mindedness for a 
strong civic and social idealism. Social attitudes must be 
developed in the students. 

1. There must be an attitude of pride in upright character. 
The school must inculcate in its product a desire to 
choose the socially desirable course of action. The 
most desirable result will be to have youth practice a 

1. Stormzand and Lewis, New Methods in the Social Studies", 

p. 200. 



















- 

' 








. • 




, 

. 












32 


self-reliant choice of conduct as intelligence and re¬ 
flection dictate and an adherence to this with a self- 
sacrificing scorn of consequences. 

2. There must he developed a pride in doing any productive 
work. 

3. An attitude of enjoyment should be encouraged in true 
non-commercial recreations. 

4. An attitude of respect for home life should be fostered. 

5. An attitude of respect for age, authority, office, ach¬ 
ievement and heroism should be encouraged. 

6. Attitudes of cooperation in group participation should 

be promoted. 

7. The student must learn to yield gracefully to majorities 
where his own honest convictions are not compromised. 

8. Students must develop respect for the convictions of 
others. 

9. The practice of challenging doubtful statements should 
be cultivated, 

10. An attitude of active participation in community affairs 
is essential, 

11. A conscientious attitude with respect to obedience to 
lawr should be developed, 

12. An attitude of intent to continue education throughout 

life should be the most natural outcome of school life. 

Stormzand and Levvis clearly define the duty of the 
school in promoting good citizenship, 

"The school citizenship education program must take 
root in some conception of the qualities which make the good 







. 






. 

H s 





. 

« 

\ 






















33 


citizen. Builders of social studies programs for schools and 
colleges must ask and answer the question: What sort of a per¬ 
son do we want when the student has finally completed his 
school•course? In terms of the suggested definition of the 
good citizen, young men and women will, if the purpose is 
accomplished, come to the end of their school courses with an 
abiding general interest in the affairs of men, and a desire 
somehow to better the lot of mankind; they will habitually 
use facts, reason and intelligence in their daily decisions 
as citizens, rather than prejudice, tradition and selfish de¬ 
sire. The general objectives of citizenship education are 
thus made clear.'* 

"These general qualities of interest and the scient¬ 
ific temper must be.broken down into small usable elements for 
the purpose of instruction. Interest will become an interest 
in the problems of poverty, and interest in reducing incidence 
of crime. The scientific temper will be broken into the abil¬ 
ity to gather facts from newspapers, the ability to draw 7 con¬ 
clusions inductively." 

"Each part of the social-studies curriculum, each chap¬ 
ter, each unit, and each year’s course, must directly promote 
these basic qualities of citizenship. Incidental and purely 
academic desirables must not be permitted to crowd out the 

emphasis on fundamentals .. Interest in the 

commonweal, guided by the scientific temper, perfected by 
practice in the promotion of the common welfare equals good 
c itizenship. 

That the learning of facts cannot be ignored is ably 

attested by Stormzand and Lewis, "While the materials and 
methods in progressive teaching give greater emphasis to the 
discussion and understanding of problems in American history 
and government, it is not to be inferred that the thorough 
learning of facts is not approved. By eliminating the^large 
mass of scholastic detail so characteristic of the typical 
high school text, the way may be made clear for the more com¬ 
plete mastery of essentials. There need be no apology for re¬ 
quiring students to memorize as well as understand a selected 
list of important dates, events, time sequences, outlines of 
movements, and cause-and-effect relationships." 

"The extreme modern attitude that disapproves of memor¬ 
ization, reviews, and even drill on a list of important essent 
ial facts in the social studies deprives the students of one 
of the principal permanent values of such work in the schools. 
Such basic information is necessary for further intelligent 
reading and for permanent cultural and civic uses. A tnorough 


X. Stormzand and Lewis, "Citizenship Education Through the 3oc 
ial Studies", pp. 14-15. 







. 





. 



■ 

■ 




. 


! j- 










. 











■ 









. 










34 


knowledge of pivotal dates, events, locations and sequences 
is the basis for all future orientation in history, reading 
and in political discussion."1 

The teacher of social studies must take care not to 

over-emphasize facts. The Report of the Commission on the 

Social Studies of the American Historical Association warns 

that, " . .. verbalism, the use of words without un¬ 

derstanding, has cursed the school all down through the cent¬ 
uries and, as investigations by the Commission prove, con¬ 
tinues to corrupt social science instruction in American 
schools today." 


Professor Neal Billings and Objectives 
Basic Generalizations 


That facts unrelated are inadequate for permanent learn 
ing is the view of Professor Neal Billings. He stresses the 
educational advantages to be derived from the process of arriv 
ing inductively at basic generalizations. He claims the stud¬ 
ent gets meanings from ideas when he understands then suffic¬ 
iently to use them in the formulation of his own generalizat¬ 
ions. Professor Billings says, "Practice in drawing general¬ 
izations already known to the educated person is the best and 
surest way to make certain that the child gets meaning from 
the general formulae which he needs in order to cope with life 
To provide this practice, there must be an abundance of con¬ 
crete data supporting the generalization. Teaching the stud¬ 
ent the needed generalizations by providing concrete data from 
which he can generalize is the surest way to make the general¬ 
izations meaningful, understandable, and usable." 1 2 

Generalizations are important. Training in making them 
provides: 

1. Preparation to meet novel situations. 

2, Practice in,generalizing guarantees the getting of mean- 


1. Stormzand and Lewis, "New Methods in the Social Studies" 
pp. 171-174. 

2. Billings, Prof. Neal, "A Determination-of Generalizations 
Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum", p. 45. 















































. 

. 

- 

■ 








. 


■ 


. 






35 


ings. 

3. Social life needs new men who generalize from data. 

4. Generalizations are keys to handling a number of sit¬ 
uations. 

Dewey said, "Generalization expresses the natural goal 
of instruction in any topic, for it works a measure of economy 
and efficiency from the standpoints alike of observation, mem¬ 
ory, and thought. 

We opened our discussion of objectives with a word of 

caution from Dr. Wesley. Dr. Charles Beard also has cautioned 

us against expecting too much from the social studies program. 

".From what has been said, therefore, it follows that 

while some of the problems of democracy must find a place in 
social studies program, they cannot form the entire substance 
of it or work wonders even when they are duly introduced and 
exploited. Furthermore, a wide knowledge of facts and a dis¬ 
cipline in thinking are the prerequisites to a fruitful con¬ 
sideration of controversial questions ........... civic in¬ 
struction in the schools in the United States must of necess¬ 
ity lay stress on the democratic process of government."2 

Dr. Beard then states general objectives for the social 

studies course: "Our fundamental purpose here is the creation 
of rich, many-sided personalities, equipped with practical 
knowledge and inspired by ideals so that they can make their 
way and fulfil their mission in a changing society which is a 
part of a world complex. Such rich and many-sided personal¬ 
ities are informed about a wide range of affairs, both immed¬ 
iate and remote. They are aware of personal and social re¬ 
sponsibilities. They know that environment can be changed 
within limits by individual and social action. They know that 
the individual can be modified by altering his environment and 
stimulating his effort. They are firm of will, for without 
will nothing great can be accomplished. They are imbued by 


1. "Cyclopedia of Education" p < 

2. Beard, Dr, Charles A., "A Charter for the Social Sciences" 













■ 

' 
























■ 






. 










o o 


the highest aspirations of the human race, for without as¬ 
piration there x is no great motive power for action. Those 
who hope for nothing, do nothing." 

This general statement is followed by five specific 


objectives: 

1. "A rich and many-sided personality possesse information. 

What and how much? . We may say that the 

primary information which social sciences must.supply 
through the schools of individuals is information con¬ 
cerning the conditioning elements, realities, forces, 

and ideas of the modern world in which life must be 
lived. "- 1 

2. "A knowledge of how to acquire knowledge is a permanent 

possession which can be used through life." 2 3 4 5 

3. "Next to the collection of data is skill in analysis - 

the power to break massed data or large themes into 
manageable units, and to get at irreducible elements 
in any complex under scrutiny."3 

4. "Among the habits which social science is concerned with 

forming are personal cleanliness, industry, courtesy, 
promptness, accuracy, and effective co-operation in 
common undertakings."4 

5. "Akin to habits, less dynamic but equally necessary to 

individual accomplishments and group performances, are 
certain elements of personality which may be described 
as attitudes. Under this head may be included such 
tendencies and propensities as respect for the rights 
and opinions of others, zeal for truth about many thing 
large and small, pride in the achievement of individ¬ 
uals, communities, America, and mankind, admiration for 
heroic and disinterested deeds, faith in the pow/er of 
men and women to improve themselves and their surround¬ 
ings, loyalty to ideals, a vivid sense of responsibil¬ 
ity in all relations, a lively interest in contemporary 
affairs, a desire to participate in the world’s work, 
far and near .. 


1. Beard, Dr. Charles A. "A Charter for the Social Sciences" 
pp. 97-98. 

2. Ibid, p, 99. 

3. Ibid. p. 100. 

4. Ibid. p. 102. 

5. Ibid. p. 102. 









































■ 




\ 

. 

' 

































. 

. 




































37 


6. "Of all the attitudes or loyalties to be cultivated by 

social science, love of country, or patriotism, comes 
first on the accepted programs of civic instruction .. 

. Loyalty to America, an appreciation of its 

achievements, and faithin its powers are indispensable 
to defense against attacks from without and to the 

promotion of the good life within. The 

loyalty which history and social science can instill 
is; then, the loyalty of reasoned affection, not the 
loyalty of tribal affection."1* 

7. "To information, skills, habits, and attitudes, will 

power and courage must be added if rich and many-sided 
personalities are to be nourished."2 

8. "Strangely affiliated with courage, and yet distinct 

from it, is imagination - the capacity to compare, con¬ 
trast, to combine and to construct."2 

9. "Deeply rooted in the imagination is another element of 

the full life - esthetic appreciation. Life without 
it is barren and barbaric, no. matter how rich in the 
material goods."4 

10. "It is one of the inescapable duties of teachers in 
social science to discover, draw' forth, and inspire 
students with capacity for leadership and creative 
work."5 


Dr. H*E. Swindler of the University of Virginia, has 
written a definite and comprehensive statement of social stud¬ 
ies objectives. 

Dr. Swindler quotes Professor Dawson regarding the 

choice of objectives, "Any discussion of the objectives of 
education is in danger of going to either of two extremes. It 
may move in the direction of such general aspirations or hopes 
that it will not- help the practical mechanic in education who 


1. Beard, Dr. Charles A., "A Charter for the Social Sciences", 


p. 103. 

2. Ibid. p. 

106. 

3. Ibid. 

P* 

107. 

4. Ibid, 

P- 

108. 

5. Ibid. 

P- 

110. 

































' 
















* 









. . : 










38 


needs definite guidance; or it may be stimulated by such part¬ 
icularization of interest. that it cannot be built 

into the system of instruction. General statements are useful 

if they can be analyzed into . their constituent 

elements in order that they may be adjusted to each other in 
organic unity. The time has passed for dogmatic statements 
about separate courses or merged ones. We must take time and 
use effort enough to decide on the basis of careful analysis 
of what it is we wish to accomplish."1 

In 1927 Dr. Swindler compiled, in order of frequency, 
a list of social studies objectives in the United States. 

Here is the list. The topics are arranged in order of pre¬ 
ference. 

1. Socio-civic efficiency. 

2. Information as a basis for judgment, 

3. Making the present world intelligible. 

4. Intelligent, willing participation in civic and social 
activities. 

5. Knowledge and appreciation of duties, rights, and re¬ 
sponsibilities. 

6. Power to evaluate facts; clear, independent thinking 
and judgment. 

7. Knowledge and appreciation of the principles underly¬ 
ing sound and enduring government and society. 

8. Broadened interest, tolerance, sympathy, 

9. Knowledge and appreciation of the past as background for 
the present. 

10. Love for country - an intelligent patriotism. 

11. Respect for lav/s and institutions, 

12. Ethical, moral and religious principles. 


1, Swindler, Dr, R.S. 




9 


’•Social Studies Instruction 11 , p. 138. 



















. 
















































39 


13. Appreciation of the interdependence of peoples. 

14. Proper attitudes and interests. 

15. Proper leisure. 

16. Establishing idea of a changing world. 

17. Mastery of tools. 

18. Influence of natural geographic environment. 

19. General culture. 

20. Health. 

21. Love for historical reading. 

22. Appreciation of scientific method. 

23. Worthy home membership.^ 

He concludes that up to 1927 general objectives were 
too prevalent. Many of these objectives have become perman¬ 
ent, There was a tendency toward a distinct set of objectives 
for junior high schools. 

He compared the findings of his broad survey with the 
suggestions of seventeen experts and found a remarkable simil¬ 
arity in objectives. 

Objectives of Seventeen Experts? 

1. Socio-civic efficiency, 

2. Command of fundamental facts. 

3. Ethical character. 

4. Vocational character. 

5. Worthy use of leisure. 


- 


Swindler, Dr. R.E., 


"Social Studies Instruction' 1 , p. 141. 


Q 
Cj 9 


Ibid. p. 149. 




















' 

/ ■■■• 

« 















t 


















40 


6. Health efficiency. 

7. Worthy home membership. 

Present day trends in social studies objectives tend 
to emphasize specific and detailed activities and experiences. 
Educational psychology has been brought to bear upon the pro¬ 
blem of objectives with the result that.there has been integ¬ 
ration and scientific classification of detailed items into a 
few major types. 

Dr. Swindler believes that by 1933 some progress had 
been made in the scientific classification of objectives for 
practical classroom use. But in his opinion, even in 1933, 
the formulation of objectives for social studies lagged be¬ 
hind some of the other subjects. 

Dr. Swindler summarizes^*the aims of recognized experts: 

1. To learn the nature of historical evidence. 

2. To acquire the habit of weighing historical evidence. 

3. To gather practical knowledge for use in daily life. 

4. To cultivate the taste for historical reading. 

5. To develop sympathy, tolerance, and understanding among 
groups, peoples, and nations. 

6. To acquire respect, love, and desire for the truth, 

7. To promote social and civil efficiency. 

8. To encourage scientific and critical thinking. 

9. To eliminate prejudice and snap judgments, 

10. To interpret and make the present w r orld intelligible. 


1, Swindler, Dr. R.E., "Social Studies Instruction", p. 157. 



























, 




*■ 


; 

































































41 


11. To set up moral and ethical standards. 

12. To learn the principles upon which sound and enduring 
government and society rest. 

13. To develop respect for law and order and reverence for 
basic social institutions. 

14. To master the tools necessary for the above aims. 

15. Development of mental powers - observation 

attention 

analysis 

comparison 

di sc rimination 

imagination 

association 

j udgment 

reason 

memory 

Dr. Swindler enumerates^ the aims of the Commission on 
the Study of Social Studies in the Schools as reported in the 
■Historical Outlook of February, 1931: 

1. They should have understanding of improved social instit¬ 
utions through which society functions. 

2. Skill in use of sources of information about society. 

3. Points of view, interest, and attitudes; that is, toler¬ 
ance. 

4. Social orientation, or systematic knowledge of social 
organization. 


1. "Historical Outlook", February, 1931, p. 64. 










' 









' 

























5. Actual participation in social activities. 

In conclusion, Dr. Swindler sets up a final master list 
of objectives in social studies: 

1. Basic facts 

2. Fundamental principles 

3. Practical abilities 

4. Proper ideals 

5. Correct attitudes 

6. Sympathetic appreciations 

7. Critical judgments 

8. Efficient co-operation 

9. Reasoned self-confidence 

10. Socially directed will and desire. 

Dr. Swindler believes that society's needs must furnish 
the basis for school social studies aims. Pupil interest can¬ 
not hold the centre of the stage. They must not be set up as 
a fetish to be worshipped. Pupil interests may be a point of 
departure or provide a method of approach. The whole fabric 
of our machine age is tottering. We need an educational sys¬ 
tem that will train our youth to become more useful citizens - 
citizens that will make this world a better place in which to 
live. To attain this end we must cease kindergarten practices 
in our secondary schools. 

Everett Dean Martin has stated the crux of educational 

objectives: "Here the presupposition is that the important 

factor in education is the question what Is to be taught, 
rather than the spirit of learning itself. Education is con¬ 
ceived of as knowledge acquired. Attention is fixed not on 
the learning process, through which an individual becomes re¬ 
oriented to his world, but upon the end result, something fix- 















- 












. 








■ 




1 






- 

. 
















































43 


ed and done, a certain amount of information stored up. Is 
this what we mean by learning? Is it receiving and memorizing 
a given something either cultural or practical? Or is it an 
adventure in any kind of truth seeking which changes the qual¬ 
ity of one ! s future experience and enables one to^behave not 
merely efficiently but wisely, with a broad view and a sympath¬ 
etic understanding of the many ways in which men have striven 
to create meaning and value out of the possibilities of human 
life?"l 


Upon occasion, Mr. Martin quarrels vigorously with the 
proponents of the new education. The following passage would 
seem to be an eloquent expression of the fact that progress¬ 
ive educators and Mr. Martin agree on some objectives in ed¬ 
ucation: "It is sought to make of education something which 

will broaden the interests and sympathies of people regardless 
of their daily occupation - or along with it - to lift men’s 
thoughts out of the monotony and drudgery which are the common 
lot, to free the mind from servitude and herd opinion, to 
train habits of judgment and of appreciation of" value, to 
carry on the struggle for human excellence in our day and gen¬ 
eration, to temper passion with wisdom, to dispel prejudice 
by better knowledge of self, to enlist all men, in the measure 
that they have capacity for it, in the achievement of civil¬ 
ization."- 

The framers of the Alberta course in social studies 
have had the products of some of the authorities mentioned 
hereto in this thesis close at hand while the course was under 
construction. I note that the very first line of the intro¬ 
duction brings this previously quoted message from the Virginia 
State Course: "The scope of the social studies embraces the 
entire field of human relations, the significant movements of 
human history, and the problems and issues of contemporary 
society." 


1. Martin, Everett Dean, "The Meaning of a Liberal Education", 
p» 27. 

2. Ibid. p. 3. 

3. "The Program of Studies for the Intermediate School", p. 28. 


























' 



. 






. 


■ 




' 


















. . 



















44 


The framers of the Alberta course 4x> not appear to have 

felt the necessity for caution which reatrained the hopes of 

Dr. Wesley and Dr. Beard. The Alberta course states:^ "There 
can be no questioning the importance of introducing youth to 
an understanding of contemporary civilization. Present con¬ 
ditions throw into sharp relief the vital necessity of under¬ 
standing modern life and the modern world. Thus our schools 
are confronted with the difficult task of educating pupils to 
become informed thinking citizens. The rapid development of 
industrial civilization has produced problems of living to¬ 
gether that baffle even the keenest adult brain. In a very 
few years the generation of children now in our classrooms is 
to confront those problems. Their reaction to them will be 
determined by the social spirit they have imbibed in the 
schools of today," 

The Alberta course states that the aim is to produce 
good national and international citizens who are intelligent, 
stable emotionally, rational and independent in thought. Men¬ 
tal growth holds an educations^! ranking superior to the acquis¬ 
ition of factual information. The student should develop a 
technique of investigation. He will learn to work co-operat¬ 
ively, He will learn to organize, evaluate and use facts. He 
will use facts in formulating judgments and in developing, 
attitudes. The social studies will be expected to contribute 
to the growth of that character and that conduct we need to 
find in our desirable citizens. 

The Alberta social studies program of fundamental ob- 
j ectives is formally listed in the Programme of Studies for 
Intermediate Schools, 

1. "To facilitate an understanding of social and economic 
realities; in other words, to acquaint students with 
enough historical and geographical facts to enable them 


1, "The Programme of Studies for the Intermediate School", 

p, 28, 


Ibid, p, 29. 



















. 







- 

































45 


to comprehend at their level our present-day economic 
and political institutions and practices." 

2. "To develop the ability to see both sides of a question, 

and to think independently on a basis of facts. 

3. "To induce an attitude of fair-mindedness, and a desire 

to co-operate with others for the welfare of the com¬ 
munity. " 

4. "To train students in the use of efficient methods for 

securing and organizing information that is available 
in reference books, atlases and charts; and to extend 
their use of such tools and pictures, diagrams, maps, 
graphs, and statistical data." 

5. "To develop an appreciation of Canadian culture." 

6. "To make clear to students the effect of mechanization 

on the production of goods and services, and on devel¬ 
opments in transportation and communication." 

7. "To help students understand the contributions of ex¬ 

plorers, frontiersmen and statesmen to the growth and 
development of Canada and the British Commonwealth; 
and to understand the contribution made'by Canada to 
the trade of the Commonwealth and the world." 

8. "To foster an attitude of tolerance and respect for 

w r orld peoples, and a sympathetic understanding of their 
social and economic problems." 

These many authorities have stated their objectives in 
different language but in the underlying philosophy of object¬ 
ives the basic differences are very few. As proved by Swind¬ 
ler’s research practically all specialists of the social stuo- 
























































' 


























46 


ies courses demand that the background of the total course 
must emphasize social purposes and habits. Some of the spec¬ 
ialists here considered have emphasized some aspects of the 
course; other specialists have emphasized other phases. Some 
specialists have denied that the social studies can achieve 
wonders. But all these specialists have proclaimed the necess¬ 
ity of directing the social studies courses into channels of 
social learnings that will make the child understand the soc¬ 
ial problems of our time and equip him with a desire and a 
facility for facing and solving the problems of his day. 

We have considered complex and detailed statements of 
objectives. These are too detailed and too unwieldy to use 
for the purposes of this essay. I have selected a simplified 

? 

statement of objectives in social studies that are subscribed 
to by the authorities we have examined. 

1. Basic facts must be learned. These facts must be organ¬ 
ized so as to promote their effective use in building 
generalizations. The facts will not be learned as an end 
but as a means to an end. The end will be a real under¬ 
standing of social life today. Facts alone are not enough 
Basically the curriculum is not subject matter but what 
the pupils do with or to content materials, 

2. Reasoning power and critical judgment must be allowed op¬ 
portunity for activity and growth to promote true under¬ 
standing of the modern world. The development of reason¬ 
ing requires a background of fundamental facts. Practice 
in judging requires that a choice be made between basic 
facts and inconsequential facts. 
















































. 







47 


3. The habit of independent study must become firmly in¬ 
grained. A knowledge of how to gain knowledge is very 
important. Good study habits must be ingrained perman¬ 
ently. 

4. Habits and skills in the handling of sources of informat¬ 
ion must be developed. Knowledge of how to study is 
necessary. Skill in analysis and in evaluation is essent 
ial. 

5. Desirable patterns of conduct based on essential attitude 
must be practiced. Fundamental here is respect for law. 

6. The student must develop a love of truth. 

7. Ideals of freedom, tolerance and patriotism to the cause 
of democracy, must be implanted. The ideal of particip¬ 
ating in the building of a better nation is essential. 

8. The idea of the human race as one vast co-operative unit 
should replace the idea of narrow nationalisms. The un¬ 
derstanding of the cultural 'growth of one 1 s homeland and 
a sane patriotism to that homeland will not destroy the 
desire to see world peoples living in harmony. 

9. All of these objectives must merge to provide opportunity 
for students to understand social realities of our day 
and to train students in a scientific temper of mind in 
order that in their day they will be able to solve the 
problems connected with the social relationships of man. 

This compilation of objectives reduces the detailed 
outlines that we have examined to a general statement of soc¬ 
ial studies objectives. For this general list I would make 

the following claims: 









' 


. 






■ 


. 









. 

* 




' 


' 










. 























48 


First, it is psychologically sound because it has been 
compiled from the writings of recognized authorities in the 
field of educational psychology. 

Second, it is pedagogically sound because it represents 
the views of recognized authorities in the practice of teach¬ 
ing. 

Third, it is practical and also possible, of attainment 
since it represents the ideas and practices of men of practic¬ 
al experience. These objectives have been attained by most 
forward-looking progressive teachers in many Idnds. 

It should be noted that objectives and methods are link¬ 
ed closely. Objectives on paper are of theoretical value only 
but objectives in practice comprise method. We therefore turn 
to a consideration of methods involving the implirnentation of 
the objectives we have enumerated. 

























•: 



























CHAPTER 111 


METHODS AND THE TEXT BOOK IN SOCIAL STUDIES 
The Weakness of the Textbook Method 

The first question we must now ask is: "What methods 
are we to practice in order to achieve the objectives we have 
outlined as fundamental to the true spirit of the course in 
social studies? 1 * 

My main experiments in regard to methods during the 
past few years have been made in connection with the use or 
lack of use of the official texts in the social studies. In 
my estimation no single factor is as dangerous to the ultimate 
success of any course in the social studies as the existence 
of an official text. I base this statement on experience in 
teaching the social studies. I find in examining the works of 
numerous authorities that they too have complaints to make 
against official text books in the social studies. 

I shall herewith enumerate my reasons for seeking an 
alternative to the use of an official textbook in social stud- 
i es. 

In the first place, much time, effort and money has been 
spent to develop a new course in the social studies. A new 
program, has given the Alberta schools an opportunity to supply 
.a new type of education in keeping with the objectives we have 
laid down. But new outlines alone do not give a new education. 
New methods are essential also. Under the former system of 
teaching the subjects that now compose the social studies 
course teachers and students found the ultimate end of the 
course to be the memorization of a number of facts. For that 


49 






' 























. 

■ 


















. 







condition I blame the formal nature of the official textbook. 

I know from experience that the textbook method of study will 
emasculate the new course in social studies and make very 
doubtful the reality of the advent of our much heralded new 
education. 

In Professor A.C. and D.H. Bining.I find support for 

my statement. In opposition to the formal use of textbooks 

in social studies these authors say: "Under the old memoriter 
system, the. chief objective was that the pupil should memor¬ 
ize a number of facts. All that was needed was a textbook 
that contained the factual material. The teacher assigned a 
certain number of pages to the pupil. The task of the. pupil 
was to memorize the facts presented on the pages assigned". 

At the present time, however, so far as the social studies 
are concerned, our aims and objectives center in the under¬ 
standing of facts^ events and movements and not in the memor¬ 
ization of them."- 1 - 

Stormzand and Lewis fear that the use of a textbook in 
social studies will result in the type of study characterist¬ 
ic of textbook methods. That type of study is a memorization 
of unrelated facts listed in encyclopedic style. They claim 
that the use of a textbook will limit the flexibility of the 
learner’s reading habits. Here is their charge against text¬ 
books in action: "The change from the common textbook recit¬ 
ation procedure to perspective reading for orientation and 
background purposes presents one of the most serious difficult¬ 
ies for both students and teachers. The fact that a textbook 
is used will tend to throw the students into the laborious, 
intensive study type of reading. It will be hard to induce 
them to use the more rapid, more superficial type of skimmimg 
helpful to the sensing of movements and outstanding important 
events and the disregard of massed detail which the typical 
textbook in the social studies usually attempts in its effort 
at cyclopedic completeness." 2 


1. Bining, A.C. and Bining, D.H., "Teaching the Social Studies 
in Secondary Schools", p. 183. 

2. Stormzand and Lewis, "Hew Methods in the Social Studies", 
p. 14. 























' 













- 































■ 










































. 















51 


The second charge I would level against the textbook 
is that when it is used as the only source or as the main 
source of information it has a strong tendency to develop in 
the minds of pupils and teachers the idea that it represents 
the total possible or at least necessary accumulation of 
knowledge in regard to the topics it describes. The text¬ 
book sets up an artificial barrier to the search for other in¬ 
formation necessary for a true understanding of the topic 
under consideration. Students in the social studies need 
access to a laboratory of information in the classroom. They 
must have also the opportunity of making contact with the 
world of affairs outside the classroom. The new course in 
social studies must repudiate the attempt of the text to set 
down its covers as artificial limits to the breadth and extent 
o f human knowledge. 

I find substantiation for this charge that the textbook 

limits available knowledge in the writings of Frederick and 

Sheats. I quote: M The social studies text cannot consistent¬ 
ly be only a story or collection of facts for pupils to learn, 
with a few ’activities’ appended to each section and ’selected 
references’ which are rarely used. To prevent sterile -memor¬ 
ization some other plan must be evolved. In social studies 
it is particularly important that pupils be given practice in 
utilizing the sources of information such as the daily press, 
the radio, the cinema, current periodicals, books, conversat¬ 
ion, and daily observation which normal adults do and should 
use. To insure reference to current conditions in the child’s 
own environment and to make certain that such references are 
real, the old, fixed textbook account must be abandoned. Too 
many teachers will continue to use the conventional book in 
the conventional way, starting with page one and getting to 
the last chapter late in the spring - regardless ............. 

In concluding this analysis of the traditional text as a teach 
ing instrument it can be said that it promotes the attitude 
’Here is a textbook: learn it’. The thing is unreal, imposed, 
final. Even ’good’ texts suffer this handicap. Somehow, some 










. 


















■ 

. 




. 


■ 




■ 


m m 










r 






■ 








52 


way, teaching materials must be perfected which will promote 
the attitude ’Here is a start, build your own text’."-^- 

p 

Dr. R.E. Swindler agrees^ that the textbook method is 
inadequate in teaching the social studies. He declares for 
one of the various possible methods of sending the student to 
the library rather than to the textbook for the information 
he needs. 

The third charge I would level at the textbook is that 
it does not allows full freedom, or indeed any freedom, to the 
problem solving method of approach to the topics in the social 
studies courses. Too often the textbook contains the actual 
cut and dried result of thinking rather than the material or 
plan that should be so organized as to encourage thinking on 
the part of the student. 

Year Book one of the John Dewey Society levels a sim¬ 
ilar charge against the thought-cramping effect of an official 
text. Year Book one urges that the textbook method conspires 
to destroy opportunity for discovery of problems. The text¬ 
book, by its restrictive tendencies, denies young people the 
opportunity for invigorating thought. It gives a cut-and-dried 
set of solutions so that students are not encouraged to find 
solutions of their own. Students are not given a chance to 
formulate their own conclusions or are they encouraged to or¬ 
ganize available knowledge into an independent and personal 
scheme. 

The authors of Year Book One of the John Dewey Society 

1. Frederick and Sheats, "Citizenship Education Through the 
Social Studies", pp. 165-167 

2. Swindler, Dr. R.E., "Social Studies Instruction", pp. 61-63. 









• ' 

, 

1 

_ 

. 

■ 












.... 










' 







, 


. . , : 





53 


substantiate my charges against the textbook thus: “There is 
in American education a curious hierarchy of mistrust of in¬ 
dependent thinking. Textbooks assume an inability on the part 
of the teacher to conduct his own teaching and to do his own 
thinking; teachers in turn mistrust the students* ability to 
learn, to inquire, and to think. These combined mistrusts 
only too often eventuate in an educational program which gives 
neither teacher nor student a chance. The major sequences of 
thought and inquiry are outlined, thus blocking independent 
quest. The process of learning begins not with questions 
emerging from the curiosities, interests, and needs of the 
particular group of students, but with assortments of knowledge 
and information brought together from altogether different 
points of view and for an altogether different purpose. This 
information, moreover, is presented in a preorganized form 
which challenges primarily memory, not thinking or judgment. 
Still further, all needed conclusions are drawn in advance and 
generalizations are states. All that is left for the student 
is to partake of the ready fare .. 

In praise of the problem solving method of approach in 

social studies Stormzand and Lewis listf these advantages. 

“The effective citizen is one who has learned how to solve new 

problems......... ....“ 

“The technique of problem-solving can be acquired more effect¬ 
ively by dealing with unsolved, vital current problems.“ 

“The use' of the problem method puts the teacher in a more 
scientific and open-minded attitude with reference to current 
political and economic issues that involve a strong partisan 
bias. The student remains free to develop his own conclus¬ 
ions. ..“ 

"The problem metbd has lofty social and moral values.“ 

The problem solving method of approach in the social 
studies is fundamental. It provides opportunity for critical 
discussion and Is opposed to blind, unthinking acceptance of 
ideas. It tests the validity of facts and denies a value to 
superstition. The processes of problem solving induce a flex- 


1. Kilpatrick, Wm.H., (Editor) “The Teacher and Society", 
pp. 103-104. 

2, Stormzand and Lewis, “New Methods in the Social Studies q 
pp. 71-75. 












ibility of mind that may one day direct mankind out of social 
stagnation and into the channels of a progressive social evol¬ 
ution. These educational and social values are denied their 
possible influence because the textbooks in the social studies 
seldom make provision for utilizing the problem solving tech¬ 
nique. 


To conclude this point I quote Professor Harold Rugg of 

Columbia University, ’’Even to the present day the work in the 
social studies has consisted too much of memoriter recitation 
from the contents of encyclopedic textbooks in history, geog¬ 
raphy, and civics ............ The very essence of the new 

course in social studies is a succession of pupil activities, 
dynamic and thought-provoking. .......... The course ....... 

constantly confronts the pupil with stimulating problems, in¬ 
sight into each of which is important for an adequate under¬ 
standing of the problems of the modern world."1 

To prove that this argument against the use of the text¬ 
book is valid I quote evidence by Professor Billings who con¬ 
demns the tendency of the textbook method to present ready 
made generalizations without giving the student an opportunity 

to draw his own conclusion. Professor Billings writes: "There 
is a second value to training in generalizing. It is a ped¬ 
agogical value. The rote memory school taught the children 
generalizations without taking them through the process of draw¬ 
ing them by induction from the concrete data upon which they 
were founded. In consequence, children learned words, not 
meanings. 

Fourthly, I claim that the textbook not only imposes 
on students the burden of memorizing non-essential facts at the 
expense of essential facts but that it does this to the utter 
disregard of understanding. Briefly, my contention here is that 


1. Rugg, Prof. Harold, "Changing Civilizations in the Modern 
World", p. 6. (Int.) 

2, Billings, Prof. Heal, "A Determination of Generalizations 
Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum", p. 45. 

































... ' . ..... 

. 

. 

















. 








*K 

. 





















55 


certain facts must still be retained permanently. But this 
permanency of retention can be far more assured when it is 
based on understanding. Too often textbooks contain a summary 
of information, too brief to permit of understanding by per¬ 
sons who'have not previously made contact with that informat- 
i on. 


In this viewpoint I find I am sustained by Billings: 

"This isolated and factual handling of social materials is 
part and parcel of that same point of view that has confused 
teachers and learners alike with artificial and academic dis¬ 
tinctions. It has resulted in slurring over the important 
interrelationships between these facts - the interrelation¬ 
ships without which no true understanding of the intricacies 

of modern life is conceivable .. Not because 

teachers do not want them to know, but because the textbooks 
they teach from do not tell them and they teach by the text. 
Facts are learned, instead of the things that facts stand for 
and that explain these facts - the broad, integrating relation 
ships of life.. 


Billinas continues his condemnation of the textbook or 


encyclopedic method of teaching social studies with these 
accusations: 

1. This method results in a lack of interest. 

2. This method results in a lack of learning. 

3. This method precludes the possibility of carry-over of 
learning to life situations. 

The fifth charge against the social studies textbook is 
that it stifles interest and thereby not only fails to encour¬ 
age activity but also deadens thought. Textbooks seldom have 
the essential abundance and variety of illustrations necessary 
to enliven the printed page. This lack of diagramatic descrip 
tion forces the child to rely on his memory rather than on his 
understanding to retain what he must for examination purposes. 


1. Billings, Prof. Neal, "A Determination of Generalizations 
Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum" pp. 13-14. 






































. 

■ 


, 




. . « » 










. 









« 


























Where illustrations aid understanding the student need not 
waste time memorizing words. Instead he can concentrate on 
retaining clear ideas. Since his mind need not be cluttered 
with a series of unrelated ideas he dares to take a genuine 
searching and speculative interest in real problems within the 
scope of his expanding interest. 

Year Book One of the John Dewey Society pursues the 
argument against text books by declaring 1 2 * that they cannot 
keep up with current thought. Textbooks are usually written 
by academic specialists who base their organization and mater¬ 
ial according to misconceived conceptions of practice. Text¬ 
books supply material in an inflexible arrangement. It inter¬ 
prets its facts and data. 

"Viewed in this light the textbook seems to be one of 
the greatest enemies not only of independent and individual 
learning, but also of the possibility of linking learning with 

life. 5 

The authors of "The Teacher and Society" conclude their 
condemnation of textbooks by blaming them for static education. 
Once a textbook has been selected the high cost of changing to 
another is used as an argument in favor of its retention. 

A final condemnation of text books is urged by Professor 

o 

Billings. Professor Billings emphasizes*'the, need for encourag¬ 
ing students to generalize. 

1. Kilpatrick, Wm.H., (Editor) "The Teacher and Society", 
pp. 105. 

2 , Billings, Prof. Neal, "A Determination of Generalizations 

Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum", p. 17. 



















. 

' 

■ 


i 






































































Billings suggest that training in thinking is the heart 
of the intellectual curriculum. This is so because life calls 
for a wide knowledge of basic meanings, the abundant use of 
generalizations. The tolerance and understanding essential to 
good citizenship should arise out of training in' thinking. 

Perhaps the most important form of the thought process 
is that of drawing and using generalizations, the process of 
seeing relationships and of using these statements of relation¬ 
ship in the solution of problems. 

And yet the practice of generalizing is almost prohib¬ 
ited by the factual outlines contained in textbooks. We have 
previously quoted* 5 ' Professor Billings on this point. 

There is much evidence against the use of a formal text¬ 
book in social studies. Where ideal conditions regarding lib¬ 
rary facilities exist it is quite possible that it would be 
desirable to discard the text completely. I have not done this, 
however. An approved text has some features that are useful 
in the social studies classes. An example of this usefulness 
is seen in the present series of guide books in the social 
studies for Alberta. Here we have textbooks that do little 
more than expand the outline of the social studies as printed 
in the course of studies. This type of textbook is of consid¬ 
erable value in many schools but of the mast value where the 
teacher may not have the time, the training or the inclination 
to plan a detailed outline based on the statement of the social 

1, Billings, Prof, Neal, M A Determination of Generalizations 
Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum", p. 13. 














' 






. 

















* 




■ 















studies in the Alberta course. 

The Alberta textbook in grade nine social studies is 
useful for providing the guide for a generalized introductory 
survey of each unit before group work is undertaken. 

We have criticized the textbook for the weaknesses it 
brings to the course in social studies. It is only fair to 
state that responsible educationists admit the textbook has 
merited the criticisms made of it. But it fulfills a valuable 
function if used properly. Some of these educationists see 
positive advantages to be gained from the use of textbooks. 

4 

Storrnzand and Lewis defend certain aspects of the text¬ 
book thus: "In considering the values and uses of textbooks 
there is no intention to defend textbook teaching as such. The 
traditional slavish use of a textbook for purposes of daily 
assignments and oral recitation has merited the criticisms 
that have been heaped upon it by progressive teachers and sup¬ 
ervisors. " 

However, the authors proceed, ........ the complete 

rejection of the textbook is considered, an unwise extreme, 
which will make it difficult, if not impossible, for most 
teachers to make even an experimental beginning with any of 
the progressive plans.' 1 * 

And also, "The textbook in all the social sciences is 
still the most convenient and best organized condensed summary 
of available fundamental information. It Is still the one 
most useful book for giving an introductory survey for per¬ 
spective on any topic or unit in history, geography or civics. 
Textbooks may have the disadvantage of excessive detail, but, 
in general, they are still the best adaptations in vocabulary 
and style that we have for the immature. 

In view 7 of this evidence favoring the textbook and in 
view of our own experiences what position shall we allow the 
textbook in our social studies? I, personally, have not dis- 


1, Storrnzand and Lewis, "New Methods in the Social Studies", 

pp. 158-159. 








. 




. 









'■■r> 








. 



. 















59 


carded the text; neither have I placed it in a position to 
dominate the information or the methods in social studies. Tn 
my opinion the textbook in social studies should be placed 
among the reference books in social studies as one among equals. 
No pupil would be compelled or even allowed to have the offic¬ 
ial textbook as a part of his personal social studies equipment. 
Among reference books the text, in my opinion, can serve a use¬ 
ful purpose in making available a detailed trend of the social 
studies as more compactly outlined in the course of studies. 

In my opinion the textbook can be prsed thus to advantage. If 
its existence means that it is going to promote the old method 
of memoriter recitation teaching, then I should prefer to see 
the textbook abolished completely. However the use of a text¬ 
book need not mean its abuse. The suggestions I offer here¬ 
after regarding materials and methods in social studies are 
framed in the belief that the social studies textbook will be 
used as herein outlined and not as the dominating factor in 


the method and material of social studies teaching. 

An Alternative to the Textbook 
At this point we are faced with the need of finding a 
means of directing the management of the social studies.program 
in such a manner as to avoid the errors we have noted as being 
too prevalent where the textbook is dominant. We must also 
find a means of implimenting the social studies program whic..: 


will put into practice the advantages gained by the methods 
previously agreed upon as fundamental to the true sp^xu 
social studies objectives. 

















’ 

. 
















- 
























60 




First, then, I cannot agree with- those educationists 
who would place the course of studies squarely before the teach 
er with instructions to go on from that point as best he could. 
That would be an extreme just as detrimental to the welfare of 
education as the too rigid use of the textbook has been in the 
past. In the hands of an expert in his fully equipped labor¬ 
atory the outline in the course of studies might suffice. If 
he so willed he could outline his own course as I have done. 
Here, however, we must develop a method that will permit of a 
reasonable attainment in all schools and also leave latitude 
for modification of techniques of teaching and of materials by 
those who have the will and the time to modify the course in 
social studies to suit their own situation. 

For this viewpoint I can cite numerous authorities. 
Stormzand and Lewis state the ill-affects likely to follow un¬ 
planned instruction in the social studies. r, One of the reas¬ 
onable criticisms that have been made of the problem, activity, 
unit, or integration programs is the lack of balance in the 
selection and study of materials by pupils, especially when 
the child-centered interest is allowed to have free sway in 
determining the reading selections.” Later the authorities 

return to a similar attack when they claim that, ”0ne of the 
dangers of a transition to child-centered work, either when 
voluntarily undertaken by enthusiasts or when unwillingly fol¬ 
lowed under the supervision of administrative direction, is 
the planlessness of the work. Teachers often assume that care¬ 
ful planning is unnecessary, inadvisable or impossible in con¬ 
nection with the new methods of instruction. Experience with 
such planless experimentation will soon convince any teacher 
of the fallacy of such an assumption. Blind or unpremeditated 
ventures of this sort usually result in despairing or disgust¬ 
ed condemnation of the whole progressive movement. Such un¬ 
fortunate results can be avoided by intelligent, systematic 
planning for pupil guidance and testing in the spirit and with 
the devices evolved in a typical subject workbook, 15 


1. Stormzand and Lewis, 
pp. 38-39. 


'•New Methods in the Social Studies” 





























- 

' 










■ 





. 





. 




















61 


The same authors advance the idea that one splendid 

method of curriculum revision is to expand the course into 

study guides in order that teachers may more easily understand 

what is expected of them regarding methods in social studies. 

In this connection Stormzand and Lewis say, "In curriculum 
revisions in a school system where it is considered advisable 
to lead a number of teachers out of subject-minded attitude 
to an experimental approach toward the progressive, child- 
centred procedure, one of the most feasible means of revision- 
may lie in the construction of study guides that will make 
the transition easier for those teachers who have not acquired 
the newer philosophy and who may have difficulty in laying 
aside their subject-minded bias or their habit of reliance on 
textbook materials in their instruction."1 

The evidence of thes4 experts fortifies our personal 
experience that there is a' recognized need for such an expan¬ 
sion of the social studies outline in the course of studies as 
will enable the average teacher to manage her social studies 
classes in the spirit of the new education. 

To meet this need I announce the following summary of 
such a detailed course. Hereafter, I shall bring the opinion 
of eminent educational authorities to substantiate the plan I 


now enunciate, 

(1) The total course is to be stated as a series of problem 
units. Under the plan here stated each problem is subdivided 
into subsidiary topics which contribute toward an understanding 
of the total problem. 

(2) An adequate but not inalterable or inflexible list of 
references is included under each sub-topic. These are chosen 
in the first place from a small select group of books. General 


references are listed also. 


1, Stormzand and Lewis, "r^ew 
p. 31. 


Methods in the Social 


Studies", 







' 

. 




































CD 

O Cj 


(3) In most cases exact page references are supplied for 
the various books listed as containing materials essential to 
the solution of the problem. 

(4) Each main problem is followed by workbook exercises and 
tests in order that students may gauge their own progress as 
occasion may warrant. 

(5) The Alberta course in the social studies is re-arranged 
to provide a more natural sequence. 

I shall now undertake a defense of each phase of this 

plan. 

1. The course in social studies is arranged.in units of work 
subdivided as a series of problems. Each problem is subdivid¬ 
ed into a series of topics each of which comprises a minor 
problem. All of these minor problems contribute to the sol¬ 
ution of the main problem. For example, in the Alberta course 
in grade nine social studies one main problem is ’’How Certain 
World Powers are Dealing with their Post War Problems.” In the 
Alberta course a general survey of necessary informational mat¬ 
erial is included under the statement of the main problem. I 
have listed this material as problem sub-topics contributing 
to the solution of the main problem. I should like to observe 
here that I have not necessarily framed these sub-topics in . 
question form. The mere framing of a topic as a question does 
not make of it a problem, 

I find here that 1 am in agreement with Stormzand and 
Lewis^- who introduce their chapter on the problem method of 


Stormzand and Lewis, 
p. 4 4. 


”New Methods in the Social Studies”, 


1 . 




































■ 





























oo 


approach by declaring that to substitute questions for topics 
adds a novelty to the course but does not provide an alter¬ 
native to the typical textbook. 

Under our method the pupil is challenged to think and 
search and relate social facts that are understood by him in¬ 
stead of blindly learning them for a testing exercise. The 
teacher will put less emphasis on reproductions of facts from 
memorization. The recitation is abandoned as a means of test¬ 
ing textbook fact-learning. 

The problems should not be taken from the adult world. 
They should deal with personal, individual and real problems 
of the student. Many of these problems will originate in his 
current reading. We must expect the student to have serious 
curiosities and real interests in the social environment. 

I shall here introduce evidence to support the proposit¬ 
ion that a topical statement of the social studies course in 
problem form as a method of dealing -with this subject has the 
approval of recognized authorities. 

Dr. Swindler quotes Professor E.E. Windes, Supervisor 
of Secondary Schools in Albemarle County, to prove that this 
type of topical outline: 

a. permits individual effort 

b. free the teacher for individual supervision 

c. is a psychologically correct organization 

d. is the best type - of curriculum revision. 

Professor Windes is thus quoted: i! The unit assignment 
plan as we are using .it has all the inherent advantages of. the 
segregated group plan and avoids all errors of classification. 




. 















' 


















. 




‘ 












. 











. 









It makes it possible for any pupil to master any unit assign¬ 
ment on the level planned for pupils of low, average, or sup¬ 
erior ability ." 

"The plan requires written specifications within a unit 

of teaching for mastery at three levels of difficulty. 

Since the assignment is made in written form in advance for 
the entire unit, which may involve three to six weeks’ work, 
and contains written guides to study, the teacher is free after 
the first presentation of the unit to the group to give his 
time to the direction of individual pupils who work through 
the assignment at their own rate ,. .." 

M The general aims of the curriculum maker are to sub¬ 
stitute a psychological organization of subject matter for 
traditional logical organization, and to select subject matter 
of greater social utility as a substitute for that which has 
been woven into the curriculum for the purposes of general 
discipline or logical completeness without reference to util¬ 
ity. Psychological organization implies selection and organ¬ 
ization with reference to the learning needs, interests, abil¬ 
ities and attitudes of a particular pupil or pupil group .. 

"Our concern is to put before the pupil a guide to study 
that he may direct his activities towards the essential learn¬ 
ing goals with greatest possible economy of effort and time..., 

it 


"We regard the unit assignment plan as ........... pro¬ 
bably the best available means of curriculum improvement. 

Frederick and Sheats make these claims for the setting 
of a series of problems or activities: 

1. these problem topics act as guides. 

2, they give the group opportunity for analysis. 

3. they urge pupil activity. 

4, they encourage independence. 

This is what Frederick and Sheats have to say, "The 
project, contract and discussion methods may all be used for 
thinking practice. By and large however, some adaptation of 
the laboratory plan wherein much of the work is done in school 
and guided by carefully set exercises or activities will be 
found the most convenient and useful of all possible class 
procedures. The picture is of a group of pupils at worn in¬ 
dividually and collectively trying to solve or answer problems 


1. Swindler, Dr. R.E., "Social Studies Instruction", pp. 182- 
183. 


































. 

. 



























' 
























■ 






























which they themselves have helped to set. The teacher acts 
as a guide ? helper, and source of encouragement. On occasion 
groups or individuals bring the product of their labor to the 
whole class for criticsm and analysis.”1 

Frederick and Sheats lay down two requirements for 
study by the unit outline method 5 "Exercises for thinking prac¬ 
tice must be new or novel in the sense that the answer cannot 
be obtained directly by reading, or asking or looking.” 

'•Units for thinking practice must be such that facts 
are obtainable by the pupils largely as the result of their 
own efforts.” 

In regard to thd psychological necessity for dividing 

the course in social studies into significant problem aspects 

Dr. Bining says, ”We might emphasize that the division of a 
course into its significant aspects, learge enough to be sign¬ 
ificant and small enough to be seen as a whole, is a step in 
the right direction in the teaching of the social studies. The 
human mind is too limited to grasp the significance of a maze 
of factual material, especially if unrelated. The relation¬ 
ships must be presented one with the other. This is the only 
way the social studies can fulfill their function of enabling 
youth to understand the world in which he lives ,” 2 

For my plan to provide study outlines containing names 
of reference books for individual and group use in the social 
studies I find a statement of support from Stormzand and Lewis. 

In chapter two the authors discuss types of workbooks. 

They write, ”In fact the best type of workbook in the social 
sciences as well as in any other content subject, should frank¬ 
ly be a study guide as well as a testing device. Teachers 
should use any workbook in the social studies largely for the 
purposes of study guidance. Pupils hould be allowed to have 
their copy of the workbook test to lead them in their reading 
and they should be instructed in the thoughtful use of such 


1. Frederick and Sheats, '’Citizenship -jClu^ 
Social Studies”, p. 62. 


Bining, Dr. A.C., 
ary Schools 1 , PP» 


"Teaching 

198-199. 


Social 


at ion Through the 
Studies in the Second' 



















. 















. 

. 






■ 

- 




















* 

• - 









study guide tests. ... Another element likely to be 

given considerable development in future workbooks in the soc¬ 
ial studies is the guidance in collateral reading already found 
in some of the more ambitious plans for correlation and integ¬ 
ration or in the more usable plans of unit organization."! 

The two educationists then declare that workbooks as 
guides to collateral reading may correct some of the errors of 
organization in progressive practices. 

The second advantage that I have found in the practice 
of listing the names of books in which the necessary informat¬ 
ion to attack a sub-topic may be found is that it saves time* 

I know that there is a value in allowing the child to enjoy the 
self-activity involved in finding his own reference. There is, 
however, a limit to the time that may be spent profitably in 
this manner. To send the student to find reference material in 
a variety of books pre-supposes an intimate knowledge of books 
on his part. The method here outlined will introduce the child 
to a reasonable number of reference books. Later, he will know 
where to go to find information on topics without having source 
books listed for him. Until he acquires the necessary intimacy 
with a wide number of titles of books, and the type of infor¬ 
mation contained in each, economy of time demands that the pup¬ 
il be given a list of references for his topic. 

In this attitude I am supported by the opinion of Dr. 

Bining who writes, "if there is much labor or difficulty in 
obtaining books, pupils are prone to ignore them unless there 
is some outward compulsion. If pupils see the need of consult¬ 
ing a reference or of looking up an important point, they will 
probably,,--do so if the means are at hand. "2 


1, Stormzand and Lewis, "Hew Methods in the Social Studies- , 
Chapter 11. 

2, Bining, Dr, A.C., "Teaching the Social Studies in Secondary 
Schools", p. 170. 






... * 













' 

. 

- 

. 


















. 

V 
















' 






■ 















. 

, 













67 


The third argument I advance in favor of the proposit¬ 
ion that the teacher or some other competent authority should 
outline for the pupil possible reference material is that the 
pupil may not be competent to judge discriminately and from 
an educational viewpoint the best'material to choose. I do 
not subscribe to the educational notion that the teacher must 
surrender all leadership in the classroom. I believe there is 
much need for teacher control and direction in classroom work. 

I grant child interests need to be exploited to the greatest 
possible extent but I agree with the Virginia State Committee 
of 1933, which urged that child interest is not the only fac¬ 
tor to consider in the arranging of a social studies program. 

M We accept two fundamental elements or factors as basic to a 
sound philosophy of curriculum building in social science on 
this level. These basic factors are: (1) the child and his 
interests; (2) the conditions, values and needs of the dem¬ 
ocratic social order ......... That is to say, this com¬ 
mittee is not willing to set up child interest alone as the 
major concern of the curriculum builder of social studies on 
the secondary school level. For adolescents, considering the 
present-day insistent problems, issues, needs, and maladjust¬ 
ments in our democratic society, social needs certainly must 
be considered paramount."1 

Professor Billings also demands that the actual outlin¬ 
ing of the course in social studies be not left to the dis¬ 
cretion of pupil minds. He says, n Those who. assume that child¬ 
rens interests should be the sole criterion of curriculum con¬ 
tent seem to believe that there is a great divergence between 
child, and adult interests. There does not seem to be any real 
foundation for this belief.......... The. activities and prob¬ 
lems that should form the basis of the course ......... . are 

those that are concerning both the most advanced adults and 
the most advanced children,” 1 2 


1. Swindler, Dr, R.F., "Social Studies Instruction" p. 47. 

2. Billings, Prof. Heal, "A Determination of Generalizations 
Basic to the Social Studies Curriculum", p. 269. 

















. 

' 




















- 


• 


' 


. 


- 




. . 




















, 








. 






. 





68 


The second phase of my suggested treatment of the soc¬ 
ial studies course, namely,'that names of reference books 
should be included under each sub-topic, I now defend. 

In the first place I claim that this method will impress 
the child with the advantages of using the library as an educ¬ 
ational instrument. The student does not develop a textbook 
complex under this method. Practice trains him to seek infor¬ 
mation in his library just^as naturally as he might turn the 
pages of his textbook to find information he knew to be there. 

Dr. Swindler quotes the Fourth Year Book of the Depart¬ 
ment of Superintendence of the National Education Association 
to prove the merits of persuading children to form the library 

habit in school: "The single text-book is no longer consider¬ 
ed adequate to the needs of the growing child. Hie problem- 
project plan, the committee research and report method, the 
individual contribution idea, all demand the opportunities 
afforded by a well equipped library. Here the child should be 
able to find data for his special assignment, to work with 
others on committee reports, to find collateral reading that 
will broaden his knowledge .......... As a result of using 

the library, children come to realize that reading is a normal 
habit which affords much pleasure, gives oil valuable informat¬ 
ion, and provides a most worthy use for leisure time. They 
come to realize* that knowledge is not divided into subjects; 
that a library is the natural place to go for information, and 
that a public library is a community necessity. In using the 
library, skills, habits and appreciations are developed that 
will be of lifelong value. 

I now offer a defence of the idea that in many cases it 
is wise to include the exact page references to which a stud¬ 
ent may turn for information. It can be ass d, reasonably, 
that the teacher will have a wide range of experience with 
books. He will turn readily to the exact portion of the refer- 


1. Swindler, R.E., "Social Studies Instruction", pp. 61-63. 
























- 

' 











■ 

■ 

‘ 


















69 


ence book required for a particular topic. The student will 
not, at the grade nine level, have acquired this facility. To 
turn the student into a strange reference book to find the two 
or three page article he requires may consume more time than 
can be justified educationally, especially where the indexing 
has been poorly arranged. This habit of thumbing rapidly 
through a text to find what is required will come in time to 
the student who is daily using an efficient means of finding 
material. It can be said also that the student loses nothing 
in independence hereby because he is still perfectly free, in¬ 
deed, he is invited to find new reference material of his own 
to substantiate the proposition he is defending. The exact 
listing of page references as is given in my outline ensures 
that the student will have at his disposal one possible source 
of reference material. He may add to this and thereby acquire 
whatever measure of independence may come to him through the 
habit of personal search. Certainly there is far more to urge 
him to such a procedure under our outline or problem method of 
approach than there is working under the restrictions toward 
factual memorization imposed by a textbook. 

I find support for this method of listing exact page 

numbers for the references concerned from Dr. Bining. I quote: 

VIt is certain that the teacher should not have his class lab- 
lab or iously searchinh out minor details that he can easily 
give. How much the teacher wall assist the class in finding 
outside material is also a question that the teacher must de¬ 
cide. With the younger classes he may have to be rather spec¬ 
ific in his references. Pages will have to be assigned and 
material specifically pointed out ........... One.guiding 

principle must be kept in mind : the means of solving the pro- 
lem must not be vague to the pupil or much of the value of the 









. 




' 


























■ 











■ 










- 

■ 

* 








■ 




70 

procedure will be lost to the pupil. 

Finally, I have included a work book with the general 
outline of topics. This need not be considered as a separate 
entity. The whole scheme involved here may not differ greatly 
from the various types of problem workbooks which now accompany 
some newer types of texts. Or. Harold Rugg of Columbia Univer¬ 
sity has devised such a scheme of textbooks and workbooks. 

When we include a workbook with—out topical outline the combin¬ 
ation of the two might be considered as a double-barrelled work¬ 
book activity. Working individually or in groups the students 
may for all practical purposes find themselves working on top¬ 
ical problems that closely approximate one type of workbook 
exercise and then later they may find themselves working on a 
second type of workbook material designed to put into practice 
or test what they have learned while working with the topical 
problems. 

For the workbook aspect of my suggested plan I can quote 

Dr, Bining favorably. M The activities provided in manual or 
workbook are generally intended to be carried out under the 
plan of supervised study or laboratory procedure. They include 
required and suggested readings, problems, exercises, questions, 
map making, graph preparing, and work of a similar nature. These 
ready-made procedures may prove suggestive to the teacher and 
beneficial to the work of the pupil^in the laboratory. However, 
it must be borne in mind that the best results of teaching 
cannot be obtained by following slavishly the directions of a 
manual o r workb o ok."^ 

Here, I must state that in the double-barrelled work¬ 
book material I have presented there is no attempt to limit 
the constructive imagination of the student. The problem units 


1. Bining, Dr. A.C., “Teaching Social Studies in the Secondary 
School", p. 114. 

2. Ibid. p. 175. 







' 




* 

















' 




. 

* 




















■ 

. 

. 


. 

















71 


outline the material of the course of studies. But having ar¬ 
ranged this material in a psychological sequence we have left 
the student absolutely responsible for devising and evaluating 
and choosing the vital means whereby he will illustrate, demon¬ 
strate and make as nearly concrete as practicable the factual 
material he acquires through reading. 

Our outline may seem to favor the accumulation of pure¬ 
ly factual material. This is not our intention. It will be 
the duty of the student to analyze, and organize and illustrate 
in an interesting manner the information that he gathers in 
order that he and his group members may understand the meaning 
of the facts gathered and therefore retain vital information 
without resorting to the crude and temporary learning method 
of pure memorization. 

The activity involved in the illustrating and depicting 
of information permits the student of social studies all necess¬ 
ary latitude for freedom, planning and activity demanded by 
progressive educationists# After ally an experienced student 
.may not know what units or facts should compose the curriculum 


and it is a perversion of recent educational trends to expect 
this of him. How r ever, once specialists have decided what basic 
units the student should learn then it is entirely dependent 
upon the capacities, the industry, the ingenuity of the stud¬ 
ent as to how much real learning takes place. In other words 
we contend that teachers and other specialists should outline 
the units that,from their knowledge of child psychology, they 
believe students of a certain mental age can master ; and- from 










■ 

' 
















; 


I 

■ 













l 





. 


■ 








72 


their knowledge of sociology they believe that he needs to have. 
Once a course thus grounded in sound psychological and socio¬ 
logical practice has been established, the full powers of the 
student can be directed into activities of his own choosing 
that will be in accordance with the fundamental principles of 
progressive education and yet ensure that the student will not 
be an "educated cad". 

After this procedure and resulting activity based on 
part one of each unit has been completed the student may turn 
to part two of the workbook material to test his comprehension. 
Tf he fails to achieve required standards his technique and 
thoroughness will need checking. The workbook material includ¬ 
ed must never become mere busy work. 

Dr. Harold Rugg favors the introduction of a workbook 

and he herewith describes the proper use of it. "Experience 
teaches the value of a planned program of work. Skilful teach¬ 
ers have learned that only by careful planning can the desired 
outcomes be achieved in the social studies. Lack of plan is 
almost sure to guarantee a chaotic organization in the minds 
of the pupils. Believing, therefore, that the teacher will 
welcome a comprehensive and systematic plan of activities, the 
Pupil’s Workbook has been prepared. This plan has not been 
set up in the expectation that every class or every pupil shall 
engage in each activity suggested.. The aim of the authors is 
to provide the teacher and his pupils with a varied and stim¬ 
ulating list of things to do ........... These suggested act¬ 
ivities are not to be slavishly followed by the teacher....... 1,1 


Finally, I shall undertake to justify the re-arrangement 
of the problem topics in the Alberta social studies course for 
grade nine. The plan calls for the re-arrangement of the six 
main problems of the course in an order that will hold the at¬ 
tention of "the students from the first day and throughout the 
course. In a recent -survey of the preferences of members of 


1. Rugg, Dr. Harold, "Teacher’s Guide", p. 


27 . 












' 















. 






■ 
















. 






















. 





my class I discovered that thirty out of the forty students 
present nominated the problem "How certain World Powers are 
dealing with their Post-War Problems" as the most interesting 
of the grade nine social studies units. While I do not claim 
this is conclusive evidence supporting my theory I do know 
that it corresponds to the experience I have had in teaching 
all of the units. It is not only the question of student pre¬ 
ference that has urged me to deal with problem six first, but 
also the consideration that once this problem has been cover¬ 
ed the information gained may be used as a knowledge background 
for the balance of the course. 

And so the course as here outlined would place problem 
VI first in an attempt to set up the problem. 

(1) How certain World Powers are dealing with their Post- 
War problems. 

This would establish the idea of the problem as being 
two-fold and the pupils would see war and poverty as the twin 
menaces to man. 

Next on the list, problem one, as in the course of stud¬ 
ies, would be taken with the view to raising the question: Are 
these problems inflicted on man by nature’s inherent scheme or 
is man himself responsible for their creation? 

(2) How the Environment Affects Living. 

Problems II and IV are investigated at this time to show 
how industrialism has changed the face of the world. This will 
show man at his best, creating new comforts of living. I urge 
the inclusion of these two problems at this point because it 
seems to me to be a psychologically correct arrangement ox the 














- 








■ 




. 











‘ 

' 
















74 


course to have the students study man’s use of nature’s abun¬ 
dance immediately after they have reviewed the location of 
that abundance. 

(3) Kow Science Affects Living. 

(4) Row Industrialism is Revolutionizing Home and Community 
Life. 

The next problem is that of democracy. "Has democracy 
proved more efficient in approaching world problems than the 
opposite form of government?" is the spirit in which this pro¬ 
blem can be initiated. 

(5) How 7 Britain and Canada have developed a System of Dem¬ 
ocratic Government. 

And finally, we would turn to investigate the main crux 
of all our problems in problem three. 

(6) How Modern Industrialized Nations Produce and Distribute 
Goods. 

And now, if we dare, the next problem. 

(7) What about the future? 

Why should we re-arrange the topics? The first reason 

✓ 

is that for the child to know the main problems of the present 
world enables him to search for a solution of those problems 
in his study of the balance of the course. By means of this 
technique the t course becomes a living reality with a real goal: 
to understand and to solve our problems. 

A second reason for the re-arrangement of the course 
lies in the great premium it puts on current events. Many pup¬ 
ils arrive at the adolescent stage of life with little interest 
in political, social and economic events. A discussion of event 




































. 

. 

.. . ' - 

























. 























75 


and personalities in the war and post-war world, as included 
in problem six, will give most pupils a real interest in the 
current events of the period. 

A third reason for the re-arrangement is this: to drive 
directly into problem one reminds one.of the old system of 
teaching something just because it was on the course. Indeed, 
the new' student may have been subjected to such a method. 
Problem one in the course of studies, as we have discovered in 
our classes, can be handled more clearly as a social problem 
if it follows six, in the spirit of: “Well there is our prob¬ 
lem. Is that problem man-made or did nature impose it on man¬ 
kind? " 

A final reason for the re-arrangement lies in the amount 
of biography which can be introduced in problem VI to enliven 
the grade nine course in social studies. Many of the person¬ 
alities live today. Much material for discussion is available. 
A spirit of discussion and debate may be infused at the very 
beginning of the course, a spirit and a practice which can be 
transferred to the balance of the course. 

























- 























. 














CHAPTER IV 


THE SOCIAL STUDIES LABORATORY 


Vi/hat is a social studies laboratory? We have an author¬ 


itative answer from Dr. E.B. Wesley. “The laboratory method 
seems to have grown out of the directed-study plan, for. the 
pupils naturally needed materials with which to work. So the 
laboratory method places primary emphasis upon equipment and 
its use. Of course, the equipment is subsidiary, but it fur¬ 
nishes the distinguishing characteristic of the method. The 
term was borrowed from the sciences, and perhaps carries a 
false connotation of objectivity and tractability. While the 
method does not bar the use of the library, it pre-supposes 
a well-equipped room in which the students have access to books, 
magazines, maps, pictures, drawing and construction material, 
a radio and all types of equipment and supplies that will pro¬ 
mote better work. ;! ^- 


A social studies laboratory 


is not as difficult or as 


costly to establish as the name would seem to imply. A very 
complete and satisfactory laboratory may be planned and com¬ 
pleted by the social studies classes of any school working 
over a period of two or three years. 

The building of a social studies laboratory can serve 


to relate child activities 


to real life work. 


Paul R. Hanna of Stanford University has outlined basic 

.considerations in the formulation of a true social education. 

“The youth who participate in a project must sense its social 

significance .. Youth must have a part in planning 

the project. Youth must have some spotting 

chance of carrying the project proposed through to more or 
less successful conclusion, .............. Youth must accept 

the responsibility for success or failure of the project . 

, Youth must actually grow in total personality as a 

result of the work undertaken."2 


1. Lesley, Dr. E.B., “Teaching the Social Studies' 1 2 , p. 545. 

2. Hanna, Paul R. , “Youth Serves the Community”, pp. .35-38 


76 


















. 
















l'UL 














! ^ 

















































eqi 


(I 


a social studies laboratory provides an opportunity fop o 
jective educational ppocedupes that achieve the desirable 


goals outlined by Ppofessop Hanna. Imagination, enepgy, re 
soupcefulness ape mope essential to the successful conclusi 
of this project than is money. Let us here consider a plan 
fop arranging a social studies laboratory. 



SOCIAL STUDIES LABORATORY, 
RIDEAU SCHOOL, CALGARY. 























78 


A Library in the Social Studies Laboratory 

The library must contain interesting books. I have 
appended to this thesis a list of essential library books^for 
the social studies laboratory. Some of these books will be 
available in the school library. In the main I have found it 
far more successful to have a room library for social studies. 
It vdll be obvious that most school boards will refuse to 
supply each teacher of the social studies with a room library. 
However, this lack need not bar the way to effective social 
studies. The pupils can build up their own library. 

One method we used is the following: Warn students in 
the spring not to purchase the official textbook. On the open¬ 
ing day of school collect from each student the price he would 
have to pay for a textbook. When the money has been collected 
it may be used to purchase reference books - one of which may 
be the present official text. If an order is obtained from 
the chairman of the School Board a substantial discount may be 
.obtained by ordering the books .through the Department of Educ¬ 
ation. If this practice is pursued for two or three years, 
the reference library Mil develop adequately even in a rural 
school. While such a library is being accumulated care should 
be taken to order in the first instance books most represent¬ 
ative of the course and ones which cover it most thoroughly. 

This plan need not be confined to Grade ’IX alone. Grades seven, 
eight and nine can .pool their funds to provide a common refer¬ 
ence library. 


1 Appendix 


























































■ 



• 













. 






V, 













79 


Frederick and Sheats declare this to be a feasable plan: 
"Many schools now require the student to buy his own textbook. 
Instead the student should pay his fee into the departmental 
treasury from which purchase would be made as needed. nl 

We have added to the number of books in our library by 
letting the class plan and execute various projects to raise 
money. They have put on shows and staged candy sales, even 
raffles, to collect money to purchase more.books. 

The library will need magazines. We have found that 
magazines provide a substantial type of social studies mater¬ 
ial not found in daily papers. Magazine articles contain a 
summary of the news of the week rather than the sensational 
headlines of the daily paper. Magazines usually contain dis¬ 
cussions of opinions regarding the news. This provides thought 
provoking substance for the students in social studies to con¬ 
sider. 


In this view of the relative merits of magazines and 

daily peepers I find that I am sustained by Stormzand and Levis 

•thus: "The daily from a near-by large city, which may be access¬ 
ible to most studentshas a corresponding objection. Too 
much of the news in metropolitan papers deals at length with 
the city’s crime and scandal that has only an ephemeral inter¬ 
est and probably too often, in yellow journal excesses, a de¬ 
leterious effect on the interests and character of yo;uth, Be¬ 
cause of its sensational nature, as provoked by journalistic 
competition, it may at least be charged that the average high 
school student will be wasting much of his time in going through 
such a paper and will acquire the greatly distorted journal¬ 
istic perspective of what news is really important."2 


1. Frederick and Sheats, "Citizenship Education Through the 
Social Studies", p. 198. 

2. Stormzand and Lewis, "New Methods in the Social Studies',' 
pp. 56-58. 














. 

' 

. 




■ 


. 



















, 

. 















These authors do not completely condemn the daily pape 
They find in its feature columns and editorials, even in its 
crime sheet, material essential to social studies. 

Stormzand and Lewis prefer magazines to daily papers 
for use in the social studies class because they lack object¬ 
ionable crime features. Magazines summarize daily news in 
such a way as to avoid inconsequential details. The weakness 
of magazines is that they do not report local and provincial 
events. 









































81 


We have experienced little difficulty in securing essent 
ial magazines. We made a simple request that students under¬ 
take to supply our social studies room with useful magazines. 
Together we compiled a list of magazines,we considered useful 
in social studies classes. That list is appsnded hereto .( t 
To stimulate clocss interest in bringing the magazines, a cred¬ 
it of five marks was allotted to each student who brought one 
magazine regularly throughout the month* Soon we had accumul¬ 
ated over one thousand valuable magazines. Groups of students 
searched the magazines for topics of social studies interest. 
The name of each such article was listed on the outer cover 
of the magazine before it was filed away in a cabinet under 
such headings as biography, economics, social problems, pro¬ 
cesses, minerals, manufacturing etc. Whenever students require 
additional information regarding their topics they are at lib¬ 
erty to search in magazines for it* 

To stimulate interest in current events we have adopt¬ 
ed the policy of using one period per week for reading, dis¬ 
cussing, evaluating reporting on magazine articles. The stud¬ 
ents are permitted to choose their own article, provided it 
will have a bearing on some social studies topic taken or to 
be taken during the year. A rapid check is made to ensure that 
the article chosen is of social studies value. We have noted 
that suspicious teachers can damage the practice of using mag¬ 
azines in school by casting aspersions on their use with, "all 
they do is look at the pictures". By mutual consent and to 
preserve our privilege of using magazines , we have agrees to 


1 Appendix 2. 

















' 



































































. 



























test for understanding and factual knowledge about one week 
after the article is studied. Interest in current events is 
growing rapidly. 

Year Book I of the John Dewey Society supports the use 

s 

of magazines in the social studies laboratory thus: "A recog¬ 
nition of the shortcomings of the textbook raises the question 
of other materials. Much more adaptable to current demands 
are brief pamphlets and magazines which organize the facts 
around single topics. Probably the greatest need at present 
is for abundant source materials organized flexibly enough to 
provide for the variety of needs of individual students and 
for varieties of curriculum organization. 

A third useful source of social studies information is 
found in the great number of stories of industrial processes 
supplied by manufacturers of consumers’ goods. An extended 
list of sources of these pamphlets is appended hereto.^ In 
the fact that these materials are so readily available we 
found opportunity for class co-operation in the project of 
equipping our social studies laboratory. Each member of four 
classes in social studies donated a two cent postcard with the 
understanding that it would be used to mail a request for a 
pamphlet to one of the manufacturers offering these free of 
charge. By means of this method we secured about two hundred 
pamphlets which have provided a variety of interesting mater¬ 
ial for our social studies library. 

A fourth pupil activity that can add excellent source 
material to the social studies laboratory is the making of 
placards. Each group of students may be persuaded to illust¬ 
rate their information by placing a copy of it on a sheet 

1. Kilpatrick, Wm.H. (Editor! "The Teacher and Society", p.106. 

2. Appendix 4. 

















' 











. 

■ 

•:j ' '-•••] ni-cl . 
































♦ 




















• 























S3 


of cardboard bearing sketches or diagrams of the main points. 
As a result of group effort a large amount of information is 
selected. To illustrate the main points a placard is made 
shov/ing by graph, illustration, picture and diagram a color¬ 
ful and artistic representation of the topic at ..hand. On each 


placard is typed a full story about the topic. Grouped to¬ 


gether, the class effort on each piece of work provides the 
equivalent of a well-illustrated and extensive source book of 
information. In some cases students may report their findings 
to the class. In other cases further study of the placards of 
one group by another group may occur, or there may be a com¬ 
bination of both methods. In any event the material placed 
before the students will be much more complete, story-like, 
illustrated, colorful and effective than is found in almost 
any text. These then can be filed away either as complete 
units or under headings such as “Biography" etc. in a filing 
cabinet for future reference. We made a filing cabinet of one 
by twelve lumber. The cabinet contains shelvea on one side 
and a magazine or booklet rack on the other side. 


On the placard side we ] 
Economics 
Minerals 
Government 
Processes 
Inventions 
Agriculture 
Transportstion 
Grade VII Grade 


ve the headings: 

Biography 
Social Problems 
War and Peace 
Manufac turing 
Trade 
Countries 
Institutions 
Til Grade IX 























































. 

' 

















• ♦- 






84 


When the placards are filed away according to these 
main divisions they may be found easily for later review. 

Placards under these topics are filed away in the pro¬ 
per compartment regardless of the grade. Work done by Gra3 
VII furnishes vital and interesting material for Grade. VIII 
and Grade IX review. Work contributed by the above grades 
provides ideas, ideals and suggestions for grade VII students. 
Placards may be accumulated and used from year to year. This 
year it was found.that students did much better work after ex¬ 
amining the placards done during previous years. 

From the product of the three grades at work on a simil¬ 
ar unit the best placards were chosen. A bulletin board, 4’X 
12’, made of rough lumber and covered with green crepe paper 
was constructed and placed against the wall, at chalk rail height. 
On this, was thumb tacked in orderly arrangement, the work of 
highest calibre comprising the unit. The advance knowledge 
that the best work would be posted, bearing the student’s name 
brought forth a very fine effort from nearly every student. 

This large bulletin - we had four of them - provided more means 
of competition or decoration - although in these two capacities 
it was effective. As a variation to seat work review students 
were permitted to go up to the board to study special topics 
in which they lacked information, Nearly always the accompany¬ 
ing diagrams were of such a nature as to enable study from 
these alone without reference to the printed matter. 

Students were encouraged to correct the spelling and 
the form of their w r ork. They were advised to have parents and 
other students aid in such correction. Reports are more com- 











' 







. 













■ 















































oO 

pact, more legible and more presentable as placard reports when 
typed. The typing may be done by the students themselves or 
they may get someone to do this for them. In this part of Cal¬ 
gary many business men live. They are glad to take' the work 
to the office to get it typed for their children. A high stan¬ 
dard of work has resulted. The home and school were given a 
valuable and needed co-operative contact. 

Aural areas encounter no obstacles here. It is our in¬ 
tention to purchase a typewriter for the social studies labor¬ 
atory in order that it may be made available to students wl o 
have no typewriter contacts. In rural schools such a purchase 
is equally possible, more necessary and even more desirable. 

It would add a novelty to the course and provide a source of 
new interest. It would provide the basis for a'new skill. One 
dance in a country school could earn enough money to purchase 
a fifteen or twenty dollar typewriter. 

Care must be exercised to see that placards do not be¬ 
come. ends in themselves. They will contain a variety of pic¬ 
tures, diagrams, graphs, cartoons and facts. This material 
will be used to impress the story the placard tells. To impress, 
the placard must be colorful and artistic. But color and art¬ 
istry cannot be accepted as the end result. Unless the plac¬ 
ards aid students to understand the topic, unless they depict 
information in an impressive fora they will be worthless as an 
instrument of teaching, 

Stormsand and Lewis urge that a radio is an essential 
part of the equipment of a social studies laboratory, "At 









■ 

■ 












■ 


























present, aside from the controlled summaries, such news as the 
radio brings, the firsthand broadcasting of events, has a 
great advantage over the newspaper accounts of such events. 

Take such an example as a presidential message to Congress or 
an important political meeting. The radio brings us the real¬ 
ity, in full and exact detail, as well as' instantaneously. 

This reality not only adds glamor to the interest of such im¬ 
portant events, but it frees the event from all possibility 

of biased editing and interpretation . It may not 

seem unreasonable, when we have discussed the possibilities of 
the radio, to say that a receiver should be available at any 
time of the school day for any class in the social studies. 

Of course the first problem is to get the radio. This 
should present little difficulty. One girl in our room donat¬ 
ed a fruit cake. Tickets were sold for ten cents each. Each 
pupil sold a large number of tickets. From this raffle we 
cleared about fifty-five dollars and purchased a suitable com¬ 
bination radio and gramaphone. Anyone who is interested in 
getting a radio for his school may employ some similar venture 
to purchase it. 

One valuable use of the radio is to have the classes 
listen to important utterances by public men. Recently, our 
class had the very educational experience of hearing Prime 
Minister Winston Churchill deliver a stirring masterpiece over 
the air. As lessons in social studies these addresses not 
only give the pupil dramatic, first hand news, but they also 
stir up an interest and a desire for more current events. 

Again, the radio may be used to place before the class 
daily news bulletins. This service is very important for the 
child who lacks access to interesting papers and magazines. In 
many other cases no news is available to the student. 

But the radio has still to find its main strength in 
school work. That strength will be found, I believe, in inter¬ 
esting and vital broadcasting of' student programs. 


The main 







' 










. 


I - 

. 




























. 

. 






















87 


weakness of the radio in the educational field is due to two 
facts. First the material is not specifically planned for 
school work, or else, if so planned, is usually so dry as to 
render it almost useless. Children cannot be expected to show- 
great interest in broadcast material suited to adult interests 
and broadcast dryly by adults. 

In 1938 my social studies class prepared an educational 
broadcast and delivered it over station C.F.R.N. Edmonton. Dur¬ 
ing the preparation in our social studies class we endeavoured 
to overcome the deficiencies of such broadcasts by gaining our 
information from a great variety of interesting sources. Then 
the less interesting sections were excluded. Our broadcast 
lasted one half hour. In advance our inspector, Mr. John 
Scoffield of Wetaskiwin, had advised all schools in the area 
to arrange access to the radio for their pupils on the after¬ 
noon of our social studies broadcast. In a notable number of 
cases instructions were followed. The program proved enjoy¬ 
able, adequate and interesting to the radio audinnce. This 
was a valuable experience for all the students in our inspect¬ 
orate and many vital lessons were learned. 

In the first place we gained the impression that pupil 
prepared reports were worded in child language and therefore 
more acceptable to child listeners. Interest was much keener 
than in similar cases where adults put on the program. 

Secondly, the promise of access to opportunity to speak 
over the air stimulated study in our class as no other factor 
could have done. Students studied enthusiastically because the 














. 

, 













■ 















' 


























. 





. 








. 




















attainment of excellence promised a regard of gaining a posit¬ 
ion among the ten to be chosen for radio work. 

Finally, a program of radio activity offers one of the 
finest and foremost means of enlisting school and community 
co-operation. 

We ended our personal venture in pupil broadcasting 
firmly convinced that schools of each inspectorate and also 
one inspectorate with another might co-operate in this venture 
for the good of education in the total province. 

In regard to the possibility of making the radio a more 
effective instrument of education Stormzand and Lewis suggest 
that a radio committee be allowed to scrutinize lists of fut¬ 
ure broadcasts with a view to choosing the more effective for 
school purposes. They suggest also that in the field of educ¬ 
ational guidance persuasion might be used to encourage stud¬ 
ents to prefer better programs. However we did not find fault 
with types of radio programs for entertainment purposes. V/e 
did find'fault however, with the fact that too few programs 
were purposely planned for school use and with the further 
fact that, in. our opinion, those which were planned for school 
use were of such a nature as to discourage pupil.interest in 
them. 


A moving picture projection machine and access to a wide 
variety of films should be made available to the social studies 
laboratory. Knowlton and Tilton have conducted experiments to 
prove the value of -motion pictures as an. aid to learning. ' - 
state these advantages for the motion pictures in school. 































■ 

. 

■ 1 












, 





















' 























89 

1. "Motion pictures enable pupils to acquire more informat¬ 
ion within a given time. 

2. Motion pictures are most effective in teaching relation- 
elm, p s • 

3. -Motion pictures are also very effective in teaching hist¬ 
orical characters and places. 

4. Motion pictures aid retention, but not to the extent that 
they aid learning. 

5. Motion pictures cause students to participate more fre¬ 
quently in recitations. 

6. Motion pictures cause pupils to read more supplementary 
materials. 

7. Motion pictures not only do not help in the teaching of 
chronology but actually decrease such learning."1 

Br. E.B. WiBley lists the characteristics of a good 

icture: 

1. "In the first place it should be accurate^tT^at least 
truthful. 

2. Pictures ..... need illuminating captions in order to in¬ 
sure their effectiveness. 

3. In the third place, pictures of scenes and processes 
should tell their own story. Too frequently they are 
meaningless without the comments of the author or teacher. 

4. -In the fourth place a picture should be localized or at 
least identified. 


. Knowlton and .Tilton, "Motion Pictures in History Teaching" 
pp. 90-93. 


















































• • • 

. 







‘ 










•: 










90 


5. "A fifth quality of a good picture is simplicity, 

One of the prime difficulties of motion pictures in 
social studies is the dullness of the available reels, ‘Educ¬ 
ational reels are now passing through that former stage of 
school textbook production where every text had to be dull, 
dry, and colorless. Those in charge of preparing moving pic¬ 
tures for class room use must learn that they need to do more 
than describe the article or process involved. They must en¬ 
liven their material with living subject matter, with hurnor, 
with color, with novel backgrounds. They should remember that 
they are not just making a n movie" but that they are making a 
piece of film which will aid in the process of education by 
forming lasting impressions. They must never forget that their 
film must compete with other films of a serious nature seen by 
the child. They should enquire to find out how their film 
compares with news reels available. There is absolutely no 
excuse for anyone to make a dull picture simply because it is 
intended for school instruction. 

All this is not to deny the value of such films as do 
exist in school work. The deficiencies of films may be over¬ 
come if the teacher or some pupil undertakes to supply what 
the film lacks. If the film Is inadequately explanatory in 
nature, necessary explanations may be supplied by some member 
of the class. 

To attain maximum benefit from moving pictures in soc- 

1. Wesley, Dr. E.B., "Teaching the Social Studies", pp. 343- 
344. 





























. 








■ 


. 


. 

















91 


ial studies a few rules should be followed: 

1. Teachers should see the picture before it is presented to 
the class. Plans to bridge deficiencies can then be made. 

2. Students should be given an advance outline of what to ex¬ 
pect. They will learn much more from the actual film if 
this is done. 

3. In "process” stories someone should advise the class as to 
just what is happening at each stage of the picture. When 
this is not done important phases of the process are pass¬ 
ed over. 

4. The pupils should be required to present a resum’e of vit¬ 
al stages of the film’s story for inclusion in notebooks. 

5. Sometimes ordinary lantern slides may be of more value 
than moving pictures. 

6. Moving pictures should be included at that particular de¬ 
velopment of a story that requires their use. Seldom 
should a reel be shown just for the sake of putting on a 
’’show”. 

Dr. E.B, Wesley agrees with many of our findings. He 
says: "The following suggestions might prove helpful in the 
effective use of .visual aids'.’, 

1. Use visual aids as aids and not as substitutes for teach¬ 
ing, 

2. Select the type of aid that promises to be most helpful. 

3. Plan the use of the aid in such a way as to have it appear 
at the most opportune 'stage. 

4. Prepare the class-by telling them what to look for. 





















. 






. 

























' 




5. Introduce the aid by recalling the problem or situation 
which seemed to make its use of value. 

6. Discuss and explain the aid so as to assure its effect¬ 
iveness. 

7. Review the results of the demonstration. 

8. Measure the results."1 

Dr. Wesley adds also: "The teacher should view the film 
and decide upon its fitness before presenting it to a class .. 
. Oral instruction adds materially to their value 


(films) .. . The films exhibited in classrooms are view¬ 
ed more seriously. The obtaining of the film, the 


setting up of the projection machine, and the timing of the 
exhibition require that the teacher exercise great care in 
p 1 aiming his work. 


In the social studies laboratory there should be num¬ 
erous pupil-made outline maps. Maps are condensed compilations 
of knowledge. When the maps have been made by the students 
themselves unis knowledge will be understood by them. 

Regarding the value of the drawing of maps by students 

Dr. E.B. Wesley says, "The principle that one learns by doing 
is strikingly true in the case of maps. It is Improbable that 
a student ever learns to read maps carefully and accurately 
until he undertakes- to reproduce them^ Their features and de¬ 
tails are than examined and studied. 

To equip our social studies laboratory with maps we 
first of all raised money to purchase materials. The materials 
needed were: window blinds (cream) 50$ 


tissue paper 
carbon paper 



India ink 


1, Wesley, Dr. E.B., "Teaching the Social Studies 1 2 , p. -42. 

2. Ibid. p. 346. 


3. Ibid. 


o c; o 
























' 




• * * • 








































. 























































To make each map an art committee was selected to under¬ 
take the actual work involved in making the map. The whole 
class acted as a committee to decide what points each outline 
map would emphasize. We found many advantages in student-made 
maps: 

1. They are inexpensive. 

£. They provide far fundamental learnings through pupil 
activity. 

2. They provide a demonstration of school resourcefulness. 

4. They enable the class to focus attention on a few fund¬ 
amental facts and features. 

5. Desirable features are impressed more readily upon the 
pupil-mind, because they are not obliterated on outline 
maps by a mass of non-essential details. 

6. These outline maps can be a description of conditions 
at the moment they are made. Map makers and merchants 
often produce or offer for sale maps that are out-moaed 
by events. 

Me have added to our social studies laboratory a number 
of relief maps. In making these maps we have observed these 
conditions: 

1. Plaster of paris provides a mere permanent moulding sub¬ 
stance than salt and flour. 

2. A plasterboard background is more substantial than either 
beaver board or three ply. 

3. The painting of set plaster of paris makes the relief 
map more interesting. 



































. 

. 


* 






, . 


. 

* 










. 








' 




. 













STUDENT FADE NAPS 


Bulletin boards are essential in the social studies 
laboratory. Our class purchased half inch lumber and nailed 
this to narrow strips of wood. Attractive appearance was added 
to these bulletin boards by covering them with green crepe 
paper. These bulletin boards proved light. It was easy to 
thumb tack display material on their surfaces. Three bulletin 
boards were built. Two of them were made four feet high and 
Ive feet long. The third was four feet high and twenty feet 
lone-. Each proved sufficiently large to display the total 
























number of excellent placards produced to represent each unit 
of work. 


Dr. E.B. Wesley suggests these rules be developed by 
or placed in the hands of a committee in charge of bulletin 
boards: 

1. ’’List the types of material that may be placed upon 
bulletin boards. 

2. Draw up a list of materials that are to be excluded. 

3. See that the displays are related to the classroom work. 

4. Make a plan for evaluating original contributions that 
are offered for display. 

5. Arrange for the simultaneous display of a variety of mat¬ 
erials. 

6. Arrange for a definite time for a discussion of the con¬ 
tents of a bulletin board. 

7. Set a time limit for displays.” 

Regarding the value of the bulletin board Dr. Wesley 

continues: ’’Pupil products of high qua.lity deserve a place on 
the bulletin board, both as a reward for merit and as a mot¬ 
ivating device, but they should be displayed only after crit¬ 
ical inspection and approval by the teacher or committee. The 
bulletin board is widely used and deserves even wider use. It 
seems to be a good index of the teacher’s alertness and re¬ 
sourcefulness. Well-selected contents attractively arranged 
convey an impression of competence, whereas large, unused spaces 
and the yellowed appearance of those displays that are present, 
give one the impression of a teacher who has lost his pro¬ 
fessional zeal. ”3- 

One more essential feature of the mechanics of teaching 
the social studies will be furniture of a type that permits 
flexible v/orking arrangements within the classroom. 


1. Wesley, Dr. E.B. 


p. 352. 


5 


’’Teaching the Social Studies” 

























- 



















* 


. 




. 







. 


0 


9 




























































. 




. 










, ■ «- 









Movable desks are superior to desks fastened to the 
floor in the social studies laboratory. Convenient arrange¬ 
ment of seating facilities for social studies group activities 
often demands that conventional arrangements be discarded. 
Movable desks make this possible. 

A second need in regard to furniture is at least one 
table with a large smooth surface about four feet wide and six 
feet long. This table will prove very convenient for the mak¬ 
ing of map outlines or other art work too large to be done con¬ 
veniently on a regulation size desk. 

Our table was recovered from a store room of discarded 
science equipment. The surface was renewed by glueing a sheet 
of rexoleum over it. Students donated paint, borrowed brushes 
and fought over the right to cover the table with two coats 
of cream paint and to trim it with red paint. What was once 
a discarded piece of junk has become an attractive piece of 
necessary equipment. The re-decorating of this table has pro¬ 
vided an opportunity for that real community service demanded 
by Dr. Hanna. 

Other examples of socially useful materials construct¬ 
ed for our social studies laboratory by students are: 
a magazine rack 
magazine shelves 
a book trough 
small bulletin boards. 

The social studies laboratory can be enlivened by in- 
viting the-adults of the community to participate in ediieatimg 
their children. Leaders in community life can bring interest 





, 




- . 




■ 


















• 0 












' 


. 

♦ 






























and reality to the teaching of social studies. In nearly eve 
community there are well educated men or women who can make a 
vital contribution to the social studies instruction. It is 
well to utilize such available material. It makes for ’r jrie 
understandings between the school and the members of the com¬ 
munity. The school is grateful that busy men will exert them 
selves and make real personal sacrifices for the welfare of 
the community. On the other hand many speakers are flattered 
at the prospect of an opportunity to appear before school 



SOCIAL 'STUDIES BULLETIN BOA.HD 


























































































. 

. 




. 




. 





































pg 

But the field of diplomacy is not the key advantage. 
Students are interested in v/ell prepared and informative talks 
from the parents of the community. Usually the speaker in- 
vited will be chosen because he possesses special information 
of importance and interest regarding some aspect or the course 
in social studies being studied at the time of the invitation. 
When we were studying about civic affairs an alderman described 
the management of the city’s business. We invited a Social 
Creditor to address the class on credit institutions. He was 
followed by a banker who gave his viewpoint on the same topic. 

A life insurance agent discussed various forms of investment 
with the class. A member of parliament explained the actual 
practices of parliamentary institutions. 

There are necessary safeguards which must direct such 
activity. First, the person invited must know specifically 
what topic, he is to discuss and how long he may take to discuss, 
it. Controversial issues should not be avoided but when one 
visitor presents one side of a debatable question another speak¬ 
er should be invited to present the opposite side of the same 
question. On each occasion students must be permitted to ask 
questions. The speaker should be warned of this in advance 
ana asked to gauge the time of his formal address accordingly. 
Students should be required to incorporate a resume of each 
address in their notes for future reference. 

If these ordinary and elementary rules of procedure are 
followed many educational advantages will be derived from the 
visits of the many men and women available to discuss a 


variety 








































- 








. 


. 








. 





































99 


of topic? connected with social studies. 

Paul R. Hanna of Stanford University, concludes his 
message to educationists by endorsing'a plan of adult co-op¬ 
eration in the school's program of social education such as 
we advocate. 


M It may be permitted this writer to express in con¬ 
clusion his profound conviction, first, that an actual sit¬ 
uation responsibly faced is the ideal unit of educational ex¬ 
perience; and second, that of all possible situations, no 
other is quite so educative as one. that prompts the responsibl 
leaders of the community to join with the young in carrying 
forward an enterprise in which all really share, and in which 
each can have his own responsible part."i 

While the social studies laboratory will usually be 
taken to mean the room in which this equipment will be central 
ized, upon occasion it may be taken to include phases of life 


experienced during excursions. There are few educational ven¬ 
tures of greater merit in social studies studies than planned 


excursions. The excursion club takes the student away from 
the world of books and lets him see and feel the world of real 


ity. In our school we have an extensive club organization. 
Twice per month it was possible to take the social studies 
excursion club to visit some industry. In the course of one 
winter we visited: The Calgary Herald 

C.F.C.U. Radio Station 


Glenmore Dam 
The Bottling works 
Union Dairies 

Bank of Montreal - lain Branch 
The Crematorium 
The Flour Mill 


"Youth Serves the Community", (Book Con- 


1. Hanna, Paul R., 
elusion) 






. 

. . w,;- - ?. * 




. .. s : r oo ‘o.: • >./- * 1 i.; \ 

■ ■ - 

, 

.. . \ „ . v . 

- . . , •_ ; > .. : 






V 


.. .1 


' 

. 

. : 

. 




..... 

. 

. . . . 

; A 






















< , . < J 

. .. 












100 


The Packing Plant 


The Bakery 

The Technical School 

An excursion will/be more vital to education when the 


members of the class have been given a previous mental outline 
of what tney will see. If the teacher is to act as guide he 
should examine in advance, the particular plant the class will 
visit later. Nearly always, however, some guide will be design¬ 
ated by the plant manager to show the class through the factory. 
One other source of annoyance map/be due to attendency on the 
part of inexperienced pupils to feel that an excursion class is 
a holiday class. Onegood way.to control the situation, is to 
let it be known that a test of knowledge and comprehension 
will follow within,a week of the excursion trip. Transportation 
of pupils provides a problem, although not an insuperable 
one. Students should be supervised carefully while in excur¬ 
sion classes. They should be transported as one unit and re¬ 
turned to the school as one unit. 

It is not essential for the student to take notes while 
on the excursion. Sometime later. he should be required to 
have in his notebook a very brief story of the processes and 
machinery examined. 

Stormzand and Lewis place a high evaluation on excursion 

classes as a means to real learning. They say, M A more general, 
adaptation of such education, with supervised observation of 
museums, naileries, other schools, govermental buildings ano 
assemblies, industrial institutions, historical monuments, # 
public works projects, and the like, is certain to be found m 
progressive social studies classes in the near iauur t,• 


Stormzand and Lewis, "New Methods in the Social Studies", 
p. 96. 















. 










. 

, 

■ 


. 




- 







..... . 




. . . ... .’. . . i 

, .... • • - . :■ . :-.r. ■. ■ ■■■ . . *r 


. 


, 




: ... 






. .. ..: '■ ... 

. 














. 

, 







101 


The pupil will be the most important part of the soc¬ 
ial studies laboratory. The student in the social studies 
class must be responsible. He must accept responsibility as 
leader for seeing that a piece of group work is effectively 
engaged in and culminated. If he is a member of a group he 
must accept responsibility for getting his share of work done 
and for being in attendance when his report is to be delivered. 
He must accept responsibility for the learning of his report 
so that it may be given effectively. He must accept respon¬ 
sibility for preserving in his notebook and for learning what 
his colleagues have contributed to the class. 

The student in social studies must be a participator. 

He must be active. It will require considerable activity to 
prepare and to deliver his report, complete with effective 
models or diagrams. He must be willing and alert to take part 
in discussions, to ask questions, to arrive at decisions. 

He must be ambitious for progress and ready to do his 
share toward making his class period more successful.. 

The student of social studies must train his mind to 
accept, after deliberation, new ideas. He must be able to eval¬ 
uate and to accept M old ideas'* of merit. 

The student of social studies must seek to learn through 
understanding. He must note that mere memory is not the only 
essential for permanent learning. 

In the social studies class the student will learn to 
weigh facts - resect prejudices. He will develop his arguments 
by references to authorities of repute. In order to gain ~n 








. 




- 






; .. : ... A ' 



' r 
























c f 




. 























102 


adequate background of knowledge he will read widely. He should 
strive to argue effectively from fact, but also know where, 
how, and when to use emotion as a persuader where persuasion 
seems essential. 

At all stages of the social studies course the student 
will learn to play'his part as a member of a social group. He 
will exemplify the active ideals of the course. He will accept 
his privileges and bear the attendant responsibility cheerfully. 
Sc far as possible he will be imbued with an understanding 
willingness to participate effectively, adequately, and social¬ 
ly in the world that is vital to him at each stage of develop¬ 
ment. 

Hach student should have a record of his experiences in 
the social studies laboratory. This record can be recorded in 
a personal note book. It is desirable that the student have a 
brief, v r ell illustrated notebook. .here will the material come 
from? 

First, a portion should include current events, briefly 
written and in pictorial form. For this material a magazine 
source is superior to the daily paper with its incorrect head¬ 
lines and sensational stories. 

•Next, the notebook should contain a synopsis of the mat¬ 
erial of the -course. Hot all topics need .. .. 
topics and the vital facts should be included. ."were will 
these be found? 

When reports are given three methods may be used. First, 
the student may take brief notes as the report is delivered 






. 












p 








. 



. 











. 














. 


































* 




* 




■ ' . . . < 1 :' 1 - 










. 



























103 


orally. At the conclusion of each report he a} ■ . ' 
to revise and rewrite this in his notebook or a number of 
speeches may be delivered before revising and rewriting 
At the very latest, every student should be required to have 
his notebook work complete the week following the giving of the 
report. Sketches, pictorial diagrams, and pictures should be 
included. 

Secondly, the student may listen to the speeches with¬ 
out taking notes and make his notes from books or placards. 
Sometimes it is a disadvantage to have students making notes' 
while reports are being given. The tendency is to take down a 
bit of material for future memorization rather than to apply a 
concentrated energy toward understanding and visualizing the 
material i t foi ediate mastery. We found satisfactory 

results where the class concentrated on the material being 
given and then took down a brief resume-of the material in the 
report. The resume was placed in advance on the blackboard by 
the reporter. 

While some subjects do not require a written summary we 
found that in most subjects it was unsatisfactory not to have 
some brief summary of material covered. Memories that can sus¬ 
tain the full body of a' wide course throughout the intermediate 
grades are rare. Review work was encouraged by the habit of 
keeping personal notebooks. We.have found that the notebook 
may provide a key source of interest and pleasure in the social 
studies course. Standards of acceptability for notebooks ce. .and 
1, an illustration, diagram or picture for each topic. 

















. 





























■ 






- 








. 




. 





1 










' 

. 


' 

. 

. 














104 


2. correct English, correct, spelling end correct grammar, 

3. legible writing 

4. inclusion of magazine articles 

5. portraits of world statesmen 

6. graphs to denote .important statistical material. 

7. lists of arguments, pro and con, numerous topics. 

8. the personal work of the student. 

As in the case of placards, the notebook must not become 
an end in itself. But if the teacher allows a notebook to be 
made, he must accept only a high quality book. If he trains 
the students to this end and if he accepts only a high standard, 
the notebook may serve as a gauge of achievement in many cases 
in the social studies class period. 

Dr. Bining offers a word of warning regarding notebooks 

in social studies; "Up class time should be given to uneducat¬ 
ive copying*, the teacher should stimulate the pupils to care¬ 
ful work, allowing for originality, rather than prescribing 
minutely the arrangement of the notebook ............ '*1 

An important' item in the social studies laboratory is 
the teacher. The personality attitudes and philosophy of the 
teacher in the social studies laboratory will determine the 
success or failure'.of the course in social studies. The teacher 
in social studies must not dominate, the thought of the class, 
neither, should the teacher be some passive article designed 
solely to cart out the pieces after a riot. Rather shall it be 
the teacher’s duty to control the class discipline where necess¬ 
ary and to guide the class to thoughtful social studies part- 


1. Bining, Dr. A.C., "Teaching the Social Studies", p. 288, 














. 






t . r ' ’ " • ' 

. 










C ' ■ 




• • - > 

. 

’ 




\;,.r 'j-unira 

- 










■ 

J Jv...T. 


% 

. 






i 






C . 











105 


iclpation. How can this be done? 

One way to do this., is to adopt and adapt some phase of 
the topical outline included as a part of this thesis. The 
teacher may become an organizer of the course of studies to 
adapt the course to the special needs of his individual classes. 
In grade nine social studies there is a complex variety of sub¬ 
ject matter essential to the course. It cannot be left to an 
hit and miss system to decide whether the class is to study and 
act upon necessary material. The general plan of class organ¬ 
ization will have to be decided by the teacher or gained by him 
from the class. 

Once the topics have been chosen the teacher may become 
a librarian, for students who may be engaged in group seat work. 
If a group experiences difficulty the teacher .may sit in with, 
that group and give necessary assistance. The teacher may ex¬ 
amine the progress of groups. The teacher may give advice re 
the making .of placards, diagrams or graphs. 

Once the reports are prepared and the explanatory diagrams 
have been completed the varoius group leaders aill, in turn, 
take over the chairmanship of the class. The group leader, at 
that time will be responsible, for the class management of ..order, 
speakers, questions, discussion etc. During this period the 
teacher is a member of the group. This does not mean that the 
teacher must hide. The teacher will have the same privileges 
as any member of the group. He may take part in the discussion, 
ask questions or contribute suggestions. He will not, nowever, 
endeavour to dominate the ideas of the group, merely because he 








. 









. 
















. 

























» 


* 














* 




< . 


V 








, 




. 




























103 


is "teacher". 

The teacher must at all times be ready to step into any 
possible breach. If an insufficient report is given, the 
teacher should see that it is completed. He may have to do 
this himself. If a speaker is away and his report cannot be 
ommited without disturbing the sequence of events, the teacher 
will be ready to close the gap. This demands that he possess 
complete information in regard to each topic. Here is no mean 
task. 


In general the teacher may need to act as a guide to 
procedure. We have read much lately of the need for the teacher 
to lead the course and the pupils forward in the desired direct¬ 
ion by a sort of underhand method, undetected by the pupils. I 
do not favor this method* I believe whatever direction is essent¬ 
ial and needful should be given by the teacher without apolog¬ 
ies. 


With the aid of the pupils the teacher will direct the 
examining' my of social studies. The supervision of tests 
. . .... . H r, 1 ye 

co-operation of the students both in maki 

tests. It may be. wise for the teacher to direct the deliber¬ 
ation in current events discussion. There is no need fci she 
teacher to disappear from class room participation. His ex¬ 
tensive knowledge of current and past events ehoula enable hum 
to provoke sound discussions. 

Through his total cla- s room worm, me ueacner *..m~ 
demonstrate his ability to allow his pupils to do all they can 









. 








. 




* 

. 

. 





















♦ 


* 

. 






. 












































107 


efficiently. Where their experience proves incapable 
teacher should immediately fill the breach always remembering 
that the school room is not the place to propagate his part¬ 
icular brand of ’'isms' 1 , and that the class room is a place for 
pupil development rather than teacher development. 

Using the Social Studies Laboratory. 

It has been charged against the unit outlines I have 
prepared that, having once been accepted,- they would tend to 
de-limit the course and to make the course in social studies 
a static course in a measure only a little, less than would the 
textbook method which we have condemned. That there is seme 
validity in this argument I admit. However, it is not my in¬ 
tention that the outline of units I have prepared shall be 
final. It is an attitude toward and a method of treating the 
social studies that I wish to establish. That there will be no 
less reliability in the units because they may be set up by 
different people is attested to by the educationalist who pop¬ 
ularized the unit method of treatment of school courses, pro¬ 
fessor Henry C. Morrison of the University of Chicago says, 

"Two materially different sets of units for a given course may 
either of them furnish valid, and. useful interpretations." 1 

Therefore, following the teacher’s summary and outline 
of the problem under consideration an outline of units could be 
placed in the hands of each pupil as suggestive of the various 


1. Morrison, Prof. Henry 
Secondary School", pp 


rj "The Practice of Teaching in the 
26 - 27 . 












. 

' 








■ 


. 




- 










„ - :■ ~ :: 


















. 
















108 


topics that will need to be considered in finding a solution 
of the problem. Out of class discussion there should arise 
suggestions as to other topics that need to be considered. 
Student opinion might also form the basis for deleting some 
topics from the appended list. As a result of the discussion 
a re-arrangement or re-phrasing of certain topics in the unit 
may become necessary. The same discussion might result in the 
suggestion of new references for various topics. If the unit 
is introduced to the class in this manner I believe that the 
precepts of successful education laid down by Stormzand and 
Lewis will be put into practice. 

"From the point of view of pedogogical method and the 
psychology of learning in social aims, it may be added that 
the socialized program arises out of the new progressive 
philosophy of education that insists on interest w induced by 
self-initiated activities recognized as truly purposeful. The 
class learning activi ty is now the enterprise of their own 
community. Group objectives are substituted for teacher com¬ 
pulsion, pupil needs for adult initiative and approach. The 
learning process is seen through the eye. of adolescent psychol¬ 
ogy in action. The student is induced to learn by doing things 
for himself and his group." 1 

A committee of the whole group will then determine what 
topics of the unit comprise a natural division of work. In 
doing this they automatically decide upon the number of groups 
to be established. 

The next step in the procedure will be to have the class 
divided into groups. Some guides to group-making are these: 

1. Group ill become unwieldly when they contain more than 
eight members. 

2. Care should be taken to see that each group contains mem¬ 
bers proficient in a variety of skills and abilities. 


1. Stormzand and Lev is, 
P » So. 


“New Methods in the Social Studies", 







. 







.... . . ' . ' 



■ 









. . ■ : 

■ c J: >Iu<| 

* 






. 






. : : 




♦ 















, 















3. Some students will desire to work on a particular group 
because they have specialized knowledge on some topic 
being handled by that group. 

4. Care must be taken to see that activity groups do not be¬ 
come small cliques of students seeking to ostracize and 
avoid unfortunate class mates. 

5. Ordinarily the group will be formed by those students who 
have a special desire to work on the topics to be assign¬ 
ed to a particular group. In other words the normal 
nucleus of the group will be the topics. 

The next step will be the election of a suitable chair¬ 
man for each group. Each group will elect its own chairman. 
Each chairman and his group will form a discussion panel in 
order to allocate topics and other activities to each member. 
The total group will consider the means whereby they can con¬ 
tribute to the solution of the main problem. They will conside 
also devices for impressing their contribution toward the sol¬ 
ution of the main problem upon their fellow classmates. Cnee 
the actual work of gathering data is started the group chair¬ 
man will have a dual role to perform. He will need to under¬ 
take a topic on which he must gather data. He will also have 
to help his group members find references and assist them when 
they need help. 

As the activities proceed the teacher will sit in with 
each group in turn in an advisory c. ' 

be freely given. The teacher will discuss the ommission of 
non-essential.material, the inclusion of mg i 











* 




















' 



. 


■ 

, 

. 


.. 






. 


. 


. 




















. 








. 













110 


evidence , the use of language, the validity of language, the 
type of display material being prepared. Throughout the unit 
the teacher will act as librarian for the whole class when the 
chairman cannot locate needed references. 

One error that is made in so-called group work is to 
demand that, all report-making be done as homework in order that 
school time may be reserved for discussion purposes, he find 
that this method defeats the main purpose of social studies and 
does not result in economy of time. We have, found that to allow 
the groups to work as groups for a period of from seven to ten 
days is really economical of time insofar as understanding is 
concerned. 

As each group approaches completion of its alloted share 
of the unit the chairman of each group and the teacher will ex¬ 
amine reports to determine their suitability. Corrections will 
be discussed with members of the group. --When all other necess- 

p ration . ... 3 i 

plan a program for his speakers. As the group members make 
final changes in their reports the group leaders and the. teacher 
will prepare a schedule of reports and discussions so that each 
speaker will know well in advance when he will be required to 
make his oral contribution. 

At this point" I shall introduce a statement of -necessary 
precautions to be observed in the giving of oral reports. 

In the first place reports must be thoroughly understood 
and learned in the sense that the ideas are so clear to the 
speaker that he can command language to describe these ideas to 






, 








. J .. 

. 


■ 














. 






. 

_ ■» 






















. 








. 


















Ill 


his class. 

Too many students and too many teachers have the notion 
that in social studies a rapid survey of much material is to 
he under-taken and little material specifi 
Parents have misunderstood and have encouraged this idea. TT o 
greater crime against , education can be committed The new 
education in social studies will fail unless the child gains 
greater knowledge, unless certain specific facts become a part 
of his life. The new education at least in the social studies 
division, must be regarded as a device toward more learning 
and more permanent learning- certainly not less learning. 

In social studies casual reading is not enough. There 
must be a continuous and deliberate attempt to learn new facts 
and conditions of life. This need net and must not mean pure 
memorization. But it does mean that a persistent study of the 
printed word,of diagrams of charts, of magazines, must be 
undertaken to produce permanent education. Too few see that 
learning does not mean memorization and that where there is 
learning with understanding knowledge is far more prolific than 
is to be found in the parrot recitations of information acquir¬ 
ed purely by memory. Learning through understanding then, 
should be the goal of social studies. 

This is a basic consideration in the delivering of oral 
reports. Cur experiments have led us to conclude that reports 
should never be read. Few adult speakers can command the attent¬ 
ion of audiences when the speech is tc be read. Of course, . 
some people^because of position or person , command attention 











- 




* 






; 

' 




' 

■ 

« 

- 








. ... . •....ig 




‘ 

* 

























112 


to speeches when read. President Roosevelt reads many utter¬ 
ances. Besides being president, he commands attention by the 
ringing sounds of his cl tD ice. [e i ads well, 
other hand, Hoover was able to lift few with his dry material, 
method and voice. 

The school room situation duplicates real life in this 
regard. Few students will give their attention to reports that 
are read. Reports that are read lose life. The material is 
seldom remembered. Too little preparation is evident and makes 
the material lack interest. Students lose interest in making 
reports when allowed to read them.. The knowledge that he must 
make a logical, unified and psychological appeal to his fellow 
students spurs the oral reporter forward. At the very most 
students are permitted to hold in one hand a card measuring 
2 M X 4 M on which was recorded headings only or sub-divisions 
of each topic. These the student could observe with a glance 
of his eye, almost imperceptibly. He did not lose the attent- 

r 

ion of the class. 

Invariably, students who. required more than the "heading 
card" had failed to prepare adequately for the adventure of 
making a worth-while oral report. We have found it inadvisable 
to allow only five or six students the privilege of delivering 
the oral report. The students chosen by a group are usually 
chosen for their fearless, effective style. In the scheme of 
topical division hereby submitted, the topical divisions were 
numerous enough to provide each member of the group with mat¬ 
erial for a three or four minute report. It should be remem- 



. 

. 

5 




. 

■ • , ' . .. 

‘ 

.■ : ,vj'‘XGC ,>’X 

■ 


. 






- 

, '• L-- • 

‘ 

. 

, 




. 







113 


bered that in this time a student can report from six to seven 
carefully written foolscap pages of material. 

Few students reaching the grade nine, level will deliver 
material of such a nature as to waste the time of 
students. It is part of the teacher’s duty to see that this 
does not occur. The teacher should inspect, and suggest necess¬ 
ary revision of each report before it is delivered in class. 

Next, each student should have the free opportunity for 
growth which is afforded by the opportunity to face his class 
in public meeting. 

A third advantage noted for this method is that the in¬ 
dividual will learn his report to a degree constituting per¬ 
manence when he must deliver it orally. 

A fourth advantage claimed for individual delivery of 
reports is that this method keys the class to a pitch of learn¬ 
ing. 

And finally, a variety of delivery is less severe to 
the listeners, because when more partake in speeches, they are 
usually not too long. 

We found ourselves in partial disagreement with Professor 

Morrison when he says, ’It would obviously be desirable to 
give every pupil an opportunity for a floor talk on every unit. 

” le; first, 1 

and, second, because the class would often become very much 
bored .............. From five to eight floor talks on a unit 

are usually all that is practicable .. M ~ 

We have not foundi ourselves pressed for time while allow¬ 
ing each member of the group to deliver an oral report. Meither 
have we experienced boredom on the part of the elms so long 
as reports w r ere interspersed with lively question and discuss- 

1. Morrison, Henry 3., "The Practice of Teaching in the Second¬ 
ary School’’^ -T), 3^3. 























* 





* 








. 




, 






' 











.. . .j : 


: o/: xJ.S.ruaif 


, c >••'••• 

• • 4 « 












. . t 









114 


ion periods. 

Actually there is no essential difference between our¬ 
selves and Professor Morrison since he is considering reports 
of thirty minutes duration given by a few and we have planned 
to allow many speakers to give reports that do not exceed five 
minutes duration. There is therefore no conflict in r~ega3?d to 
the matter of time. Secondly, as will be seen in a quotation 
that follows, Professor Morrison sees real value he opport¬ 
unities for personal growth afforded to those who give reports. 
He therefore will not desire to limit the making of reports.to 
the few. 


Professor Morrison describes the method to be used and 


tne values to be gained in the ..unit recitation procedure. 'In 
the mastery recitation, the pupil has something of a coherent 
nature to present, he knows what he is talking about, and at 
the best he is quite capable of delivering an interesting 
lecture running to thirty minutes or wore. At the worst, he 
can at least stand on his feet and say something which is. pert¬ 
inent to the learning product mastered. The dail^ 
is primarily a test; the mastery recitation is primarily a 
part of the learning process." 


''then the class assembles for recitation, the teacher 
seats himself among the pupils and the pupils who recite take 
•successively the teacher’s position. In other words, an aud¬ 
ience situation is created. The pupil who has the floor pro¬ 
ceeds much as the teacher proceeds in presentation. He uses 
the blackboard when he needs to, uses demonstration apparatus 
if that will help to make his points clearer. He holds his 
audience because he is conscious of endeavouring to convince 
them that his view of the matter is a sound one or cf trying 
to interest them in the presentation. Interruption either by 
the teacher or by a member of the class is viewed as discourt¬ 
esy, and it is not allowed., unless the pupil himself has said 
that he will be glad to be interrupted for questions." 

"At the close of the pupil’s recitation, there is apt to 
be a period of questions ancl discussion and contributions in 
which members of the class will take part. This period should 
be kept perfectly natural and untrammeled by the teacher, ex- 
cept as far as it may be necessary to keep order and due. court- 










. 

. 


. 


. 


, 
















• 









, 

. 

* 

, 























. 



























115 


esy and to prevent rambling . ,, - L 

Professor Morrison adds some general observations regard 
ing this recitation method, 

1. A superior performance makes for clarification of learn¬ 
ing. 

2. Ability to stand before an audience, convincingly are 
valuable products of learning. 

3. The natural volubility of children is given opportunity 
to find expression in the recitation period. 

4. The teacher shoul demonstrate the methods of improving 
floor talks. 

5. Interest during the recitation period is a fairly good 
guage of interest during the period of preparation. 

6. Sometimes floor talks will be unsatisfactory and they 
should be done over again. 

7. The recitation should be focussed upon the unit as a 
piece of understanding. 

8. Some students may prepare written reports. 

This procedure that Professor Morrison has described is 
the one we have used in general. There are a few points of 
difference. We allow other students to ask occasional question 
while the report is being delivered. Also, as we have observed 
previously, we prefer shorter oral reports. We also allow the 
group leader to proceed to the front of the room and act as 
chairman of his group while oral reports - are being de¬ 

livered, 

1. Morrison, Prof. Henry C., "The Practice of Teaching in tne 

Secondary School' 1 , pp. 328-332. 









■ 



♦ 


♦ 

* 

. 

' 

. 

. 

. 

. 


« 

. 


* 

. r , 

* 

' 



, 





- • « • 

- 













110 


We find ourselves in agreement with Professor Morrison 
regarding the advisability of encouraging a discussion period 
following the delivery of the report. At the conclusion of the 
speaker’s address the chairman will rise and invite questions. 

He may even initiate the discussion by making some pertinent 
observations. 

Professor Morrison stressed the understanding of the unit 
rather than factual knowledge. We too stress understanding but 
we make provision for later review of the facts that are essent¬ 
ial to understanding by permitting the student to jot down key 
facts as the story is unfolded. This writing down of a few key 
facts may be done at the end of the period of discussion follow¬ 
ing the recitation. 

We have found it very useful to conclude the series of 
reports presented by one group by having the committee of the 
whole evaluate the evidence introduced in the solution of the 
problem. The class members may endeavour to arrive at some 
conclusions. 

Occasional debates enliven the management of the class. 

We believe that the pursuit of this method of handling 
the social studies'course will avoid the errors charged against 
modern education by Everett Dean Martin. 


The so-called "new psychology** has filled modern educat¬ 
ion with confusion. Eads and fancies of all sorts prevail, 

each with its psychological jargon. '‘Progressive experimental 
schools everywhere give voice to ’modern ideas 1 . n many such 
there is a minimum of discipline, pupils- are er 
to take initiative in all things, to study whs 
when they choose. "Everything is 
as pos able, nc 1 r 

ent to express himself .. • • • ine P re - - 













. 


* 












a 












* 


' 


- 


















' 








. 






‘ 






O* H* O 


117 


ana trends of le ocratic, industrial age are taken as the ulti¬ 

mate criteria. It might be said that education has come to be 
regarded merely as a function of the environment. 

We believe that the moderation of our method iti accept¬ 
ing the new education as a technique in teaching rather than as 
a fad to be pursued to the last 'theoretical limit enables us to 
lay claim to having secured the main advantages claimed for 

rogressive educational procedure-by Dr. K.H. Lane. M The prime 
haracteristic of human beings - men and women, boys and girls 

s growth ... . The human organism ..., ,. lives 

rom birth onward in an environment. ............... From the 

eginning, life to the child is a succession of experiences .... 

. ... New experiences have to be met by what we call 

intelligence ....... ....... 


Dr. Lane points out necessary realizations on the part 
of the teacher: 

1. "that the children are the important feature in the room 
and that their growth is the major end to be sought.' 1 2 

2. "thaw the environment afforded by the classroom and the 
school plant in which it is located is a matter of major 


importance. : 

3. "that the curriculum is to be thought of not as blocks of 
subject matter to be learned, but as a sequence of valuable 


4. 


life experiences." 

"that the children must be allowed sufficient freedom to 
allow them to meet situations and find solutions to pro¬ 
blems." 


"that the-children must not be left to flounder 

through experience." 


in nan 12~• 


1. Martin, Everett Dean, "The Meaning of a Liberal .education", 
pp. 33-40. 

2. ‘ PP* 










. 














. 

. ... .. 

. .... 

- 














: •: ,, ' ; 

, 








- 


. 




. 








1 




' - . . ■ . ? 









: first to 


118 

6. "that society exists to serve two functions 

puss on the social heritage of the post, and second, to 
blaze new trails to future achievement.“ 

Dr. Lane then lists outcomes: 

1. “Growth in good social habits. 

2. Conquest of those simple homely skills which are essent¬ 
ial to successful group-living. 

3. Orientation to the whole world in which the child lives. 

4. acquisition of as much of our American cultural heritage 
as children can learn on their own level. 

5. The right of every child to develop his special talents 
to the fullest degree.“ 

I contend that the establishment of the social stud¬ 
ies laboratory and the practice of teaching in that laborat¬ 
ory in accordance with procedures outlined herein will attain 
the educational standards established by Dr. l ane. 
























. 

, 

.* 

. 

■ ■ * 

. 

. ' 

", 















■ 


























































HT-TAPT 




The lie suits 

I shall conclude this thesis with a statement of the re¬ 
sults secured by following the plan outlined herein. 

First, we shall examine the extent to which the methods 
enunciated and the results secured meet the requirements of 
our list of objectives in chapter two. 

Secondly, we shall examine our methods and results to 
prove that they are psychologically and educationally sound. 

Finally, we shall introduce the evidence of pupils to 
prove that procedures herein are regarded favorably by them. 

Can We Attain Our Objectives? 

To what extent do the methods outlined in this thesis 
achieve the objectives with which we concluded chapter two. 

Let us examine an abbreviated statement of each objective in 

order. 

1. “Basic facts must be learned to aid in the growth of 
the child’s capacity to develop generalizations that will en¬ 
able him to understand the social life of today." Our outline 
of units divided into topical problems arrange a program 
basic concepts and provide a method whereby all necessary facts 
needed to understand these concepts may be secured, he have 
outlined methods of reporting, of discussing and thinking that' 
will give individuals and groups opportunity to develop general¬ 
izations. Our whole plan urges the child to avoid the textbook 
method of cramming the memory with unrelated facts. 

2. "Reasoning power and critical judgment mu . 


119 







.. . 



















- 


, 


l 












* 

. . . : 

, 






opportunity for growth." 

To promote the practice of this aim we have outlined 
many sources of reference material. A variety of viev.'s is pre¬ 
sented by the authors of this reference material. The students 
have to exercise their powers of reasoning and judgment to 
formulate a personal opinion. More facts will be accumulated 
than are necessary for the solution of the problem at hand. 
Critical evaluation will be necessary to sift the seed from the 
chaff. Keerf^ss of discernment will be developed during the 
inter-play of minds in open-forum and during debates. The fact 
that under the methods we have enumerated the student will not 
be permitted to memorize lists of facts as a demonstration of 
learning and the further fact that he must be able to reproduce 
facts because he understands them ensures that there will be 
opportunity for development of the powers of reasoning and 
critical judgment. 

3.& 4. "The habit of independent study and a knowledge 
of how to study must be developed." 

In the social studies laboratory the student will succeed 
or fail according to his ability to find and use evidence. There 
will be opportunity for the teacher to aid the student in the 
formation of correct study habits. To the extent that he is 
active the student will learn. By the very nature of the unit 
outline and the methods by which it is used the student is forced 
to gather evidence for himself or for his'group. 

5. "Desirable patterns of conduct must be established 
and practiced." 

The social studies laboratory will provide an opportunity 










. 







. 

‘ 











. 

■ 

. 

■ 

♦ . 

» 

, 












. 











. 









% 





121 


tc socialize the class behavior. The laboratory can be arrang¬ 
ed so as to provide a reasonably natural portion of a real 
social environment. Formal class discipline need not be applied 
except in the case of individuals who have not arrived at an 
adequate stage of self-discipline. In the laboratory the or¬ 
ganization of class discipline can be left in the hands of 'the 
various groups. Adults themselves might not measure up to ex¬ 
pectations under similar circumstances. We should not demand 
adequate behavior patterns of the children immediately. Under 
the careful guidance of the teacher desirable patterns of con¬ 
duct can be organized and developed. 

6. M The student must develop a love of truth.” Working 
under the methods outlined. heretN the student will constantly 
be in search of evidence to support or deflate various proposit¬ 
ions. Emphasis on the quality of evidence which is acceptable 
will develop in the student mind a knowledge of what can be 
accepted as,true information. The inter-play of vigorous minds 
in aebqte and in open forum will encourage the growth of a 
desire to seek true statements because other statements will 

be punctured easily by those who have practiced seeking truth. 

7. ”Ideals of freedom, tolerance, and patriotism to the 
cause of democracy must be implanted in the student.” 

The student will have opportunity to learn that real 
freedom means, first of all, liberation from ignorance. In the 
second place he will learn in the social studies laboratory 
that his own freedom is conditioned upon his capacity to re¬ 
spect the freedom of his fellow students. In study and during 






. 

. 

, 

» 

■ 

' 






■ 









. 


* • 

V 




• . 

. 












• . 












Ihh 


discussion he will learn to honor the pioneers of human free¬ 
dom. He will develop within his group arguments to prove man's 
superior growth under the flag of freedom. Tt will be on this 
basis that he fixes his pledge of patriotism to democracy. 

He will learn habits of tolerance because the course in 
social studies will acquaint him with living conditions in other 
lands and tolerance is based upon knowledge and. understanding. 

He will learn the true meaning of tolerance from current events 
a 3 will 1 arn not to comr e his main principles in order 

to promote an academic notion of tolerance. 

8. "The idea of the human race as one vast co-operative 

of narrow nationalism.." 

Working with his fellow students in the social studies 
laboratory will give the student an active basis for his ideas 
on co-operative endeavour. He will learn from experience the 
values of co-operation. He can deduce from his experience the 
benefits national and international that will follow a genuine 


recognition by mankind of the values of co-operation. 

9. "All of these objectives must verge to provide 
opportunity for students to understand the social realities of 
our day and to train students in a scientific attitude of 

mind .." 

We have re-arranged the Alberta course in social stud¬ 


ies to emphasise the social aspect of the problems contained 
in it. As arranged in our outline the total course comprises 


a series 
exoerienc 


of social problems many of which 
e of many of the pupils. Vie hn r e 


are within the direct 
indic ated r Iready 











































, 

- 

■ 

f : 

, 
























•J^po 

that the student will deal with a considerable variety of 
evidence. Practice in selecting 1 or thy evidence and in making 
his 3 Lsi ill slop a sci 

He will learn to look upon the solution of social probl 
being necessary and possible. 

It can, therefore, be claimed with reasonable 
that the methods and materials we have outlined in this thesis 
ill achie*' bj _ . 


Is Our Plan Psychologically Sound? 

I claim for my outline of methods and procedures in 
social studies that it is psychologically sound. ' To prove 
this I herewith measure what I have suggested as a means of 
teaching social studies against a scale of psychological stan¬ 
dards established for the guidance of social studies teaching 

~\ 

by Dr. Harold Pugg of Columbia University. ^ I shall list 

Bugg '■ s• psychological standards individually a: 

each standard the means whereby v/e have met the requirements 


demanded. 

'. Pri 
assimilation. 

We have recognized the need to practice this principle 
by setting up a pupil-created social studies laboratory which 
provided activity opportunity during construction and which, 
having been constructed, encourages, persuades and forcevS fur- 
• activity. This laboratory is a'studio for self-express¬ 
ion." There is opportunity for experimentation, investigation, 


1 . R, ? g, I . r’s Guic 

in-the Modern World", pp. ^~ 1- • 



















. 
























. 











' 















. 
























discussion and self-expression. ^.11 of these opportunities 
provide situations where active, understanding assimilation 
of information may occur. 

The course as outlined provides a "succession of things 
for the pupils to do." We have arranged for reading “from, 
"books, magazines, and newspapers' 1 . The groups are permitted 
to arrange open forum periods and debates. All students will 
prepare "briefs, outlines, summaries, and criticisms". We 
have left opportunities for inventions of "graphic methods of 
portraying important facts and principles of how people live 
together". Even in the second part of the workbook few act¬ 
ivities that would portray, graphically, the student reports, 
have been suggested. This omission was purposeful. The 
student must invent means of graphic description for himself. 
Workbooks can easily become as stereotyped in material and in 
methods as the textbook methods that we have condemned if they 
attempt to plan every item of the child*s school behavior. 

We have left, in this regard, full opportunity for the student 
to exercise his own capacity for planning and'graphically 
describing the informational portion of the course in social 
studies. 

Restraints have not been imposed on the opportunity to 
think. Whether the opportunities to think, to draw general¬ 
izations and apply them to the problems of contemporary life 
are used depends upon the attitude and the philosophy of the 
teacher. We claim for cur outline that it will provoke thought 
in a greater degree than will the organisation of material in 























































. 














125 


a textbook. It until] depend largely on the teacher's concept 
of class organization whether or not the pupil is given prac¬ 
tice in making decisions with facts. 

Regardless of the teacher's attitude the methods ac se¬ 
ated for the use of this unit-outline plan in a social studies 
laboratory will give the child an abundance of opportunity 
for active assimilation. 

Rugg's second principle : The situations of the school 
must be real and dramatic. 

Dr. Rugg demands as much first-hand experience as 

possible. We have met this requirement by indicating our 

faith in planned excursions wherever such are practicable. 

Rugg says, "For an understanding of all those modes of living 
which are far distant from the immediate environment of the 
pupil, the teacher and her class must rely upon pictorial 
material and dramatic word descriptions."- 

Reading and discussion participation will give the stud¬ 
ent a clear picture of distant regions. Vividness of the 
description will determine the extent of learning. Rugg de¬ 
clares that there is an imperative necessity for making mater¬ 
ials of the social studies course as dramatic, vivid and dy¬ 
namic as possible. 

We have met these requirements. As nearly as possible 
we have outlined the program as an aggregation of real problems. 
We have brought the interest of the dramatic to the course in 
social studies by introducing moving pictures and lantern 

1. Rugg, Dr. Harold,. "Teacher’s Guide", p. 6. 







































■ 'I; . . .. . . v .. | o ...... . oli 1% 




. : 


. 


. 














' 










■ 

' 









126 


slides into class management. We have taken the class to real 
situations for exploration. We have invited specialists to • 
demonstrate their knowledge of subjects and problems that they 
knew well. 

Materials of the social studies have been made vivid by 
including interesting evidence from a variety of sources. 

These stories have been made more vivid because the students 
have outlined them in diagrams, maps or pictures in an integ¬ 
rated, artistic manner. Dynamic interest has been secured 
through the media of class discussion, debates and open forums. 
ITow, of course, I do not claim all of these qualities are in¬ 
herent in the unit outlines but it would be difficult to use 
the unit outlines without employing at least some of the above 
techniques also. 

Rugg*s third principle ; Learning proceeds through the 
gradual accumulation of experience. 

Dr. Rugg states that the way to develop these experience 
is to arrange for a stream of experiences that will re-shape 
the understanding. These new experiences will be introduced 
through the technique of the inductive methods of study. As 
backgrounds of meaning increase opportunity for drawing more 
and more compileated generalizations increase also. Practice 
in drawing generalizations increases the capacity to draw more 
difficult ones. To arrange opportunities for practice in 
generalizing the- course must be outlined as a carefully graded 
series of experiences. 

In organizing the material of the course \ e have on- 






















, 





















. 

• • 

- 




. 













■ 





' 






deavoured to meet the requirement laid down by Dr. Rugg by re¬ 
arranging the order of the problems as at present outlined in 
the course of studies for Alberta schools. A second attempt 
to attain the requirements laid down, by Dr. Rugg in his third 
principle w/as made by dividing the main problems into units of 
understanding small enough to be comprehended by the mind of 
the pupil. 

Rugg 1 s fourth principle : Every avenue of learning 
should be employed. 

We have.met this requirement by including vivid reading 
material in our list of references. In these reference lists 
we have included a great deal of material on biography end 
books of travel. In our laboratory for social studies we have 
urged that motion pictures and pictorial illustration be free¬ 
ly used. Problem material has been organized in the workbook 


and much more will develop in class discussions. 


One of the 


features of the method we have outlined will be a variety of 
individual and grouj carch in’ the library and in the con¬ 
crete realities of the community. Rote books will provide 
opportunity to write original compositions and to incorporate 
much artistic expression. Thus we have endeavoured to employ 
the many avenues of learning that Dr. Rugg lists as essential 


for the permanent mastery of a social education. 

)r. Rurv’ s fifth principle ; Maximum growth in understand- 


To attain this demand Dr, Rugg suggests that student 
activities must be planned in such an order as to ensure that 













. ' JiX' 


■ 

' 




























. 









. \ 


■ 











































128 


the major concepts will be met under varied circumstances. 

The curriculum must consist of experiences that will illust¬ 
rate important meanings and generalizations. er- 

taking we are net making a curriculum but we have met this 
demand by rounding out parts of the course as outlined in the 
course of studies for Alberta schools where additional mater¬ 
ials seemed essential to understanding. We have arranged 
activities under a system of planned recurrence. 

Dr. Pugg 's sixth principle : Systematic and economical 
practice on the skills. 

We have met this essential requirement by insisting that 
there is a body of fundamental facts regarding locations of 
cities, ports, deposits of iron, coal and other resources 
which must be learned thoroughly. Thorough learning implies 
devices for repetition and review. To assist in organizing 
repetition and review of fundamental facts we have included a 
workbook. This workbook may be used to test knowledge of 
fundamental facts and to practice the use of that knowledge. 

The student will also devise means of graphic description that 
will be available for rapid review work. 

Dr. Pugg 1 s seventh principle ; Learnings develop simult¬ 
aneously. 

Dr. Rugg declares that the teacher must remember that 
many phases of education act upon the child at one time. He 
may be learning facts but other learnings of a fundamental 
nature are being acquired also. Attitudes will develop, emot¬ 
ions will be in play,, techniques of learning will be gained. 













129 


Habits of study will become fixed. 

We have met this requirement by providing the student 
with opportunity for freer reading practices, for learning to 
think on his feet and for learning to address his classmates. 

D r. P.ugg pl s eighth principle : The intensive study of 
a few things. 

Dr. Rugg demands that the intensive study of a few 
things replace an encyclopedic and superficial study of many 
matters. There are a few crucially important facts upon which 
the pupil should concentrate his attention. We have met this 
requirement by listing a minimum of topics composing the 
Alberta curriculum. We have suggested that an abundance of 
concrete material be made available and that numerous illust¬ 
rations be accumulated or constructed that will encourage the 
pupil to think and gain understanding. 

Dr. Rumm 1 s ninth principle : Attention centred upon 

one thing at a time. 

We have obeyed this dictum to confront the pupil with 
only one central theme at one time. The extent of our units 
may vary from a matter of days to a matter of weeks. At any 
one time the students concentrate on one task. Each of our 
units assembles material concerning facts and relationships 
that are bound together in close relationship. Attention can 
be concentrated and mind-wandering reduced to a minimum. 

2 , ■ - ’ sntl ] ic houlcl b e - 

ized around "understanding units". 

We have followed this suggestion also. Wherever geog- 









130 


raphy, history, civics, economics or any other information is 
needed to und tand the unit under consideration it has been 
included* Facts necessary to understand a unit under consider 
ation 'have been included. Facts necessary oo undei 
unit have been presented as a unit in order that an integrated 
body of information could supply an understanding of a total 
situc one Light co rent it in actual life. 

if/e cc . b lain that our outline of material and 

methods is psychologically correct in accordance with the 
psychological standards laid down by Dr. Pugg of Columbia. 


that the Students Think 

I shall conclude this statement of results of using the 
unit outline plan of teaching social studies by quoting rep¬ 
resentative views of grade nine students in Hideau Park Junior 


High School, Calgary, Alberta. 

In regard to these statements I register the following 


statements: 

1. They are spontaneous opinions. 

a. The authors of these opinions are anonymous and therefor 
free to write frankly. 


• In their own personal school lives the authors have had 
sufficient experience to make their opinions valuable, 

. The statements of these students were taken regarding 
three specific and fundamental procedures outlined in 
this thesis: (a) Group work 


.(b) Topical outlines 
(e) Oral reports. 




4 






















. 






' 


















. 


- 


























• ’ 

. 





,. 




* 



' 


. 

0 

' 












. 









131 


Here are the student answers: 

Question one: would you rather work in social studies as a 
member of a group or as an individual? 

1. “I would rather work in a group because we can exchange 
ideas.” 

2. :, I think working in groups encourages one to work harder. 

It gives one a chance to test his ability with others.” 

3. ”If we are stuck we may be able to help one another by 
giving good ideas to one another.” 

4. ”To work in groups means that you can associate with 
fellow members of the class and see how they work. It 
creates more interest in social studies.” 

5. ”You learn more. One or two bright boys in a group of 
about five who are not so bright would help them to learn 
more.” 

6. “Group work helps you to get more material and makes work 
more enjoyable.” 

7. ”We can co-operate with one another and get more accomp¬ 
lished. ” 

8. ”1 do like the idea of working together as it prepares 
you for years to come. For don’t we all have to work 
together in our democracy?” 

9. ”It gives me a chance to get the other fellow’s idea in 
the matter. We can contradict each other and thereb2f 
iron out the bad spots in cur work. In other words, I 
think that two or more heads are better than one.” 

10, “While working in groups one person does not have to do 








































’ 





. 






















































' 


* 



















1 

XO c-j 

such a great deal of work and in getting together every¬ 
body takes more interest so as not to let the group down 
and consequently knows more. 1 ' 1 

11. "I would rather work with others because they know some 
very valuable information which may help you to under¬ 
stand the topic more fully." 

question two: Would you rather work from a text book in soc¬ 

ial studies than from a printed outline containing topics, 
reference books and exact page references? 

Here are representative answers favoring the printed 

outlines: 

1. ’’Going from book to book enables you to pick up more 
knowledge as each book may have a little different data 
that will enable you to form a more correct general view." 

2. "It is easier to study if it is interesting. Texts are 
not very interesting." 

3. "If you go to different references you have different 
ideas and it is much more interesting. If you work with 
a text it becomes dry and you lose all interest in your 
topic." 

4. "When you are looking through different books you see 
more interesting things and get more references for the 
use to remember in later lives." 

5. "I think outlines of references are better because you 
get the right story and when we take it out of the text 
we get only the beginning and you are not learning ^ne 

topics as well." 









. 


. 

, 










. 




J- 































5. "It gives you a chance to ge J diff 

ic as no two authors have the same view. While from a 
text you just have one to go by." 

7. "I would like to work from a list. One book doesn’t ^ive 
information to make a report." 

8. "On this list there is stated the exact topic and from 
the references given I believe you get more and much 
better information on that particular topic." 

S. "The text cannot possibly give you all the references on 
a subject. The sheet, however, gives you a list of many 
references." 

Question three: Would you rather prepare and deliver oral re¬ 

ports and have others do likewise as a method in social studies 
than to have the whole class working on the same topic at the 
same time? 

Typical student answers were: 

1. ”It is much more interesting to to have a student met up 
in front of the class and give a topic than to have to 
write and hunt up all the topics for yourself." 

2. "I would rather have the oral reports because when they 
are coming from, different persons you. receive more know¬ 
ledge of 'that certain topic." 

3. "When you gi 1 an oral talk you have to select your Er 
lish and it wall help you," 

4. "Speakers on one topic can look up the topic more fully 
and get views from many authors. :l 

5. "In giving oral reports one learns more about his topic 
than from just reading. When topics ?re given ‘by the 


























. 

' 





























, 
















134 


pupils it edds more variety to a class period." 

•-!- ■ t+ r->^r + - + ■ with us when we've heard 

it better than when we've read it." 

7. The reports give a variation of topics that the text 
cannot possibly give." 

8. "I think that if everyone does a different topic you get 
more interesting material. If you have to get all the 
information yourself you must make them (each topic) 
short as possible." 

We have found that our unit-outline plan fulfill! s our 
list of objectives as stated in chapter two and. that it meets 
Dr. Rugg's demands regarding a psychological basis for the 
course in social studies. We have shown that the plan meets 
the approval of students themselves. 

On this varied evidence we commend these outlines and 
methods to the general use of social studies teachers. 


















. 
























































?> I?J.TOGRAPHY 


CmA* * A Cha C 4 .] ' i.al Sciences, The Nature 

of the Social Sciences. 

Billii ts, Neal, Generalizations Ba 
Course. 

Binin^ A.C.& D.H., Teaching the Social Studies in Secondary 
Schools. 

Frederick and Sheats, Citizenship Education Through the Soc¬ 
ial Studies. 


Iianna, P.R. , Youth Serves the Community. 

Hilpatrick, Wm.H., “The Teacher and Society. 

Martin, E.D., The Meaning of a Liberal Education. 

Morrison, Prof. H.C., The Practice of Teaching in the Second¬ 
ary School. 

Heumann Henry, Lives in the Making.. 

Rugg., Harold, Democracy and the Curriculum, Changing Civil¬ 
izations in the Modern World, Teacher’s Guide. 

Russell, Bertrand, Education and the Social Order. 

Stormzand cl Lewis, New Methods in the Social Studies. 

Swindler, R.E., Social Studies Instruction. 

Wells, H.G., The Work, Wealth, and Happiness of Mankind, An 
Experiment in Autobiography. 

Wesley, E.B., Teaching the Social Studies. 


Cyclopedia of Education. 

Historical Outlook, February, 1931. 

'National Education Association^Journal. 

Program of Studies for Intermediate Schools, (Alberta). 

Report of the Commission of the American-Histc 
on the Social Studies. 

Stanford University Conference - Social Education. 


135 

















APPENDIX I 




. 


■ 

. 











- 1 - 


PROBLEM ONE Post War Problems 

Germany 

1. In the war the flower of German Manhood was destroyed. 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World (371-372) 
Rise of American Civilization 
The world of Today (269) 

2. Long Accumulations of Wealth were Destroyed. 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World (372-373) 
Social Planning for Canada (186-187) 

Rise of American Civilization (Beard) 

3. Germany lost rich territories in Europe. 

The World Today (269) 

Post War Europe (27-28) 

The Modern World (271-272) 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World (379-380) 

4. The German Colonial Empire was Mandated to Her Conquerors. 

Our Empire and our Neighbors 

Outline of History - Wells (1121-1128) 

Since then - Gibbs 

The Shape of Things - Wells 

5. The Republican Democracy replaced the Kaiser’s Absolute Gov¬ 

ernment. 

The World of Today (270) 

The Modern World ((272-273) 

Post War World (40-45)*(60-64) 

6. Strained by the War, Germany’s Economic Structure completely 
collapsed partly due to the load of the Treaty of Versailles, 
but also because she planned thus to pay her debts in worth¬ 
less paper money. 

Outline of History (1108-1121) 

Post War World (28-31) 

The Modern World (273-274) 

The World of Today (270) 

Changin Civilizations in the Modern World (374-380) 

7. Republican Germany, hindered by the Democratic Allies failed 
to rebuild a Broken Civilzation. 

Post War World (46-50) 

Inside Europe (3:1-32) 

The World of Today (270) 


8. Hitler Promised to Reconstruct a Greater Germany 
























■ 


' 








... ■ . . r--: 


















. 












- 

, 


* 

. 





, 


; . . . . 



« 















- 2 - 


8. Hitler promised to Reconstruct a Greater Germany, 

Inside Europe (1-60) 

The World of Today (270-272) 

The Modern World (274-276) 

Britain’s Story (552-353) 

9. The Nazis ruthlessly destroyed their Opponents, 

The Modern World (276-284) 

Inside Europe (ch. IV) 

Post War World (136-138) 


10. Germany resigned from the League of Nations. 

The Modern World (284) 

11. "Might is Right" ruled the World so Hitler built a huge 
mechanized Army. 

Inside Europe (80-83) 


12. Defying the Treaty 
Rhineland. 


of Versailles Germany Re-Occupied the 


The Modern World (274-286) 
Inside Europe (84-85) 


13. Ribbentrop urged the return of the former German Colonies 
as a source of raw materials and a Market for Manufactured 
Products. 

Inside Europe (92-96) 

The Modern World (286-287) 

14. In the spring of 1938 Germany joined Austria to the 
Eatherland. 

Inside Europe (103- 

Britain’s Story (356-358) 

15. The Munich Conference opened the way to Czechoslovakia, 
Poland, Memel, Norway, Holland, Belgium, Ernace. 

Inside Europe (Int. 11-23) 

Britain’s Story (358-365) 

16. On September 1, 1939, Hitler’s armies marched into Poland 
to start a second world war within a generation. 

The Story of Britain (Kingsway) 

Italy 

1. The Allied Powers promised Italy great gains, so in 1915, 
she entered the war on their side. 



{' • ~ 1 

■ 






... : 

. 

- 






. 


- . 

■ 

. 

♦ 




- 




* 


; • : ■ 7 : . 


. ■- - 















. 










T ’V ; 













- 3 - 


The World of Today (274) 

The Modern World (253-255) 

2. The war cost Italy billions of dollars. 

New Governments in Europe (Buell) 

3. Six-hundred thousand Italian soldiers lost their lives in 
the war. 


The World of Today (274) 

4. Signor Orlando failed to satisfy Italian ambitions at the 
Peace Conference. 

Europe Since 1815 (Hazen) 

5. The War smashed the Italian Economic Structure and there 
was untold suffering. 

The World of Today (274) 

6. The Government failed to put an end to distress. 

Inside Europe (190-192) 

7. The Fascists seized power. 

The World of Today (274-277) 

The Modern World (255-260) 

Inside Europe (187-191) - (203-205) 

8. Opponents of the new order were beaten, drenched with 
Castor oil or murdered. 

Outline of History (1107-1108) 

The Modern World (260-269) 

9. Mussolini conquered Abyssinia from Haillie Selassie, King 
of the Ethiopians. 

The World of Today (278-279) 

Inside Europe (ch. 15) 

10. The League of Nations, half-heartedly, applied Economic 
Sanctions to the aggressor. 

Inside Europe (ch. 34) 

Inside Europe (223-225) 

11. In Spaid, Italian soldiers and war-craft waged war in the 
name of France, against the peasants. 

Inside Europe (ch. 12) 




- 4 - 


18. According to Mussolini, the Rome-Berlin Axis forms the 
Pivot of World Politics. 

Inside Europe (Introduction 22-88) - (86-90) 

13. In the fall of 1938 World Peace poised delicately in the 
balance, subject to the whims of two men. 

Inside Europe (Int. 11-21) 

14. In the spring of 1939 Mussolini took Albania. 

Inside Europe (Int. ) 

15. In 1940 Mussolini declared war on France and on England. 

Britain’s Story (351-352) 

16. In November 1940, the Greeks nearly drove the Italians 
into the sea. 

Magazines (Time, Life, Newsweek) 

Japan 

1. The Rome - Berlin Axis was extended to include Tokyo. 

Inside Europe (86-87) - (103b.-103c) 

2. Japan is now fully engaged in a war against China. 

Changing Governments (551-556) 

Insdie Asia. 

3. After the war, Japan devised the slogan "Asia for Asia¬ 
tics". 

The World of Today (280-283) 

Post War World (310-314) 

4. Commodore Perry made a treaty with Japan about the middle 
of the last century. 

5. Japan modernized her industrial plant. 

Outline of History (1031-1033) 

6. The Great War gave Japan a splendid opportunity for In¬ 
dustrial development. 


The World of Today (281-283) 
The Post War World (308-311) 
Changing Governments (5489551) 







. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

- 




: . • - ; . . f ■ >ji 






. 

. 

■ . . ■ - 







- .. ; 

* 








. 

- 

- .. - j ■ 

■ 

, 

• : ‘ ■ ‘' ■ 

. 

- 






- 5 - 


Our World Today 

The Modern World (346-351) 

7. Wages of Japanese Workmen are so low that the home market 
is small. 

The World of Today (283) 

Post War World (314-315) 

8. In 1931 and 1932 dynamic Japan shocked unrealistic 
world opinion, by a military conquest of Manchuria. 

Inside Asia 

The Post War World (317-325) 

9. The weakness of the League of Nations was portrayed by 
her failure to punish Japan. 

Inside Asia 

The Post War World (3250-327) 

Inside Europe (282-284) - ch. 34. 

10. Russia and the United States suspect Japanese ambi¬ 
tions for World Power. 

Post War World (311-317) - (327-330) 

11. Over one million Chinese have been killed in the present 
Sino-Jap conflict. 

Inside Asia. 

12. Japan joined Germany and Italy to combat the so-called Red 
Menace. 

Inside Europe (86-87) 

Inside Asia. 

13. One hundred years hence, Europe may have to unite to gain 
protection from the"Yellow Peril*. 

14. Ghiang Kai-Shek leads the Chinese against the invading Japs. 

Inside Asia. 


Russia 

1. Russia is vast and rich. 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (391-399) 

The Challenge of Russia 

Our World Today 

The World Todajr (298) 

2. The Industrial System of old Russia made slaves of the 
workers. 



* 

, 

* 

. 






■ 






... 

. - 

. 

. 


















- 


1 

' 







« 



















•V 








- 









- 


















































- 6 - 


Changing Civilizations (366-368) 

Changing Governments (401-405) 

3. The agricultural system of old Russia used crooked sticks 
for plows. 

The World of Today (298-299) 

4. The Government of the Tsar was but a legalized murder, 
plunder, torture, and starvation. 

Inside Europe (456-459) 

Seven League Boots (100-145) 

Changing Governments (398-400) 

5. The masses of the Russian People dwelt in the valley of 
ignorance. 

Changing Governments (443-445) - ch. 15. 

The Challenge of Russia 

6. With empty stomachs, few guns and less bullets, the Russian 
soldier wais hurled against the mechanized army of Germany. 

Modern Times (274-278) 

Changing Governments (413-415) 

7. A Provincial Government under Kerensky took over the Gov¬ 
ernment when the Tsar abdicated. 

The World of Today (299-300) 

Outline of History (1131-1136) 

Changing Governments (416-419) 

8. Lenin, the leader of the people, is now a God to the Rus¬ 
sians because he led the Russian Revolution. 

Modern Times (ch. 24) 

9. Leon Trotsky ripped up the rails to make guns; he organ¬ 
ized the peasants into an army. 

Post War World (157) 

Inside Europe (458-461) 

10. The Russian Revolution came because the people wanted land, 
bread and peace. 

Outline of History (1094-1097) 

Changing. Governments and Changing Cultures (ch.16) 
Europe Since 1815 
Britain’s Story (350-351) 

Seven League Soots (100-141) 

11. The Revolution set up a workers country. 












* 














. 




- 


« . 

. 







■ 



. • 

■ 












. 


. 













- 7 - 


The Modern World (301-310) 

Changing Governments (oh. 16) 

Britain’s Story (350-351) 

12. When Lenin died, Joseph Stalin bedame Dictator. 

Inside Europe (451-488) 

I Write As I Please 
Britain’s Story (351) 

13. The Economic System of the New Russia has followed pure 
Communism, the new Economic Policy and the Eive Year Plan. 

Inside Europe (501-511) 

The World of Today (300-305) 

Changing Governments (ch. 16) 

Outline of History (1128-1136) 

14. Russia’s foreign minister, Litvinoff, supported the League 
of Nations. 

Inside Europe (478-481) 

15. Molotoff replaced Litvinoff in 1939. 

Inside Europe (482-483) 

16. At first Russian joined France and England in an effort 
to stem the expansion of Nazi Germany. 

The Modern World (310) 

17. Russia reversed her policy, supported Germany and helped 
to divide Poland. 

The Modern World (310-312) 

Inside Europe. 

United States 

1. During the war the United States grew rich by sale of 
materials to combatants. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch2. - 
ch. 27) 

Changing Civilizations (381-383) 

Post War World (389-391) 

The Post War World (427-430) 

2. European Countries borrowed billions of dollars from the 
U. S. during the war. 

Post War World (124-130)-(60-64)-(389-391) 

The World of Today (305-306) 












•• 










' - " ■ '■ ) ;r.tn. 

. 

- 

■ \ ' 

• • ■ ' 

> ‘ r j oD 


- 






. 


„ 


. 






. 






. 

, 
















. 

. 

. 






- 8 - 


3. Uncle Sam was rich, and lent billions more to reconstruct 
a war torn Europe. 

Post War World (60-64)-124*130)-390-399) 

The World of Today (306-307) 

4. American tariffs prevented the repayment of these debts 
in goods. 

Post War World (398) 

The Modern World (524) 

5. Europe began again to supply her own needs and unemploy¬ 
ment in the United States followed this loss of markets. 

The Post War World (451-454) 

6. The breakdown of World Economic fabric was dramatized in 
the Stock Exchange collapse of 1929. 

Post War World (453-454) - (399-407) 

The Modern World (527-529) 

7. President Roosevelt moved rapidly and dramatically to pre¬ 
vent revolution in the U. S. 

Post War World (452-457) 

8. The New Deal tried to create artificially high prices for 
farm products. 

The Post War World (465-467) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (New 

Edition) 

9. The New Deal poured billions into old industries and cre¬ 
ated new ones to provide purchasing power for industrial 
workers. 


The Post War World. (457-462) 

10. The Blue Eagle of the New Deal became the symbol of will¬ 
ing co-operation. 

The Post War World (462-470) 

11. The Government of the U. 3. passed many laws regulating 
economic and industrial activity. 

The Modern World (541-544) 

The World of Today (307-309) 

12. The League of Nations - brain child of ex-president Wood- 
row Wilson was repudiated by the United States. 













. 

. 


j> . 




* 

. 












. • 






- •:: . 




- 

. 




, - . 

' 

* . , 

* 

■; '' 

' 

. 

. 

; . 

* 

^o r i erf 1 

. ' 1 

. 

' 

- - 







- 9 - 


The Poet War World (391-393) 

Britains’ Story (333-337) 

The World of Today (309) 

13. The Kellogg Peace Pacts marked a brief American interest 
in World politics. 

Post War World (67-68) 

The World of Today (309-310) 

14. Senator Nye’s investigation of war, brought forth from the 
Senate, America’s present Neutrality Laws, which were later 
repealed. 

15. The Monroe Doctrine has been strengthened by the Pan Amer¬ 
ican conference at Buenos Aires. 

The Post War World (409-410) 

16. President Koosevelt assured Canada of protection against 
aggressors. 

Great Britain 

1. England has a flexible Parliamentary System. 

Changing Governments (ch. 7) 

The World of Today (286-289) 

2. Democracies are made to plod even when rapid decisions are 
essential. 

The Modern World (ch. 11) 

The World of Today (288) 

3. Post-war unemployment was caused by Japanese and American 
encroachment on pre-war markets. 

Post War World (110-113) 

The World of Today (283-289) 

4. Pree trade Britain suffered trade losses in a post-war 
world of ever mounting tariff barriers. 

The Modern World (524-527) 

5. In 1931 Stanley Baldwin’s Nationalist Government adopted a 
protective tariff policy. 

The Modern World (529-532) 

6. The Rt. Honorable R.B. Bennett convened the British Empire 
trade delegates at Ottawa. 

The Story of Our People (377-379) 



• 5 y • 

* 

, 


: 

* 





' • 



: - ' 



• 







. 

- 










'• " V '' 


.. - ; 

. 






- 10 - 


7. The Ottawa Trade Agreements of 1932 raised tariffs of the 
Empire against the outside world. 

The Modern World (467) 

The World of Today (289-290) 

8* Britain’s relations with the League of Nations have been 
chequered. 

Post War World (33-34) 

Inside Europe (I03z - 103f) 

The World of Today (290) 


9. Premier Chamberlain openly protested against ’’Midsummer 
Madness” - The League of Nations. 

The Struggle for Peace 

Inside Europe (261) - (103a - 103f) 

10. The relationship among the members of the British Empire 
becomes more loose. 


A Reader in Canadian Civics (162-166) 

The Modern World (ch. 26) 

11. In peace, the policy of the Empire is based on cooperative 
trade and protection. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (ch. 22) 

The World of Today (290-292) 


12. With the Empire at war, a hew arrangement of relationships 
may become necessary. 

The Story of Our People. (408-421) 

13. The British Parliament declared w T ar on Germany in September 
1939. 


Britain’s Story (358-370) 


Prance 

1. Prance clings desperately to Parliamentary Government. 

Inside Europe (ch. 8) 

Changing Governments (ch. 11 - 12) 

Changing Civilizations (ch. 7-8) 

2. The great number of political parties in Prance makes a 
mockery of Democratic Government. 

Inside Eurooe (134-135) (ch. 11) 

Post War World (74-78) 

3. The Great Nightmare of Prance is the German Military Ma¬ 
chine . 
















.o- .. • ' 0 :' a; ‘ 

. . . 

• '■ 










, ... • - •' *: ? ;• " 



. 

■ / r « 




■ .. 





. 


- ? •: ’ ■ t i ■ i. •. ' 


... . 


■ 


' 





. 


■ 

. 

. 

i 'y. • . ) - 

. 

. ' ■' ' • : 

~ - ' 

• * " ■ «. ' • ' • / 


. .. 

. 

' -vv r ■ •.) ;.r:T 

. 

■ 

. > '■ 


- 11 - 


The Post War World (66-73) 

The World of Today (293-295) 

Inside Europe (130-133) 

4. The inconsistency of French foreigh policy undermines her 
prestige in England. 

The World of Today (294-296) 

Inside Europe (220-228) 

5. France had a mutual assistance pact with Russia. 

Inside Europe (511-514) 

The Modern World (310) 

Inside Europe (Introduction) 

6. Collective security under the League of Nations was a 
cornerstone of French policy until Premier Laval struck 
a death blow at that institution. 

Post War World (73-74) 

The World of Today (296-297) 

Inside Europe (136-141) - (225-228) 

The Post War World (476-480) 

Britain’s Story (356) 

7. In the fall of 1938 Franch helped Britain barter away the 
territory and independence of Czecho-Slovakia. 

Inside Europe (Int. ) 

8. In September 1939 France declared war on Germany. 

Britain’s Story (358-365) 

9. In June of 1940 Franch capitulated before Hitler’s armies. 
Canada 


1. During the war artificial needs an industrial boom. 

The World of Today (313) 

2. Many industrialists made millions of dollars in exorbitant 
profits on war material and after the war were knighted 
for their great sacrifice and heroism. 

Social Planning for Canada (22-27) 

3. During the war, prices rose to fabulous heights. 

Social Planning for Canada 

4. High tariffs made it impossible for debtor countries to pay 
amounts due in the form of goods. 





















; ■ 

' ,; ■ ' \ v c 


'•• • . - ‘ix?:.-• ‘ / ; •' ^ • ; 

. 





.. ... 

. 






- 

. 

' 


, « • ; £ 

- 

: 






. 

. - 

. 




. 

. 

. 

. 

. 







- 12 - 


Social Planning for Canada (31-37) - (348-360) 

5. In 1929 the prices of basic commodities skidded near the 
vanishing point. 

The World of Today (313-314) 

The Post War World (443-445) 

Social Planning for Canada (185-186)-(28-30) 

6. The unemployed youth of the land crossed Canada on the 
freights. 

The World of Today (314) 

7. The Statute of Westminster made Canada a free and wqual 

partner in the British Commonwealth of Nations. 

The Post War World (446-447) 

The Modern World (457-465)-(471-472) 

8. The Canadian Government under the leadership of R.B. Bennett 
attempted to stem the depression. 

The World of Today (315) 

9. The Ottawa Trade Agreements of 1932 gave Canada additional 
preferential treatment in the British Market. 

The Post War World (447-448) 

The Modern World (465-470) 

10. In Canada, new Political Parties arose on the failure of the 
old line parties. 

The World of Today (315-318) 

Social Planning for Canada (315-326) 

11. Our happy trading relationship with the British Empire 
brings work to Canada. 

The World of Today (318-320) 

12. Canada supported the League of Nations. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (167-173) 

13. In September 1939 a special session of Parliament'declared 
war on Germany. 

14. As a result of the Monroe Doctrine and President Roosevelt, 
Canada and the United States have set their gears very close 
by the appointment of a joint Defence Board in 1940. 


The Modern World (438-444) 


f I .V. r : ’ v ' v 









. * ■ 
















.'..•O' ' 








. 




. 


■ 


■ ■ 














V: • * : i 






. 




. - ■ 








" u.; 


















- 13 - 


Social %uiz on Post War Problems 

1* How many (a) men 


(e) 


Russians 


(b) French 

(c) British 


(f) Americans 


(g) Canadians 


(d) Germans 

died in the actual blood bath of the Great War 

2. In what countries did civilians perish as a result of the 
World War, and how many perished as a result in each country 
named? 

3. How much wealth was destroyed in the Great War and what 
could have been done with that money for the social im¬ 
provement of the people of this planfet? 

4. Choose the correct statement: 

After the Great War Germany was ruled by: 


a. the Kaiser 


b. The Communists 


c. Democracy 


d® The lews 


e. The Weimar Constitution 


5. Germany collapsed after the war because: 

1. she printed too much money 

2. she paid too much on war debts 

3* Versailles was harsher than Brest-Litovsk 

4. Germany wanted to collapse 

5, France invaded the Ruhr valley. 

Note — In the following questions choose the best answer or fill 


the blanks 






. 


















' 

' 

* 










. 


. 













- 

* 
















. ■ 


. J 
















np W _ , 

0 O O at* 

^HO Jh 

cd 

Pi £ © 
•H d o ^ 

.d 

^ d © © 
Oh pi 
Pi © M -p 
©Co 
cd p 

pH -P r-i .H 

©•© pq 

£ ^ Pi 

P Pi © 
© M >4 
•h © cd 

Pi ft p 

P o • 
h h © 
Pi 3 cd cd 
O pq p; 













■ 

.. 








1 















I 












- 16 - 


6. After the war, the Kaiser went to: (1) England 


(1) 

England 

(2) 

France 

(3) 

Belgium 

(4) 

U.S.A. 

(5) 

Holland 


7. From 1924 to 1929 Germany recovered because: 

L. she had no army 

2. she borrowed money 

3. she printed too much money 

4. she sold goods in foreign lands 

5. Hitler persecuted the Jews. 

8. The German Republic failed because: 

1. the great depression came 

2. Germans don’t like democracy 

3. there was unemployment 

4. the Jews sabotaged. 

9. Hitler was born in: 1. Berlin 

2. Vienna 

3. Berschtesgaden 

4. Austria 

10. The Nazis terrified the German people by: 

1. using castor oil 

2. shooting offenders 

3. making them fear the French 

11. The Reichstag was burned by: 

1. Goering 

2. The 0 ommuni st s 


van der Lubbe 


; .. , . u v \1 . ' 0 tJ , ‘I&i 


* 

'* ■ 

* 






. 




' 








. 


- 







- 17 - 


12 . 


13. 


4 . 

Ernest Roehm was a :1. 

2 . 

3. 

4. 


Roosevelt 

sucilde 

Jew 

friend of Hitler 
leader of Storm Troopers 


The Beer Hall Putsch was: 


1. a drunken party 

2. a free for all 

3. an attempt to overthrow the Govern¬ 
ment. 

4. a beer drinking contest. 

14. Hitler wrote: 


1. Gone with the Wind 

2. Among My Souvenirs 

3. Mein Kampf 

4. 0 f To Be in England 

15. Goering was: 

1. tall and slim 

2. A Swedish aviator 

3. head of the German air-force 

4. pilot of a "Dixie clipper". 

16. Goebbels was: 

1. Hazi Foreign Minister 

2. Minister of propaganda 

3. club-footed 

4. Russian ambassador to Germany 

17. Germany’s army emphasized: 


1. infantry 











. 






:: •. ; . .!. 








, 

. 









■ 

. 


, 












: . • 


* 


















: 






* 




. 


- 



, 

. . ; 

» 

. 

’ 

. 










- 18 - 


2. aeroplanes 

3. battleships 

4. tanks 

18. France: (1) invited Germany to occupy the Rhineland 

(2) chased Germany from the Rhineland in 1935 

(3) didn’t care whether Germany occupied it or not 

19. Ribbentrop was: (1) Germany’s finance minister 

(2) A Luthean minister 

(3) Foreign minister 

20. The Rome-Berlin Axis was: 

(1) an iron shaft 

(2) a gentleman’s agreement 

(3) A Christian accord with the pope 

(4) a military alliance 

21. War started in September 1939 because: 

1. Poland invaded Germany 

2. Russia invaded Poland 

3. The Germans wanted peace 

4. Hitler was determined to have war. 

22. The Munich Conference: 

1. brought peace 

2. brought war 

3. helped the Germans 

4. destroyed Czechoslovakia 

5. made Benes president of the Reichsbank 

23. A Blitzkrieg on London means: 


1. a group of balloons 

2. a flight of the Hindenburg 













. 

. 

: 











: 















. . 




* 

■ 









- 

. 

. 

. 

♦ 

. 














- 19 - 


3. murder from the air 

4. A Messerschmidt falling in the Thames 

5. air warfare with explosive and in¬ 
cendiary bombs. 

24. Hitler does not invade England, because: 

1. he lacks troops 

2. he lacks a navy 

3. The British have superior numbers of 
aircraft 

4. his soldiers are afraid of fish 

5. he is afraid 

6. he thinks the English will surrender 
soon 

In the following, fill the blanks: 

1. Italy joined the Great War on the side of the . 

because they promised her ...., by the secret Treaty of ... 


.... in the year ...... In the war, Italy was defeated at 

. ...by the ... Italians were killed in 

the Great War. 


2. At the Peach Conference held in.. Italy was repres¬ 
ented by. He quarrelled with President . 

For Italy he gained (1)...(2).(3).. . 

(4) .. 

3. After the war.was great in Italy. A party called 

the .. arose. It was led by .. 

4. Mussolini was the son of a. He fled to ..to 

avoid .. There he was.many times. Once he 

stole some . from some ....... ladies. His followers 
































: f vcn 




. 










' ' ' - ' 








f) •• > 








. . 

, .* ; r . 

. 


















£l) • • » • • » • 

OH WCO ^ LO E-i CS 


0 ■ 






i a :- 




U> 


i.,. 

V; ''V. 


4/'T 


"X, 

V '. 

" -\A\ 


A 


f 

<;X’ 






A 

'-J 




> 

\ < r 



- 21 - 


doused enemies with.and beat them with 

. They murdered. Mussolini attacked . 

in 1935 and drove out Emperor . Mussolini sent his 

soldiers into (1).(2).(3). in 1940. 

The British drove the Italians from (1).(2). 

(3). (add 4,5,6, etc. as needed) 

5. When Prime Minister Churchill said to Mussolini on May 16, 
1940,: 


"Is it too late to stop a river of blood from flowing 

between the British and Italian people? We can no doubt 

inflict grievous injuries upon one another and maul each 
other cruelly and darken the Mediterranean with our strife. 
If you so decree, it $ust be so". 

What did Mussolini reply? List four reasons for his reply. 
Do you think he could then see into the future as far as 
Sidi Barrani, Bardia, Tobruk, Albania, Greece, Taranto, 
Sicily? 

Japan and World Problems 

1. Match names and offices held: 


1. Matsuoka 

2. Konoye 

3. Chiang Kai Shek 

4. Soong sisters 

5. Grew 

6. Wei 

7. Hirohito 


~ Premier 

- foreign minister 

- female leaders in China 

- American ambassador to Japan 

- puppet ruler of North China 

- leader of Chinese 

- Emperor of Japan 


2. Fill blanks: 


Japan used to 


shipwrecked fishermen. She traded 














' : ; ,r ■ v 


. • • . i. . 























v'.C * 











* 

* 

. 

, * 1 ■ ,v '■ . 

. 

. 














- 22 - 


wit h -only. Commodore -persuaded her to sign 

a treaty with the- -in-. Japan be¬ 
gan to build-copied from-countries. Today 

she is an- -industrial nation. 

3. In the last fifty years Japan has taken: 

1. Korea 

2. Formosa 

3. Manchukuo 

4 . 

55 . 

6 . (complete the list) 

4. Brand these statements as true or false. Think with dis¬ 
crimination: 

a. Japs are runts and Jjoor fighters. 

b. Japan licked Russia in 1905 

c. Japanese oranges grow in Florida. 

d. The Japs made an alliance with Italy, and Germany 
aimed at the United States. 

e. The Chinese prefer to let Japan have Manchukuo. 

f. Tokyo is in the extreme horth of Japan. 

g. Japan exports steel and oil. 

h. Japan exports silk, toys, oranges. 

5. Why did the League of Nations let Japan take Manchuria? 

6 . Way can Japan sell her goods abroad so cheaply? 

7. What objections do Californians and British Columbians 
raise to Japanese immigration? 

. What does Japan mean by the "new order in the East" and 
"Asia for the Asiatics"? 


8 
























. 

• ' .. • 





















. 



















.v 

. 
































i • ■' 




















Vf' 






- 24 - 


9. 

What is the Burma road? 



10. 

Write a paragraph about: 




1. 

Madame Kai Shek 

6 . 

Manilla 


2. 

The Soong Sisters 

7. 

Hong Kong 


3. 

Singapore 

8. 

Konoye 


4. 

The Dutch East Indies 

9. 

Fujiyama 


5. 

French Indo-China 

10. 

The Emperor 

Russia and World Problems 



1. 

Show 

Russia’s areq by: 




1. a bar graph comparing Russia and Canada 

2. superimposing map of U.S.A. on map of Russia 

3. comparing actual area with North America in square 
miles. 

2. Under the Tsar, Russian peasants were: 

1. happy 

2. idle 

3. slaves 

3. Could you justify this statement: "Nearly all the Tsars were 
ravenous gangsters who sought to torture their subjects and 
to keep them in poverty, ignorance, filth"? 

4. Write a paragraph to describe farming methods under the Tsars 
of Russia up to 1917. 

5. Why was Russia so easily knocked out of the last war by 
Germany? 

6. What were the terms of the treaty of Brest-Litovsk? 

7. Write a paragraph about: 

1. Trotzsky 7. German-Russo Alliance 

2. Lenin 8. Molotov 




















- 35 - 


3. The Russian Revolution 9. 

4. Stalin 10. 

5. The Five Year Plan 11. 

6. The Finnish War 12. 

The United States and World Problems 

1. List ten methods by means of which 
rich during the Great War. 

2. Select the true statement: 

1. War debts were loans made 
during the war. 

2. War debts were loans made 


Russia and the Dardanelles 
Ribbentrop went to Moscow 
Sir Stafford Gripps 
Maisky 

the United States grew 


to combatant countries 


to revive Furope after 


1919. 


3. Underline the statement most nearly correct - Reparations 

are: 

1. payments on war debts 

2. interest on loans 

3. goods destroyed in war 

4. payment for war destruction 

4. Place check mark beside correct statement 

"Shylock" was a term applied to Uncle Sam after the Great 
War because: 

1. The United States collected 100% of war debts 
owing. 

2. Americans wouldn’t trade with the w T orld. 

3. Americans were greedy and wanted a "pound of flesh". 

4. Americans wanted repayment of war loans. 


List five causes of unemployment in the United States after 









[Name all cities marked by a black spot and tell why or how each is im¬ 
portant. 
































- 28 - 


the war. 


Match these lists 


a. Roosevelt 


car manufacturer 


b. Willkie 


President 1929 


c. Hoover 


President 1927 


d. Ford 


Republican Candidate 


e. coolidge 


successor to Wilson 


f. Knudsen 


secretary of state 


g. Harding 


President in 1933 


h. Hull 


organizer of defense program 


Mark true statements correct. The New Deal was: 

a. a re-shuffle of the cards 

b. an act to help bankers 

c. social reform for common people 

d. a plan to build Boulder Dam 

Choose correct statements: The stock market crashed in 1929 
because: 

1. the price of wheat fell 

2. Europe declared war 

3. Germany defaulted on her loans 

4. people feared the boom would break 

5. there was great unemployment 

6. Hoover didn’t try to stop the crash 

7. there was too much money 

8. prices fell 

Write a paragraph of ten lines favoring the New Deal. Write 
another paragraph of ten lines or less attacking the New Deal. 













WORLD 
















\ 

<■ 


i 

£ 

; 

f 


j 

? 

■ 

i 

i 



C'' 




' \ 





i 

% 





-30- 


10* Brand these statements as true or false: 

a. The Blue Eagle stood for American readiness to co¬ 
operate to make the New Deal successful. 

b. Boulder Dam was built as a tourist centre. 

c. The New Deal tried to raise wages by a system of 
codes. 

d. The United States took President Woodrow Wilson’s 
advice and received the League of Nations with open 
arms. 

e. The Monroe Doctrine guarantees safety to Canada. 

f. President Roosevelt was not the first American to 
receive three terms as President. 

11. Pill in the blanks: 

Eranklin Roosevelt was born in the year ..... at .... 

. He was educated at .. as a .. During 

the last war he occupied a position as . In the 

elections of 1920 he ran as Democratic candidate for the 
. ...of the U.S.A. Later he was stricken with a dis¬ 
ease called . .. By sheer will.he 

began to recover. At the .of Georgia he re¬ 
cuperated while In 1928 he was elected governor 

of ... state. In November 1932 he was elec¬ 

ted as ............ of the United States, but he did not 

take office until ... 1933. He is very anxious for 

his country to aid .... against the Dictator¬ 
ships. Recently he traded fifty . to Great Britain 

for.. in the Atlantic. In 1940 he was elected 


for a 


term. He is the 


American to be so 







































On this map mark in Red all American possessions; Show here the Panama Canal. TT rite the 
mark in blue America’s recently acquired naval bases. story of its con 

in bright green mark America’s main trade toutes. struction and im¬ 

portance . 















-32- 


honered. 

12. List the bases the United States has acquired in the At¬ 
lantic and tell how they will help to defend herself. 

Great Britain and World Affairs 

1. Chech your knowledge of Winston Churchill by marking with a 
check mark the individual events with which he was associat¬ 
ed in the following list. Give his attitude toward each. 

1. The Boer War 

2. Mein Kampf 

3. The Munich Conference 

4. Spanish War in Cuba 

5. First Lord of the Admiralty 

6. Chancellor of the Exchequer 

7. Author of the World Crisis 

8. Frontier War in India 

9. Female suffrage 

10. Communism 

11. The General Strike 

12. The Regina riots 

13. The Invasion of Belgium 

14. ^eynaud’s resignation 

15. The Dardanelles campaign 

16. Execution of van der Lubbe 

17. The War of 1914 to 1918 

18. A traffic accident in New York 

19. Randolph Churchill 

20. Duke of Marlborough 

21. Oldham 





















22. "This was their finest hour" 

23. The Spanish Civil War 

24. Dunkirk 

25. The Murder of Matteoti 

Check each of the items mentioned above and include them in 
a paragraph on Churchill’s life story. 

Check correct statements. Place an 2 on incorrect. 

a. The Government of Britain is a democratic government. 

b. A parliamentary government is headed by a dictator. 

c. A premier chooses his cabinet. 

d. A cabinet minister must have a seat in the House of 
Commons or in the House of Lords. 

e. The House of Commons has more power than the House 
of Lords. 

Which of the following statements could be included in an 
essay on post-war unemployment in Britain: 

1. The Americans gained Britain’s markets while Britain 
8 was fighting for survival. 

2. The Japanese expanded their industrial output. 

3. The world system of trade broke down. 

4. Tariffs hindered trade. 

5. The World Economic Conference of 1933 crashed. 

6. Machines replaced hand labor. 

7. The people became flabby. 

8. There was no money. 

9. No goods were needed. 

. Oil replaced coal. 


10 








* 


. 

’ 

. 

■ 

, 

. 









. 

• , ' J 

. 

. 

. 

. 

- 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 









£ 


On this nap show the oaths leading to the Ottawa Economic Conference of 1932. Show also 
the products that were inter-changed thereafter. 

















- 36 - 


5. Free Trade means: 

1. to charge foreigners a tariff on their exports to 
us. 

2. to allow goods entrance to our country duty free. 

3. to charge no duty on Empire goods only. 

6. Match these names with proper events: 


1. 

Stanley Baldwin 

- 

Libya 

2. 

K.B.Bennett 

- 

Anthony Eden 

3. 

Bardia 

- 

Ambassador to U.S.A. 

4. 

Dunkerque 

- 

Minister of Labor 

5. 

Appeasement 

- 

Submerged bombs 

6. 

Air Blitz 


Ottawa Trade Agreements 

7. 

Neville Henderson 

- 

7f mile channel 

8. 

Ernest Bevin 

- 

Prime Minister of Great 

Britain 

9. 

Lord Lothian 

- 

Leader of the Free French 

10. 

Mines 

- 

Nationalist Government 

11. 

Harry Lauder 

- 

Leader of Labor Party 

12. 

Neville Chamberlain 

- 

Athenia 

13. 

Royal Oak 

- 

Treaty of Versailles 

14. 

Godesburg 

- 

T.H. Lawrence 

15. 

Foreign Minister 

- 

Labor Par£y 

16. 

Clement Attlee 

— 

British Ambassador to Germ¬ 
any 

17. 

Churchill 

- 

Aeroplane 

18. 

Charles.de Gaulle 

- 

Czecho-Slovakia 

19. 

Coventry Raids 

- 

Munich Conference 

20. 

Torpedoes 


Aircraft Carrier 





■ 

- 


* 



« 


* 

- . 

























v» 























* 






. 


. 1 









, ♦ 


* 

: : 




. 










. ' 


























- 38 - 


21. 

Benes 

- 

France 


22. 

Gibralter 

- 

Chamberlain 


23. 

Lloyd George 

- 

London 


24. 

Snowdon 

- 

blackouts 


25. 

Lawrence of Arabia 

- 

Samuel Hoare 


26. 

Herbert Morrison 

- 

Musical Comedian 


27. 

Taranto 

- 

Total air attack 


28. 

Darkened lights 

— 

Labor chancellor 

chequer 

of Lx- 

29. 

Ramsay McDonald 

- 

Attack on Italian Navy 

30. 

Spitfire 

- 

Minister of Home 

Security 


France and World Events 
Choose the correct statements: 

1. When France surrendered to Germany in 1940 the Premier was 

a. Petain 

b. Keynaud 

c. Daladier 

d. Laval 

2. France, before the German conquest, had a Government that 
was: 

a. Parliamentary 

b. Dictatorial 

c. constantly changing 
&. stable 

3. France now has a Government called: 

a. Republican 

b. Directory 

c. Parliamentary 







. 

. 





- 






. 









- 

* 


. 


















. 


* 

. 




* 



. 

' 

- 

. 








- 39 - 


d. Autocratic 

e. servile puppets 

4. Kussia broke her ore-war assistance pact with France be¬ 
cause : 

a. she trusted Germany more 

b. The Munich Conference 

c. One nation joined the Axis 

d. self-interest 

e. fear of capitalism 

5. To France the League of Nations meant: 

a. World Peace 

b. Security 

c. Free Trade 

d. Protection from the Germans 

e. a debating society 

Canada and World Affairs 

1. Fill in these blanks: 

William Lyon Mackenzie King is . of Canada* He is 

the grandson of ... • • ... who took part in the .. * 

. of 1837 in. From Osgoode Hall, 

Mr. King graduated in Law. He was hired by the . in¬ 

stitute in the United States to explore labor troubles. 

He became a labor-dispute conciliator for the Canadian Gov¬ 
ernment. He was made Deputy Minister of.in Lauriers 

time. He studied at . in Germany and at . in 

the United States. In.he was elected as leader of 

the . party. 


In the elections of 


his party was successful at 

















>0 ti 

. 

. 

■ 

■ 

, 

- 

. 

. 

- 

« ■ 

. 

■ 

* 

: 

. 

..* . 

. . 

*. : 

. 

. 

. 













- 41 - 


polls and he, as leader of the official opposition became. 

. of Canada. In 1926 he attended the . Conference 

in. and dined with King George V. In September, 1939 

he invited Canada to join the war against Nazi Germany. He is 
now credited with preparing for Canada’s smooth entrance into 

this war by arranging for the visit of the . and . 

to Canada in . He is also praised for aiding Great Brit 

ain and the.to Understand each other. Since 

1921 he has been premier for.years. 

2. State whether following conditions are true or false: 

a. The Statute of Westminster made Canada a free and 
equal partner in the British Commonwealth of Nations 

b. Canada is a colony 

c. The depression came in 1929 because we had too much 
wheat. 

d. K.B. Bennett was Premier of Canada from (1935 to 
1940) 

e. M.J. Coldwell in National leader of the C.C.F. 

f. Canada maintains high tariffs against foreign goods. 

g. The Ottawa Trade Agreements provided for the sale of 
Canadian bacon and wheat to England. 

h. The Beauharnois Scandal concerned Mrs. Simpson and 
King Edward VTII. 

i. No one was unemployed in Canada after 1933. 

j. The Monroe Doctrine compels the United States to 
protect Canada from invasion. 

k. President Koosevelt has pledged the United States 
to protect Canada from invasion. 

























- 42 - 


l. Wm* Aberhart is Premier of Alberta, 

m. Frederick Banting discovered insulin. 

n. "There will Always be an England" was written in 
Canada. 








-43 


PROBLEM TOO: Do this and Learn 
How the Environment Affects Living 

1. Varied and extinsive natural resources can provide an a- 
bundant supply of food, clothing and shelter. People en¬ 
joying such plenty are said to have a high standard of 
living. 


An Introduction to American Civilization (12-58) 
Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 1) 

2. Manufacturing industries provide employment in general. 

World Wide Geographies VIII (208-223) 

3. The’natural resources of a country determine the type of 
occupation. 

a. Fertile soil beckons the farmer. 

The Cultivators (K.S.G.) ch. 6;9; 11;12. 

At W T ork in Britaih (ch.3-9) 

World Wide Geographies VIII (ch, 7) 

Economic Geography (ch. 26) - (182-183) -(250-255) 

b. Coal deposits encourage men to enter the pit. 

At Work in Britain (ch. 10,11,12) 

Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 3) 

World Wide Geographies (179-190) - (256-257) 
Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 6) 

Economic Geography (ch. 25,31) 

c. Iron ore deposits supply a need for steel workers. 

At Work in Britain (ch. 13) 

World Wide Geographies (258-261) 

Miners and Manufacturers (K.S.G.) ch. 5; 7. 
Economic Geography (ch. 30;33) 

d. Forests are cut by Sawyers and loggers. 

Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 4) 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 16) 

Economic Geography (ch. 22-23) 

World Wide Geographies VIII (133-149) 

e. Water Power Development requires electrical engineers. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch. 10) 
World Wide Geographies (200-206) 

Economic Geography (312-314) re zinc and lead. 
Economic Geography (306-309) 









. 

. 

. 

. 


. 

. . 








’ 


. ‘ 






' 






• 




. 

. ; 

) ... • , 

s . . . 

. 

. 

• . 

- 

■ 

. 





- 44 - 


el, The existence of clay provides the basis of the pottery 
industry. 


World Wide Geographies (266-267) 

At Work in Britain (ch. 17) 

e2. The glass industry is based on sand and coal. 

World Wide Geographies (267-268) 

f. Lakes, rivers and oceans provide the basis for the fisher¬ 
man’s livelihood. 

At Work in Britain (ch. 1-2) 

Economic Geography (29-56) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (49-52) 
World Wide Geographies (113-133) 

4. The climate of a region may determine the occupations of 
the people. 

a. In Malaya the climate favors rubber growing. 

Economic Geography (136-140) 

The Cultivators (ch. 17) 

World Wide Geographies (158-167) 

Economic Geogrphy (136-140) 

b. In the Southern United States the climate favors the 
growth of cotton. 

World W T ide Geographies (150-157) 

Economic Geography (382-387) 

Our Country Past and Present (257-259) 

c. The grazing fields of South America encourage ranching 
as an occupation. 

World Wide Geographies - Stembridge VIII (58-61) 

d. Paper-making as an occupation is possible where the 
climate permits the growth of pulp-trees. 

Economic Geography (ch.23) 

World Wide Geographies (269-270) 

e. Formosa’s climate has helped to establish the camohor 
trade. 

Economic Geography (248) 

f. The quinine producing Cinchona tree grows in South 
America. 


Economic Geography (248) 















. 





- 










t. 


. ' • 















. 






. 


. 




- ■ ’ ■' : r 1 









< 













. 










- 45 - 


g. Argentine grows the Quebracho tree from which tannin 
is extracted. 

Economic Geography(248-249) 

World Wide Geographies (268) 

h. The Western Mediterranean harbors the cork industry. 

Economic Geography (250-251) 

i. Tropical forests supply mahogany. 

Economic Geography (243) 

j. The Toquilla fibre supplies material for "Panama hats" 

Economic Geography (242) 

k. Banana culture is greatest in the climate of the Car¬ 
ibbean sea. 

Economic Geography (114-119) 

The Cultivators (ch. 14) 

l. Coffee is grown in Brazil. 

Economic Geography (124-130) 

The Cultivators (ch. 18) 

m. Sugar cane is grown in Cuba. 

The Cultivators (ch. 19) 

Economic Geography (106-113) 

n. The climate of western England has located Britain’s 
textile industry about Manchester. 

World Wide Geographies (261-266) 

Economic Geography - lames (388-392) 

5. Occupations are influended by available transportation 
facilities. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (224-247) 

a. The Radium deposits of Great Bear Lake were opened up 
after advances in aeroplane freight hauling were made. 

b. The aluminum industry at Arvida, Quebec, was possible 
because of adequate transportation facilities to trans¬ 
port bauxite from British Guiana. 

Economic Geography (314-315) 


- 












. 

■ 

.. 












' 



. 

, 

. 

" . ■ . • 

* 


* 




















- 46 - 


c. Fresh Australian mutton was available to the British 
householder when refrigeration steamships were per¬ 
fected. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (238) - (61-64) 

The Modern World (116) 

d. The Dates of Arabia are shipped abroad after being 
transported via the camel. 

The Cultivators (K.S.G.) ch. 14 
Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 7) 

6. Occupations are determined by location. 

a. Coastal people become sailors and fishermen. 

Economic Geography (137-145) - (ch. 4) 

b. Mountain people make their living in many ways. 

Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 10) 

c. The Grand Banks of Newfoundland have beckoned the 
coastal people of Eastern Canada. 

Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 2 &17) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (128-131) 

d. Tin miners work in South Eastern Asia. 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 4) 

Economic Geography (309-311) 

e. Oil workers find employment where nature has deposited 
oil forming plants. 

Economic Geography (ch. 28) 

World Wide Geographies (193-200) 

f. Packing plant employees usually find employment in the 
heart of a cattle-grazing region. 

Economic Geography (ch. 35) 

g. The occupation of conserving forests is plied in for¬ 
est areas. 

Economic Geography (ch. 24)-(259-266) 
gl. Asbestos provides work for many people. 

Mining of Asbestos 






i •• j •> 


.C ' 






























' 








. 






. ■) 











- 47 - 


h. Turpentine distilleries are located vrtiere resinous 
pine trees abound. 

Economic Geography (246-248) 

i. The jute and hemp industries get raw materials from 
the monsoon areas of the globe. 

Economic Geography (154-157) 

j. Rice growing is confined to monsoon regions. 

Economic Geography (145-149) 

The Cultivators (ch. 5& 6) 

k. Various conditions determine the location of textile 
factories. 

Economic Geography (381-399) 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 12, 13, 14) 

l. The manufacture of machines and machine tools provides 
skilled occupations. 

Economic Geography (369-371) 

Economic Geography (315^316) re alloys needed. 

m. The automobile industry provides work for hundreds of 
thousands. 

Economic Geography (358-362) 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 8) 

n. Commerce provides many occupations. 

At Work in Britain (ch. 19) 

World Wide Geographies (273-286) 

Economic Geography (ch. 33; 37) 

o. Shipbuilding employs steel workers. 

At Work in Britain (ch. 18) 

World Wide Geographies VIII (259-260) 

Influence of Geographic Factors 

1. ?/orld population is located chiefly in three areas. 

Economic Geography (3-37) 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World (3-180 
Van Loon’s Geography (ch, 1) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (13-37) 

2. Geographical factors have produced a variety of racial 
types. 








■ ' ■ ■ ; ' " o.". * :n -i' 

. 

. 

. 






i ■ ..; .' . , 


. 

. 

■ 

, 

: 







. 

■ 

. 

. 

* 

* 

. ■ ■. 

. 




. 

. 




■ 




. 




. 






-48-r 


Outline of History (ch. 11) 

The World of Today (9-25) 

5. The water masses surpass the land masses of our globe. 

Yan Loon’s Geography (ch. 3-p.505) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (21-29) 

4. North America is a natural Economic Unit. 

Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 46) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (ch.7,8,9 
& 1-6) 

Our World Today - Stull & Hatch (29-50)-(515-682) 

5. Despite the jungle region of the Amazon and the mountain¬ 
ous barriers of the Andes, South America produces abund¬ 
ance . 


Our World Today (430-513) 

Social Studies for Canadians (ch. 6) 

Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 46) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (ch. 10) 

6. Despite the great deserts and swamps Africa has rich sup¬ 
plies of minerals and foods. 

Van Loon’s Geography (45) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (18) 

Our World Today (101-130) 

7. Asia possesses enormous supplies of unexploited resources. 

Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 30-41) 

A World Geography (ch. 15,17,16) 

Our World Today (75-101) - (371-429) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (ch.19) 

8. Australia has a vast uninhabitable interior. 

Our World Today-Stull & Hatch (50-75) 

Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 42-44) 

A World Geography for Canadian Schools (ch. 19) 

9. Europe is both the cradle and the grave of modern civil¬ 
ization. 


Van Loon’s Geography (ch. 7,29) 

A World Geogranhy f&r Canadian Schools (ch.19) 

Our World Today (7-28) - (331-371) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (ch.10 
-14) 

Influence of Social Factors 


1. The standard of giving of a people is measured by their 




















. 










. 


- ' ' ' r 








* 








. ' '* ^ ' 

i 

• • 














- 








- 49 - 


supply of food, clothing, shelter and that class of art¬ 
icles now, or formerly known as luxuries. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch.2 p. 
193-194) 

The World of Today (1-6) 

2. In the United States and Canada the average living condi¬ 
tion is described as high. To this description there are 
many individual exceptions. 

An Introduction to American Civilization - Rugg 
(ch.2;28) 

3. In China the standard of living is low because the people 
have despised to harness machinery to the task of converting 
to consumer goods, vast natural resources. 

Whither Mankind (ch. 1) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (541- 
545) 

4. In Spain the standard of living is low. 

Days of Our Years (ch. 9J. 

Inside Eurone (ch. 12) 

The Post War World (106-107) 

5. Within any one country conditions may vary from the gold 
plate of the king’s palace to the vermin infested squalor 
of the morgue feeding slums in a large city. 

Calgary Herald (Nove. 29, 1940) 

Social Planning for Canada (22-30) 

Social Credit - Douglas (120-128) 

6. Ambitious leaders often goad hungry populations into war, 
dangling before their eyes the prospect of raw materials 
and markets and higher standards of living. 

The World of Today (pt. 7) 

The World of Today (28-32)-(35-40) 

7. In former days emigration provided the key to congestion, 
it could if the leaders would, today. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch.5) 

The World of Today (28-32) 

8. The application of science to develop new areas for homes 
has increased the worlds living space. 

Our World today (232) 

The World Today (32-34) 

The Boulder Canyon -Project 




. 


. 


( 


* 

. 





• . 

. 

: 

/ 

' 

- 






















. 




. 




■ 






- 50 - 


Nature has supplied peace and abundance for all. 
trouble is: Man has thwarted nature. 

Van Loon’s Geography (ch.l; 47) 

Social Credit - Douglas (ch 2 ) 







Our 




- 51 - 


Problem Two - Social Studies Activity 


How the Environment Affects Living 

1. List carefully under these headings what a person must 

have to he considered among those who enjoy a high stand¬ 
ard of living: 


1. food 3. shelter 

2. clothing 4. modern appliances 

2. Which of the following articles are luxuries and which are 
necessities for a home where the income is $150.00 per 
month. 


radid 

car 

chesterfield 


mix-master 

$200 bed-room suite 

electric sewing machine 


full length mirror a $12.00 crib 
furnace porcelain bath tub 

refrigerator air conditioner 

ice-box $100 engagement ring 

washing machine Wash bowl in bedroom 

moving picture camera 

3. What type of soil is required for each of these products: 

1. wheat 4. bananas 

2. cotton 5. oranges 

3. potatoes 6. strawberries 

4. Draw a picture of a coal mine for your personal note book, 
Print on it the- name of each necessary part. Draw a map 
of the world and on it mark the world’s coal deposits. 
What is anthracite coal? Where is it found? 

5. On a map of the world, show there iron ore fields: 











■ . ' ; - . ■ _ .... / 

- 














■ 

■ * 

.... 













. 

















: - ■ 















r • • : c 

* 

. r 

. 

■ 

















- 52 - 


1. Mesabi Range of Minnesota 

2. Kiruna, Sweden 

5. Lorraine in France or Germany 
4. Bilbao, Spain 
6, Where are these trees found? 


spruce 

hemlock 

fir 

banana 

tamarac 

cinchona 

oak 

quebracho 

maple 

mahogany 


7, Why are the Kiruna mines of Sweden able to sell iron ore 
so cheaply? What per cent of Kiruna iron ore is iron? Who 

buys Sweden’s surplus? How does Sweden ship her iron ore 
to its market? What makes iron ore from Lorraine so ex¬ 
pensive? What body of water is used to transport Minneso¬ 
ta’s iron ore to the great factories of Detroit? 

8, Where is Canada’s rather meagre iron ore deposit located? 
Why is this deposit scarcely touched? Where does the Al- 
goma Steel Company of Saulte Ste. Marie get iron ore? 

Where do the plants of the Dominion Steel Company at Sydney 
get iron ore? Do you expect Canada may eventually repair 
her deficiency as an industrial nation due to the lack of 
abundant accessible, rich iron ore? 

9, Draw a map of Canada, On it mark Canada’s iron anc coal 
deposits, 

10, Where are Canada’-s forest areas located? 

11, From what Canadian tree is each of the following products 


made: 








-/ . 


a ,o. ^ '■ 












■ 




' 


■ 




. 


. 


’ . 

, 






1 


: 





- 53 - 


shingles quarter round 

hardwood flooring? shiplap 
window frames drop siding 

bevel siding finishing material 

12. In the language of the lumber camp what is meant by: 

gang saws high rigger 

band saw carriage 

slab Jack checker 

fireman 

13. List the many means Canadians use to get logs from the 
forest to the mill. 

14. List ten steps in the manufacture of paper from wood pulp 
Why is a paper factory usually located on a river? 

15. Draw a sketch of the story of the production of electri¬ 
cal power from mountain stream to the consumer. Use 
Ghost River dam as an example. Show the complete story 
from Ghost River to Edmohton. What do these terms mean: 

Transformer head 

pressure meter 

watt turbine 

generator spillway 

16. Where is Alberta’s pottery industry located? What types 
of pottery are manufactured in Alberta? What other pro¬ 
ducts are manufactured in connection with the pottery 
plant in Southern Alberta? 

17. Who was Josiah Wedgewood? Lor What was he famous? Where 
are England’s pottery industries now located? 

18. Write a paragraph entitled n the Making of Glass”. 







- 


































. ' • 


. 


















. 



. 




T 


. 



-54- 


Climate and Occupations 


What product 

is associated with each of these climates? 

Where is each product to be found? 

Climate type 

I 

1. 

intense warmth 

2. 

abundant moisture 

3. 

even temperatures of 75 to 85 degrees 

4. 

monthly rainfall of at least 5 inches 

5. 

little wind 

6 • 

relative humidity 75% to 80% 

7. 

yearly rainfall 75 to 120 inches. 

Climate Type 

II 

1. 

high temperatures 

2. 

intense sunlight 

3. 

rainfall more than 70 inches 

4, 

freedom from wind storms 

5. 

near the equator - less than 10 degrees from 

it. 

6 • 

rainy lowland 

Climate type 

III 


1. near margin of tropics 

2. moderate temperature 

3. 45 to 60 inches of rain 

4. f of rainfall October to March 

5. showers every month 

6. no prolonged drought 

7. heavy shower type of rainfall 

. dry sunhy season-April to September 


8 

























- 






























- ■ 






♦ 

' 




* 


























' 

- 

♦ 

. 

* 






















<D Q) 

£ > 

0 *H 

Ph +? 

FJ ° 

oh £ 

iHga'-P o 

od^PH-P 


s ^ 

P o 

o 

Sh CQ rH 

k ctf 
<H O -p 

a) h n. 


r,j 0 ctf <tf ^ 3 *H -p 4 4 

lKo«ScW<! ocowo 


j N p)<ft|0«0I>-C0a>O>H<M 

















C ft 


w 

H 

< 

H 


Q 

W 

H 

2 


_p 


<D 

o 

cl 

M 

o 

CO 


On this map of the United States show iron ore deposits and route 
of iron ore to industrial centres. 







s 


o 


o 

\r 


o 

co 



5 | 


O 

CStf 














f 

v ; 








j 












- 58 - 


Climate tyoe IV 

1# hot days and nights in summer 

2. plentiful rain of thundershower type 

3. rain at night 

4. hot dry spells to kill boll-weevil 

5. growing season at least 200 days 

6. summer temperature at least 77 degrees T. 

7. minimum of 18 inches of rainfall annually 

8. autumn rains seldom 

2. Match these products and countries: 


a • 

camphor 

Colombia 

b. 

quinine 

tannin 

c. 

quebracho 

Panama 

d. 

toquilla 

Santos 

e. 

mahogany 

Port Hope 

f. 

coffee 

British Honduras 

6* 

bananas 

Dominican Republic 

h. 

pitchblende 

Australia 

i. 

mutton 

gasoline 

J. 

crude oil 

British G-uiana 

k. 

Arabia 

radium 

1* 

Arvida Quebec 

dates 

m. 

cancer 

bauxite 

n. 

water power 

Formosa 

0. 

refrigerated 

ships Great Bear La] 

p. 

Brazil 

Canada 


Q. 


Turner Valley Argentine 


















































- 59 - 


r. Cinchona Fazenda 

3. What products grow under these conditions: 


Type 

1. 

a. 

thundershower rain, at night 




b. 

hot weather 




c. 

warm nights 




d. 

no early frost 




e. 

fertile, alluvial river bottom soils 




f. 

black prairie soils 




g. 

minimum rainfall of 20 inches 


Type 

11. 

a. 

fertile, dark colored, fine textured 

loamy 




soil 




b. 

high summer temperatures 




c. 

comparatively low rainfall 


Type 

111. 

a. 

relatively cool climate 




b. 

not too much moisture 




c. 

fertile soil 


Type 

IY. 

a. 

planted in February or March 




b. 

harvest 11 to 12 months later 




c # 

10 - 18 months to reach maturity 




d. 

no frosts 




e. 

abundant rain April to November - 45 

ins. 




minimum 




f. 

dry December to March 




g. 

fertile red clay soil 


Type 

V. 

a. 

hilly or mountainous lands 




b. 

excellent soil drainage 




c. 

very heavy rainfall evenly distributed through- 




out long, hot summer. 

















. 







. 

. 

♦ 

. 




. 

' 






- 

. 



iO L' 









■ ■ 

















- 60 - 




d. 

rainfall greater than 100 

ins. per 

year 



e. 

fertile soil 



Type 

VI. 

a. 

warm humid climate 





b. 

50 inches of rain as minimum per year 



c • 

minimum of 5 ins. of rain 

per month during 




growing season 





d. 

fields flooded at intervals 




e. 

loam over a heavy clay 





f. 

coastal lowlands, such as 

deltas - 

ideal 

Type 

VII. 

a. 

rich black or brown soil, 

fertile, 

humus 



b. 

low rainfall 15-25 inches 

per year 




c • 

rains June and July 





d. 

wet weather produces rust 





e. 

freedom from frost 




4. Where are the Grand Banks? What fish are found there? 
What is a dory? What is a trawl line? Write a paragraph 
describing the perils of fishermen, 

5. Make a list showing the uses of real tin. Remember that 
many of the cans you call tin cans are really sheet steel. 

6. ?7hat does an oil drill look like? Draw a picture of an 
oil well derrick. What is a "rough neck”? How does oil 
well casing fit together? How is casing pulled from a 
well? 

7. Visit a large packing plant in Calgary or Edmonton. Later 
write a brief story of what you saw. 

8. The forest reserve on "Vinlando” is in need of a chief 
forester to organize conservation measures in a forest 
containing 2,000 ,000' acres of timber-land. The Government 











. - 



















. 






















- 61 - 


of Vinlando wants a forest chief who knows every angle of 
conservation work: 

a. Write a letter to the Government of Vinlando 
outlining carefully every precaution and each undertaking 
necessary to promote the welfare of their forest reserve. 

b. There are careless individuals near the Vin- 
lando Forest Reserve. What steps will you take to per¬ 
suade them not to destroy their own forest area? 

c. Plan a poster persuading campers not to be 
careless in their own forest. Make it colorful, persuas¬ 
ive, tactful. 

9. List 10 uses of Asbestos. 

10. What products do we get from: 


1 . 

jute 

7. 

bauxite 

2. 

hemp 

8. 

cane 

3. 

pine trees containin resin 

9. 

cinchona 

4. 

blood from packing plants 

10. 

fazenda 

5. 

slag from lead refineries 



6. 

crude oil 




11. Send to Eldorado Radium Go., Toronto, Ontario for a pamph¬ 
let describing the production of radium. Read the story 
of Canada’s pitchblende deposits on Great Bear Lake. 

Write a paragraph outlining the labors of Madame and Pierre 
Curie to find a cure for cancer. What does cancer do the 
afflicted parts of the body? Is radium treatment always 
successful? When is radium treatment of cancer most suc¬ 


cessful? 














: ■ . ' "’; ■' "'/' 3 ' 0 

* 








. 


- 










* 






. 
























* 

. 

. 













- 62 - 


12. Fill in the blanks: 

Linen is made from. The . is cut 

and dried. Later it is stamped into . hole. It 

is kept there for.days. It is taken out and 

allowed to dry. Then the . oarts are scraped off 

in a sort of grinding machine. The remaining parts are 

. from which cloth is made. Linen is bleached by 

leaving it in the . stretched on the . for 

several days. 

13. Compare these facts re the "Queen Mary" ship with Robert 
Fulton’s first steamboat. 

1. kitchen stove - 16 feet long - electric 

2. meals - 10,000 per day 

3. menu for a voyage - 40,000 lbs of meat 

4,000 chickens 
40,000 lbs of fish 
70,000 eggs 
4,000 lbs. of tea and 
coffee 

60,000 lbs of potatoes 
10,000 bottles of wine 
60,000 bottles of mineral 
water 

40,000 lbs of vegetables 
4,000 gals, of milk 
6,000 lbs. of butter 
10,000 lbs. of sugar 
600 crates of apples 

















and oranges 


2,000 lbs. of cheese 
40,000 bottles of beer. 

Dimensions of the Queen Mary: 


Tonnage 

80,773 tons 

clocks 596 

Length 

1,018 feet 

prints own daily paper 

Height 

135 feet 

two acres of space for 

Ft. Heel to 

masthead 234 feet 

games 

Horse power 

200,000 

speed 37 miles per hour 

Cost 

§30£000,000 

4,000 miles of electric 

Crew 

1,050 

wiring 

Passengers 

2,000 

30,000 electric lamps 


Three Orchestras 24 lifeboats - capacity, 

Telephone communication with the world each 145 pass- 
Return fares-cabin $500 third class §165 engers. 

14. Rill in the blanks: 

Salmon are hatched in ....... water. They spend 

their lives in the . When they feel the urge to 

. they return to fresh water. The . lays the 

eggs and the ....... covers them with gravel. Then the 

. dies. When the young salmon is about two years 

old it is . inches longs. They go out to the ..... 

..... Fishermen catch them when they return to . 

Fishermen use ........ nets suspended in the water, A 

school of salmon is often surrounded by a net called a 

.... . The fish are loaded into the . 

of a shipi$ taken to a.to be .without being 

touched by human hands. The 


river in B.C. is 




























- 64 - 


noted for its salmon. At.B.C. the fishing 

industry has gained an extensive foothold. 

15. List 10 products made by the inhabitants of the mountains 
of Switzerland and show how each product is made as a 
direct result of living in a mountainous area. 

16. In Arabia one third of the surface is covered with . 

the wind has piled it up in. At mid-day the heat 

of the.on the head and the . on the feet is 


terrific. Sometimes desert storms called . bring 

death to the weak. 

In Arabia cloth is made from. hair. Arab 

women have no home life and are very. The Camel is 

the Arab's finest friend because: 


(1) 

(4) 

(2) 

(5) 

(5) 



When a camell gets sick the .. eat it. Some 

meat they preserve by . it. Arabs do not drink 

whiskey but ....... is their national beverage. Life is 

very severe and even . women are ....... when they 

reach thirty years of age. 

Arabs have a high sense of . They never 

. clothing or food left by someone else. When 

all are thirsty the first arriving at an . wait 

without drinking until all arrive to share equally the 


























i 


un this map show where the population of the world is concentr 


















On this map of South Am 

1. Coffee area, Santos 

2. Amazon 
i3. Panama Canal 
41 Buenos Aires 


"ica Show 

5. Grazing lands 

6. political divisions 

7. salt deposits 

8. British Guiana 
13. rubber areas 


9. Montevideo 

10. Santiago 

11. Lima 

12. Trinidad and pitch 
14. whe at fields 
















7 



AFRICA 


On this map of Africa show: 

1. Suez Canal 

2. Johannesburg 

3. Dakor 

4. St. of Gibraltar 

5. Mediterranean Sea 

6. Red Sea 

7. Nile, Niger, Zambesi, Congo 


Q. Belgian conga 5c rubber 
9. Gold Coast and Cocoa 

10. Kimberley 

11. Orange Groves of the Union 

12. Alexandria 

13. Sahara 5c Kalahari 

14. Aden. 

15. Cairo 

16. Pyramids 












. 































i 









w 

H 

< 

H 

CZ3 

Q 

w 


H 

2 

O 


On this map, list and locate the essentials that an industrial nation must possess 
Show in what decree and where these are located in the United States, To what ex¬ 
tent is the U.S. self-contained? Make a list of her imoorts. 
























•'? 






- 72 - 


People such as the Arabs who travel from place 

to place are called . Arabs eat porcupines, lizards, 

jackals, hyenas and . 

17. Pill the blanks: 


1. 

Rice is a . 

2. 

We eat the . 

3. 

Each plant may have as many as.branches. 

4. 

Each contains. seed or seeds of rice. 

5. 

Rice grows in.valleys 

6 • 

It needs.rains and intense . 

7. 

Such an area has a. climate. 

8. 

Monsoons often blow for.months each year. 

9. 

Rice is grown .. water. 

10. 

The rice field must be .. 

11. 

The rice field is plowed under water and becomes very 

12. 

A wooden plow is pulled by . 

13. 

Plants . inches high are transplanted. 

14. 

Plants are Placed . inches apart. 

15. 

Rice often grows .per day. 

16. 

In the month of . harvesting commences. 


17. Rice is cut with 


18. 

It is allowed to dry. days. 

19. 

Cattle trample the . from the head and the grain 

is separated from the bhaff by . it into wind. 

20. 

The seed is encased in a hard shell called .. 

21. 



stick 































• c ' r • " 




























EUROPE 


I 














- 74 - 


22 , The husk is blown away by the 

23. The work is made harder by: 


(a) 

(c) 

(b) 

(a) 


18. What are machine tools? How are they made? Of what ad¬ 
vantage are they to industrialists? 

19. The automobile industry shows modern production at its 
peak of efficiency. What do these terms mean when applied 
to this industry: 

River Rouge mass production 

Chrysler casting blocks 

the assembly line General Motors cars 

specialization of labor testing grounds 

laboratories dependent industries 

stainless steel armor plate 

hydraulic brakes labor union. 

Influence of Geographic factors 

1. Which of the following places does man find as most attract¬ 
ive for a home and why: 

a. hot deserts d.temperate lands 

b. swampy lowlands e. equatorial forests 

c. the cold northland f. frozen north 

2. Why has the great mass of the world’s two billion inhabit¬ 
ants flocked to these areas. 

1. South Eastern Asia 

2. North Western Europe 

3. Eastern United States 























. 














. 


. 




* 

- 




* 









- 75 - 


3. How is it that Europe seems to have advanced to a higher 
quality of life than that enjoyed b either white men or 
savages in South Africa? 

4. How many people live in Asia? List four arguments and 
three against these arguments: 

a. The people of Asia are in poverty because 
they have failed to use machinery to lift the slavery of 
hard toil from man’s back, 

b. The people of Asia are in poverty because 
they have failed to manufacture goods with machines. 

c. The people of Asia are in poverty because 
white men have robbed them. 

d. The peoole of Asia are in poverty because 
they prefer to live as their ancestors did. 

5. What has made so mpch of Australia - desert? Draw a bar 
graph to compare the areas of Canada and Australia. What 
is meant by Anzacs? Make a list of Australian exports to: 

a. Canada 

b. England 

c. U.S.A 

What makes Australia more English than Canada seems to be? 

6. How far is New Zealand from Australia? Draw a map of Alberta 
and superimpose the map of New Zealand to show the latter 

as being 1/5 to 1/3 the area of A1 erta. 


. 

* 


* 










. !' :■ f ■ • 

- 




■ 

. 













. 











i 













- 77 - 


PROBLEM THREE 


How Science Affects Living 

1. The industrial Revolution created a new and changing civil¬ 
ization. 


Our World Today (144-159) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch. 1) 
A New Wonder Book of Knowledge (572-576) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (120-130) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (13-20) 

Makers of the Modern World (Eront. 5-6) 

2. The Industrial Revolution marked the replacement of man by 
machinery. 


A Social History of England - Guest (172-193) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch.12) 

New Wonder Book of Knowledge (133-186) 

Science in Our World of Progress (33-44) 

The March of History (Enc of 17c to P.Day) (32-40) 
World Wide Geographies (208-222) 

3. The arrival and growth of the Industrial Revolution can be 
examined in the cloth industry. 

Makers of the Modern World - Searle (11-28) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (463-468)-(572- 
578) 

The March of History (End of 17c to P.D.) (71-78) 

4. Improvements in the processing of steel paved the way for 
intricate machinery. 

The Picture Story of Steel 
Makers of the Modern World (39-41) 

Introduction to American Civilization - Rugg (ch.12) 
The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (422-438) 

The March of History (End 17c to P.D.) fc82-36) 

Men of Algoma 

5. Science answered the call for more coal. 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (244-247) 

At Work in Britain (ch. 12) 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 6) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch.8) 

The March of History (82-84) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (186-190) 

Mining and Preparation of Anthracite 


6. Coke replaced coal in blast furnaces. 









- 78 - 


Introduction to American Civilization (ch.8) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge 

7. The Steam engine supplied power for the new factories. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (82-88) 
Heroes of Science (52-60) 

.Makers of the Modern World (29-37) 

The March of History (41-43) - (79-82) 

World Wide Geographies - (196-198) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (15-24) 

8. Steam locomotives improved transportation facilities. 

Makers of the Modern World (123-138) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch. 15) 
Social History of England (186-188() 

Our Country and It’s People 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (494-498)-(535- 
538) 

9. The steamship brought a revolution to speed and capacity 
for water transportation. 

An Introduction to American Civilization 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (300-303)(530- 

533) 

Kingway Histories - IV (ch.5) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (235-342) (273-285) 
(232-235) 

10. The Internal Combustion engine brought speed, lightness 
and safety to transportation. 

The Makers of the Modern World (211-215) 
Introduction to American Civilization (88-89) 

The Hew Wonder Book of Xhowledge (559-564) 

Science in Our World of Progress (144-149) 

Kingway Histories - IV (30-32) 

11. The automobile revolutionized transportation. 

Story of Human Progress (254-257) 

Miners and Manufacturers (ch. 8) 

Makers of the Modern T World (207-211) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (481-488) - (559 
-564) 

The Outline History of Transportation 

The Introduction to American Civilization (ch.14) 

12. Rubber has played an important role in modern transporta¬ 
tion. 

The Cultivators - Kingsway III (121-123) 

World Wmde Geographies - VIII (158-166) 






























. 














’ 


* 




■ 










. ) i: d 









- 79 - 


Introduction to American Civilization (574-576) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (578-592) 

The Story of the Tire (samples also) 

13. The Development of the aeroplane, by a great many inventors, 
culminated in the discovery by the Wright Brothers of Dec¬ 
ember 17, 1903. 

An Introduction to American Civilization ^ch.17) 
Makers of the Modern World (227-243) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (28-43) 

World Wide Geographies -VIII 
J?'lying Across Canada 
Aviation Atlas 

14. The Diesel engine has made it possible for greater power 
development from the use of cheap oils. 

Diesel; The Modern Power (Pamphlet) 

Science in Our World of Progress (149-150) 

15. Electricity, produced by Hydro-electric power plants, 
makes possible the transmission of power to convenient 
factory sites. 

Introduction to American Civilization (318-329) 
Makers of the Modern World (42-53) 

World Wide Geographies - Stembridge VIII (200- 
206) 

A New Wonder Book of Knowledge (274-283) 

Grand Coulee Dam 
Boulder Dam 

16. Oil has replaced coal as a source of power. 

Introduction to American Civilization - Rugg ch.8 
Our Industrial World (226-229) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (198-200) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (76-82) 

Science has discovered new modes of communication which have 

made the world smaller. 

1. Telegraph and cable lines carry messages rapidly through¬ 
out the world. 

Makers of the Modern World (153-161) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (89-92) 
The Canadian Industrial Reader (271-273) 

An Introduction to Literature 
A New Wonder Book of Knowledge (262-272) 

2. The telephone has supplied a social and business need. 

Makers of the~“Modern World (151^164) 




. 






. ' 



. 

. 


















t 




•• If • ' 

' 

. 

























. 





















- 80 - 


The Canadian Industrial Reader (273-275) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (329- 
336) 

The Miracle of Talking by Telephone 

3. Wireless machines conveyed messages without miles of cables 
and lines. 


Introduction to American Civilization (337-342) 
Kingsway Histories - IV (29-30) 

4. The radio has placed the news of the world on the very 
doorstep of even the most humble. 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (262-272) 
Science in Our World of Progress (318-324) 

5. Television seeks to do with pictures what radio is doing 
with sound. 


The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (132-134) 
Science in Our World of Progress (334-335) 

6. The Rotary Press can print thousands of daily papers per 
hour and thus enable the public to read the latest news, 
minutes after the occurence. 

Calgary Herald Scrap Book 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (172-180)(286- 
289)(380-382) 

How Paper is Made (pamphlet) 

Economic Geography (267-272) 

7. The Camera shows people of the world how other people are 
living. 


The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (162-168) 
Makers of the Modern World (191-198) 

8. Moving pictures have changed radically the mode of living 
in our generation. 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (11-23) 

Makers of the Modern World (205-207) 

9. Many types of work formerly done by man are carried on by 
new machines. 

An Introduction to American Civilization (ch.12) 
The World of Today (162-163) 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (183-184) 
Britain’s Story (ch.40) 

Science in Our World of Progress (237-247) 


















. 


- 























. 









. 














. * 

■ 














_ 

. 










- 81 - 


10. Governments have undertaken to stimulate scientific dis¬ 
coveries. 


uhanging Governments and Changing Cultures (ch.5) 
National Research Council (Ottawa, Canada) 

11. Governments often keep and develop power sites for the 
people. 


The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (52-56) 
Boulder Dam (pamphlet) 

The Modern World (216-218) 

12. Governments censor the news, the movies and radio pro¬ 
grams. 


Bureau of the Censor (Ottawa) 

The machine age has changed our ways of living - sometimes for 

good - sometimes for bad.~ The machine age brought many evil~ 

in its wake. 

1. The Industrial Revolution brought factory slavery. 

Freedom vs. Organization - Russell (70-78) 

A Social Historv of England (195-200) 

The March of History - II (155-171) 

The House of History - IT (ch. 9) 

Makers of the Modern World (98-106) 

Our World Today (164-169) 

The Post War World (415-416) 

2. Robert Owen was horrified at the evils of industrialism in 
private hands. He proposed social ownership. 

Modern Times - Prescott (125-139) 

Man’s Achievemetn (494-496) 

House of History - IV (105-110) 

Freedom vs. Organization (146-168) 

Our World Todajr (169-171) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures 
(208-211) 

3. Karl Marx wrote **Bas Kanltal" 

Man’s Achievement - Pahlow (496-498) 

4. Francis Place fought for the trade union movement. 

House of History - IV (99-105) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (64-65) 

5. Lord Shaftesbury (Ashley Cooper) led the struggle against 
child labor. 
























. 

. 




■ . ; • ' ■ 

. 








- 

i 


. ' ' • ■■ ; 





■ 

, 




- 





- 


• 




- 













- 









- 82 - 


Modern Times (180-189) 

Makers of the Modern World (98-106) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (66-67) 

6. Elizabeth Fry struggled to organize prison reform. 

Makers of the Modern World (93-97) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (72-74) 

7. Labor unions arose to organize the worker’s demand for a 
higher standard of living. 

Freedom vs. Organization (ch.15) 

The March of History (70-78)-(133-148) 

The House of History - IV (ch.10-ch.15) 

A Social History of England (201-202) 

The March of History (19c to P.D.) (133-143) 

8. Workers sometimes go on strike to force their demands. 

Post War World (115-118) 

The Modern World (153-156) 

Studies in Citizenship (122-126) 

9. Sometimes employers answer a demand for higher wages or 
shorter hours by the "lockout*. 

Our World Todav (176) 

Our Modern World (77,154,157) 

Studies in Citizenship (126-1271 

10. Governments have organized conciliation boards to arbitrate 
or iron out differences between capital and labor. 

Our World Today (176-177) 

The Story of Our People (374-377) 

The March of History - ISCentury (154-156) 

Our World (Modern) (156*157) 

11. Governments have passed laws retulating conditions of albor 
in factories. 

Our World of Today (172-175) 

The March of History (17 Century to P.D.)(163- 
171) 

Our Modern World (157-164) 

12. Governments have set maximum hours of labor. 

Britain’s Story (ch. 51-52) 

Our World Today (171-172) 

13. Governments have established minimum wage laws. 




























' 




















- -7 














. 




















. 




. 



















- 83 ' 


The March of History (19 century)-(120-122) 

Our World Today (172) 

14. Workmen’s Compensation Acts protect workmen against loss 
of income through accidents. 

Story of Britain and Canada (132-134) 

The March of History (19 century) (-119-120) 

Write Alberta Compensation Board 
Studies in Citizenship (130-132) 

15. Governments are enforcing unemployment insurance measures. 

Our Modern World (164-167) 

Our World Today (174) 

The Story of Our People (347-351) 

The March of History (19 Cent.)(116-118) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (ch.9) 

16. Some factory owners allow workers to own a large number of 
shares in factories. 

Our World Today (179) 

The March of History (19 Cent.)(151-154) 

17. Some employers distribute excess profits to their workers. 

The March of History (151-154) 

Our World Today (178) 

Studies in Citizenship (127-130) 

18. Many governments have undertaken to imorove housing con¬ 
ditions for that nation’s workers. 

Sweden: The Middle Way 

The March of History (17 Cent, to P.D.)(250-251) 
Our World Today (179) 

Canada Housing Plan (Ottawa}) 

Social Planning for Canada (451-463) 

Science has made the nations of the world inter-dependent. 


L. The interdependence of nations if well exhibited in the 
case of England’s exchange of goods with Argentine etc. 

Economic Geography (ch.32) 

Our Modern World (113-118) 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World (ch.14) 

2. The U.S. is dependent on other countries. 

And Introduction to American Civilization (ch.29) 

3. Canada raises wheat for Britain and takes textiles and 
clothing in return. 













. 

, 








) 







' . '! . 


. 

- 

- 

, - ' 

* 

„ 




• • 














) 


. . . 















- 84 - 


Economic Geography - Jones (177-186) 

Canadian Industrial Keader 

Kingswa^ Social Geography - III (ch.12) 

4. Argentine trades her cattle to England for steel goods. 

Economic Geography (74-76)(401-403) 

5. The fishermen of the Grand Banks sell their catch in 
England and New England. 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (525-330) 
Social Studies for Canadians (ch.2 ) 

World Wide Geographies - VTII (114-117) 

Nova Scotia’s Beep Sea Eighters 

6. British Columbia and the Annapolis Valley are noted for 
apples. 

Social Studies for Canadians (395-399) 

Canadian Industrial Reader 
The Story of Salmon (pamphlet) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (117-120) 

7. Tropical Cuba grows millions of tons of sugar cane. 

Our World Today (187-191) 

Kingsway Social Geography - III ch. 19) 
Economic Geography (106-113) 

Our Modern World (133-136) 

World Wide Geographies (30-86) 

8. Eruits vary with the climate. 

The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (331) 

World Wide Geographies (70-80) 

Kingsway Social Geographies - III (ch.14-15) 

9. Brazil supplies the world’s coffee. 

Economic Geography (124-130) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (93-97) 
Kingsway Social Geography - III (ch.18) 

The Stbrv of Coffee 

10. The Chinese grow rice. 

Kingsway Social Geography - III (ch.5-6) 
Economic Geography (145-148) 

11. Ceylon supplies the British Empire with tea. 

Economic Geography - Hones (131-135) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (87-93) 

Kingsway Social Geography - III (ch.19) 




















. 








. 












' 



. 

‘ 


. 









. 




. 







. 








- 85 - 


12. Cocoa comes from the Gold Coast. 

Our World Today (191-192) 

The Story of Chocolate and Cocoa 
World Wide Geographies - VIII (97-101) 

Kingsway Sociai Geography - III (ch.18) 

15. The Agrarian Revolution increased the productivity of farm 
land. 


Britain 1 s Story (ch.54-35) 

Makers of the Modern World (1-11) 

March of History (17 Cent.) (64-71) 

Our World Today (192-196) 

Economic Geography (363-369) 

14. Luther Burbank increased the productivity and quality of 
many plants. 

Heroes of Science (186-189) 

Our World Today (198) 

15. Charles Saunders developed Marquis sheat. 

Hungry Eighters 

Our World Today (196-197) 

Canadian Readers * Book V 

16. Louis Pasteur saved the fruit and silk industries of 
France. 


Heroes of Science (120-128) 

Grade VII Literature Text 

17. Boneless chickens (?), small boned sheep and cattle are 
engaging scientific attention. 

Makers of the Modern World (9-10) 

18. Fertilizers, natural and chemical, have increased product¬ 
ivity. Elephant Brand* Fertilizer is well known in West¬ 
ern Canada. 

Elephant Brand Fertilizers (pamphlet) 

Economic Geography - lones (ch.27) 

19. Refrigeration transportation opened the markets of the 
world to the most perishable products. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (238-239) 

Our World Today (199-200) 

20 Packing plants have increased supplies of food by reduct¬ 
ion of waste in handling car ca sses. 





. 

















1 




♦ 

- 












* 






- 


. 














. 
















. 


•• ■ • 








* ' 
























- 86 - 


The New Wonder Book of Knowledge (292-300) 

The Romance of Leather 
Economic Geography (373-380) 

Armour’s Packing Plants (namphlet) 

The World of Today (106-114) 

21. The fish canneries of British Columbia preserve food for 
future use. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (119) 

The Story of Salmon 

22. Abundance of food aan be grown but Canadian bins bulge 

as the Chinese and white men starve because we have failed 
to learn how to distribute to consumers the abundance that 
science can produce. 

Our World Today (201-204) 

Our Modern World, (ch.29) 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (548-556) 
Hrora Wheat and Elour 

Science has greatly influenced the tyoes of clothing worn. 

1. Not many years ago, in the days of the Loyalists, clothing 
was made of homespun. 

The Story of Britain and Canada (88-98) 

The St&ry of Our People (231-240) 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story 
The World of Today (90-101) 

2. Today clothing is made by machinery in vast factories. 

Kingsway Social Geography - IV (ch.12-13) 

World Wide Geography - VIII (261-266) 

At Work in Britain (ch.14-15) 

3. The Industrial Revolution started in the clothing indust¬ 
ries. 


Makers of the Modern World (11-28) 

Changing Civilizations (ch.o) 

March of History (17.Cent.) (71-78) 

4. Elias Howe’s sewing machine increased the productivity of 
clothing factories. 

A History of American Civilization (395-398) 
Makers of the Modern World (148-151) 

5. Cotton clothing was used more extensively after the invent¬ 
ion of the ’’Cotton Gin” by Eli Whitney. 














, 




• •• 

. 


' 





* 

: . ■ - , ■ 


. 

’ ’ 






. 























- 37 - 


A History of American Civilization (389-390) 
Makers of the Modern World (25-28) 

6. The modern generation wears less than did its predeces¬ 
sors, (Here the student will enumerate various articles 
of clothing and compare the robes of other days with the 

abbreviated clothing of today. He can thus prepare a 
report containing some estimate of the smaller amount of 
cloth required for each garment and the possible totals.) 

7. Cotton is raised in the Southern United States. 

The Story of Cotton Thread 
Economic Geography - Tones (187-197) 

Kingsway Social Geography 9 III (149-153) 

Our Country Past and Present 
' Cur Modern World (138-141) 

8. Egypt grows cotton 

Economic Geography (194-195) 

World Geography 

Kingsway Social Geography - III (149-153) 

Our Modern World (138-141) 

9. India has soil and climate favorable to cotton productioh. 

World Geography 

Our Modern World (138-141) 

10. The climate of Western England favors the bleaching of 
cotton. 


Economic Geography (388-392) 

World Geography (Denton and' Lord) 

11. Australia produces large quantities of wool. 

Economic Geography (392-396) 

World Geography 

Our Modern World (1369138) 

How Wool Blankets are Made. 

12. China has an abundant supply of cheap labor - needed in 
production of silk thread. 

Kingsway Social Geography - IV (ch.15) 
Economic Geography (1571161) 

Our Modern World (140-141) 

13. Silk weaving is centred in New Jersey. 

Economic Geography (396-398) 

14. Elax is grown in Ireland. 












































0 3'/C'T. - , 
















* 





- 






. 


. ~ 




■ 


. 






- 88 - 


King sway Social Geography - IV (ch.14) 

Kingsway Social Geography - III (153-155) 

At Work in Britain (ch.16) 

15. Rayon has replaced silk in the making of many garments. 

Kingsway Social Geography - IV (111-115) 

Economic Geography (298-299) 

Our Modern World (141-142) 

16. Men of all colors and creeds combine to clothe the people 
of the world. 

(discussion) 

17. Cannot the nations of the world cooperate in all things 
as they do in clothing? 


(discussion) 


















.. • . ■ : - 

































89 - 


probluh thrke 

How Science Affects Living 

1. What is meant by a revolution? Can you enumerate cases of 
bloodless revolutions? 

2. What is meant by the word industrial? What was the one 
main feature of the industrial revolution? 

3. Match these inventors and machines: 


Watt.. 


Kay.. 


Cartwright...., 


Arkwright.. 


Howe. 


Whitney. 


Hargreaves...., 


Crompton. 



4. Draw a picture of each machine in question 3 and feell the 
particular advantage each brought to the textile industry. 

5. Using these headings, describe advances in the production 
of steel: 

The Use of Coke 
Refining Iron 
Bessemer’s Converter 
The Use of Alloys 
Stainless Steel 

6. Draw a picture of a blast furnace. In one of your refer¬ 
ence books in Science or Social Studies you mil find a 
diagram of one. Copy it. Also describe the complete pro¬ 
cess from iron ore, coke, limestone to steel. 

















- 90 - 


7. Draw a sketch of a mine shaft and list the uses of coal 

today. Write a paragraph on the topic: "Have electricity 
and oil replaced coal?" 

Write one paragraph in the affirmative and one in the neg¬ 
ative . 

George Stephenson 

1. When George was eight years old he took a job . 

cows for 4^ per day. 

2. From the bogs he took ......... and made .. engines. 

3. Then he went to be a picker in a mine. He picked . 

and . from the load of coal. 

4. He became fireman on an. and learned much about 

machinery. 

5. When he was seventeen, he could neither . nor 


6. George went to .. school after work. By the time he 

was nineteen he could write his own name. 

7. George Stephenson’s first engine was called . and 

could haul ..tons up a grade at .miles per 

hour. 

8. In September 1825 the Stockton to.railroad was 

opened. The engine actually reached . miles per 

.. hour, and covered the .miles in .. 

. hour s. 

9. Stephenson went to survey a route for a railroad from Man¬ 
chester to . and at least one farmer chased him with 


a 























' 




























, 




















- 91 - 


10. In 1829 his engine the .won a prize of . 

dollars on the Manchester - Liverpool run and actually 
attained a speed of .miles per hour. 

1. John’s father was a . 

2. Once the father said, "Iteach my sons to cheat. I teach 

them to be .” 

3. When John was twelve years of age his clothes were so .. 

. he stepped out of the group sitting for a school 

picture but even then he had saved . and lent it 

out at }}))>»))))• 

4. At an early age he went into oil . 

5. He made arrangements with the railroads to haul his oil 

at a much .. rate than for his competitors. 

6. Anyone who refused to handle Standard Gil Products was 

. from business by . competition. 

7. Once Rockefeller placed some cannon to stop his . 

fromlaying a . 

8. He ruined his opponents by . the price until they 

want broke and then he .their business. 

9. While Rockefeller paid fl.06 per ....... for haulage his 

competitors paid the railroad ^2.66 and he got the dif¬ 
ference. This helped him to . his opponents. 

10. After Rockefeller retired his business .. four times 

as much as when he was active. 

Shipbuilders 

1. Pour important ship yards In the British Isles are: 1... 


2 


3 


4 































. 



















-92- 


2. A ... of a ship is made in wax. 

3. are drawn before mechanics commence work. 

4. Near the . yard is a large room with a floor about 


.yds. long, resembling a. On 

this, full scale . are drawn in chalk. 

5. The ship is built on. on a strip of gently. 

. concrete. This concrete strip is called a 1. 

6. Along this is a row of ten. to lift .parts 

to position. 

7. The . is built on . on these blocks, 

steel girders are laid to form the . of the ship. 

8. The .. are attached to this and fastened in posit¬ 
ion by .. 

9. Girders are .when they come from the steel-yard. 

They are . and bent. 

10. Chalk ......... are drawn and . pegs are driven 

along the line. The girders are . around these 

when hot. 

11. The . of a ship is covered with steel plates about 

30 feet long and five f£et wide. 

12. Holes are made in one sheet at one time by a . 

machine. 

13. Then this sheet is . to the side of the ship. 

14. About a thousand . of rivets are used in one 

month. 

15. The vessel is .by breaking a bottle of wine over 


the bow 





























’ i * ’ * ' ' 

, . , , ■ ' ■ ’ ■ . 

t • • . 

... 

. . 4 *. ». * 

* • 

. 

.. ... . . . " " . 

.• • 

- 





















93 - 


16. After launching much . remains to be done. 

17. The Clyde took the lead as a centre of shipbuilding be¬ 
cause : 

1. 3. 

a. 4. 

8. Learn the life story of: 

1. Newcomen 

2. Watt 

3. Stephenson 

4. Fulton 

5. The Rocket 

6. Daimler 

7. Henry Ford 

9. What advantages has the automobile brought to modern life? 
What disadvantages has the automobile brought to modern 
life? 

10. Fill in the blanks: Rubber was a native plant in . 

Some seeds were smuggled to .. and planted in . 

gardens. Small plants were transplanted in ....... . 

.. .Today the .practically 

supplies the British Empire with raw rubber. 

Rubber trees grow on a .. on which.do the 

work under the supervision of . The rubber tree 

is . feet high and. inches in diameter when 

five year of age. It can be tapped when it is.year^ 

of age. A liquid called . is collected in small ... 

••••• attached to the tree just below a . shaped cut 

on the tree trunk. TSTs^is collected by. and placed 








































- 94 - 


in a large . Here . acid is added to. 

the rubber. The raw rubber is then cured over smoke from 

.. It is rolled into sheets, packed in 

boxes and shipped throughout the world. 

11. Tell the part played by each of these in the development 
of the aeroplane: 

Lilienthal 

Montgolfier 

Daguerre 

Lindberg 

Petroleum 

1. Prom petroleum is made: 

a. paraffin for . 



b. grease to 

c. fuel oil 

• oil our . 

as used in. . 



d. gasoline 

used in . . 

.. and. . • 


e. asphalt as used in. . 


2. 

Petroleum is a 



3. 

It was formed 

by the . . 

, of plants. 

4. 

It collected between beds of . , 


5. 

In oldern time 

s oil came from , 


6. 

Today ........ 

.. find an oil field. 

7. 


large fields in 

Europe . 

8 . 

In Rumania: 




a. 

the oil well resembles a . well. 


b. 

it may be . 



c, light is reflectad-HrOwn by 




































- 95 - 


d. air is pumped in by . 

e. the worker labors at the end of a . 

f. it requires about . years to dig 

this well. 

g. The oil is lifted to the surface in . 

9. Today in Canada in search of oil, we . a hole. 


10. The . supports the drilling tools. 

11. The . actuallly drills the hole. 

12 .keeps the walls from caving in. 

13 .is used to blast rock from below the bit. 


14. If the oil rushes up in a fountain it is called a . 

15. When oil is struck ..must be built. 

16. Ships that haul oil are called . 

17. A thick, heavy brownish black liquid that comes to the 

surface of an oil well is . 

18. The oil may be transported through a . 

19. Oil is used in ships rather than coal because: 

1 . 


3. 

20. Alberta has oil fields at . 

11. (Continued) 

Tell the part played by each of these in the development 
of the aeroplane: 

Alcock Zepplin 

Brown ^The Hindenburg" 

Wright Bros. Boeing Aircraft 


■ 


de Bozier 


The Illustrious 


































-96 


Diesel 

Watt 

Daimler 


Nobel 

Morse 

The Great War 


The War which started in 1939 

Parachutes The Trans-Atlantic Clippers 

The British Empire Air Training Scheme 

The R101 Wiley Post 

Trans Canada Airways 

Air tunnels Movies 

12, Write to the Calgary Power Co., and to the Ontario Hydro 
Electric Commission for all available information on pro 
duction, distribution and consumptionnof electricity, 

13, Why has oil replaced coal as a source of power in ocean 
transport? 

Communic atio n 

1. Match these names with appropriate invention: 


1. 

telegraphy 

- 

Marconi 

2, 

telephone 

- 

de Forrest 

3 . 

wireless 

- 

Fulton 

4 . 

Atlantic cable 

- 

Wright 

5, 

camera 

- 

Haynes, Ford 

6 • 

aeroplanes 

- 

Lord Kelvin 

7 . 

automobiles 

- 

Morse 

8 , 

radio 

- 

Daguerre 

91 

locomotives 

- 

Bell 

10 . 

steamships 

- 

Stephenson 

11 . 

moving pictures 


Edison 












































. 


. 

















- 

. 




. 


. 


» . 

« 







- 97 - 


2. Prove the following statement by reference to the above 
ten devices: 

"The world is getting smaller and smaller." 

3. Read "How the Atlantic Cable was Laid". You maji find it 
in the old literature book "an Introduction to Literature" 

4. Write the complete story of the life of: 

Alexander Graham Bell 

Thomas Edison 

5. Under these headings describe what Governments are doing 
to stimulate research: 

1. Canadian Research Council 

2. Honors to discoverers 

3. University Grants 

4. Scholarships 

5. Positions to the brilliant 

6. Grants to private organizations 

7. Agricultural Schools 

What rachlnes have done to Uanklnd 

1. Describe the horrible conditions existing in mines and 
factories during the earljr days in factories. 

2. Pill in the blanks: 

Robert Owen was born in.He was the son 

of a ...His father sent him to the .. school. 

One day he ruined his stomach by gulping hot •.He 

went into the .business. He found the man 

. and.The women were . and .... 

...... The company lost much money because the workers 

. the goods they made. 









































■ 

* 


■ 










* 






. 

. 

. ... . 

’ * * * 














- 98 - 


Owen took these steps to improve the condition of his workers: 


1 .• • • 6 * 

2 . 7. 

3 . 8. 

4 . 9, 

5 . 10. 


Joseph Lister (1827-1912) 

1. Lister was a. and he resented the . around 

hospitals. In his day it was worth a man’s life to be 
sent to a . 

2. Glasgow was a .. center and many workmen were sent 

to the hospitals with . limbs. 

3.used to kill half the hospital patients. 

4. Many doctors thought that . on open wounds 

caused infection. Lister did not . this because 


he had seen . limbs recover as long as the flesh 

was not . also. Cases wher the flesh was broken 

vrere .. 


5. Lister remembered Pasteur’s ideas about . and he 

concluded that the things that soured milk could also 

.. , , the human flesh. 

6. Lister said, ’’Bacteria are more deadly than.” 

7. He discovered an . 

8. He used .to kill bacteria or germs. 

9. His patients were saved from pain and death by his use of 


10. Lister ignored the vast . that could have been his. 

11. He operated on. or .. rr.with tender . 




















































- 99 - 


T horn a.? Alva helicon 

1. Thomas Edison was born in ., Ohio, in . 

2. He made his elders tired by asking . 

3. He . the school teachers so his mother hired a 

special tutor. 

4. He got into much mischief: 

a. He fell into a. and nearly drowned. 

b. He fell into the grain. and nearly 

smothered. 

c. He let another boy chop the end off his .... 


d. Once he made a . on the floor of a 

barn. 

5. When he was twelve he became a. on the . 

running from Port Huron to . 

6. He studied in the Detroit . between trains. 

7. Edison was deafened'by a. on the ear from an angry 

.. because he was . and set fire to the 

train. 

8. When he was twenty-two years of age he was working in .... 

. at a . getting . dollars per month. 

9. He spent §100,000 perfecting an . light bulb. 

10. Edison also invented a talking machine called a . 

11. He invented the first . moving picture. 

3. Choose the correct statement: 

1. Francis Place a : 


fought for home rule 









































- 100 - 


Drove the Yankees out of Halifax. 

Organized labor unions, 
floated the first warship, 
made suite for a living. 

2. Karl Marx wrote: 

a. The Red Menace 

b. Das Kapital 

c. Modern Times 

d. An Outline of History 

e. The Story of Mankind 

3. Lord Shaftesbury urged: 

1. protection of children in factories. 

2. prison reform 

3. high tariffs. 

4. Elizabeth Fry: 

1. was spit upon by women in jail. 

2. urged separate jails for women. 

3. taught female inmates of prisons. 

4. Arrange three arguments to support, and three argumts to 
destroy the proposition that: 

"All labor unions should be abolished". 

5. What does each of these terms mean and of what value is it 
to the wielders: 

strikes 

lockouts 

conciliation board 
minimum wages 





. - 






- 

















* 








■ 













* 




, 

- 




































- 101 - 


6. List ten ways in which governments have helped laborers to 
secure a fair deal. 

Nations are Interdependent 

1. Match products and countries: 


Canad a 

Apples 

Argentine 

coffee 

C-rand Banks 

rice 

Annapolis 

cattle 

Cuba 

tea 

Brazil 

wheat 

China 

fish 

Ceylon 

sugar 

Cold Coast 1 

cocoa 


2. In a paragraph each, outline every step in the production 
of these goods. Divide the story into 10 important head¬ 
ings: 

Coffee 

Rice 

Cocoa 

Sugar Cane 
Beet Sugar 
Tea 

3. Make a list of new farm machinery that has made power 
farming possible. 

4. Write the life story of: 

Pasteur 

Saunders 


Burbank 














* 

‘ . 





- 
































. 

























* 

, 

* 









-102 


5. List at least five arguments proving the merit of Elechant 
Brand Fertilizer. 

6. State five cases in which refrigerated transport facilities 
have made trade possible. 

7. Tell the story of salmon from egg to can. 

8. Has the world too much food? Of what kinds if any? Why 
have some people so much and others so little? 

Science and Clothing 

1. Get a picture of Major Hoople in a bathing suit and com¬ 
pare it with one that Tillie the Toiler might wear. Here 
you have in a nutshell a story of a revolution in clothing. 

2. Answer these questions regarding cotton. 

1. climate? 6. picking? 

2. soil? 7. Cleaning? 

5. moisture? 8. fertilizing? 

4. the boll weavil? 9. "Ginning it?" 

5. the growing season? 10. baling? 

3. What peculiar properties has the climate of western Eng¬ 
land that favor cotton bleaching? 

4. List ten fcteps in the production of silk, rayon, flax. 


















• . 




. 














* 

. 





- 


- 






. 








* 






















- 103 - 


Silk 

The silkworm makes silk. The .moth lays the eggs and then 

. These eggs are placed on . and covered with 

clean. in a warm room. When the eggs hatch, tiny ... 

. are seen. These . feed ....... leaves. They shed 

their skins . times in the first few weeks. They they 

commence to spin their.Each of these . contains a 

.mile of fine silk thread. Then the caterpillar turns 

into a . and to keep this from breaking the thread the 

cocoon is placed over . water. The chrysalis dries and 

falls into .Reeling must be carefully done. Eight 

cocoons are placed in a. of warm water to loosen a kind 

of.that sticks the . together. The ends 

are loosened with a little . and drawn through four small 

. Two fibres pass through one ring and become un¬ 
ited in one. The four threads are twisted in . and finally 

from the eight threads we have . When about f of a 

mile of this silk has been thus wouid it is called a. 

Silk can be produced wherever . leaves can be grown. 

However, there is much work to do and .must be cheap. 

China, Japan, Italy, Turkey and France are chief .. 

The hanks of silk are sent to the factory to be wound on .... 

.... Now . threads re wound together, each containing 

16 strands. 

Rayon 

Silk is very. Scientists wondered if it would be pos¬ 
sible to make silk without . Others said this was like 

producing wool without 


A Frenchman watched a silkworm 










































- 



* * • * • 

* . 





















- 104 - 


to learn how it made silk. He noticed . small holes near 

its mouth. A. oozed out and hardened when it came in 

contace with the air. There were . The Liquid used was 

made from.pulp. The pulp is torn into shreds and ... 

. with chemicals until it is soft yellowish-brown. 

. is added to make a thick, sticky dough resembling 

corn syrup. It is filtered to remove any. From the 

tank, several tubes lead to a trough. In the end of each tube 

are twenty. about 4/1,000 of an inch in diameter. 

These . threads are . together to form one 

thread. From this wood, fancy silk-like garments are made, 

hut real silk lasts . and is. 

Linen 

1. Egyptians used to wrap their. in linen. 

2. Linen is made from. 


3.... seeds make linseed oil. 

4. .. is grown in Russia, Belgium, France, Ireland. 

5. Flax. go into the ground a long way. 

6.plowing is very necessary. 


7. This plant requires a great deal of . 

8. The stems are . or . feet high and carry small 

.. flowers. 

9. When the stems begin to turn. the farmer knows it is 

time for harvest. 

10. Flax is pulled up by the . 

11. The . is knocked off on boots. 

12. The flax plant contains some woody straw as well as . 


00 

































• 'O 













■ 


















-1Q5-- 


. but only the latter are valuable. 

13. The leaves, seeds and branches are pulled off in a . 

14. The stems are now . 

15. The stems are now placed in . 

16. Layers of flax are . under the water and left there 

for 12 days. 

17. The stems are then spread out to dry for another . 

days. 

18. When the stems are . they are gathered and the rotted 

woody parts are .from the fibres in a machine. 

19. In spinning mills the fibres are passed through hot . 

to keep the fibres flexible. 

20. The color of linen when it comes from the loom is . 


21. To bleach this white the sheets are soaked in a weak .... 
.... and laid on grassy lawns. 

22. In Ulster, miles of ....... can be seen . in the ... 


Sugar 

1. Sugar cane is a . 

2. Sugar cane requires much labor and therefore cannot be grown 

profitably except where labor is . and . 

3. In the West Indies the labor is performed by ........ but 

the managers are .. 

4. One of the chief sources of sugar-cane is .. 

5. Sugar cane is always grown from . 

6. Can grows to a height of. to .. feet. 



























• '.-.*»« ■* 

I -■ . ' ■ • 

%_ l ' • 10 X 

* *' * * * * 1 

* 




















- 106 - 


7. It resembles a piece of . and has . 

about 8 inches apart. 

8. From each notch apring . 

9. The canes may be cut .months after planting. 

10. Leaves are cut off, dried and .. 

11. The canes are cut down with an . and hauled to the 


12. In the factory they are passed between . to squeeze 


out the .which is saved in a large 

13.is mixed with the juice. 


14. The mixture is evaporated until small . of sugar 

appear. 

15. The sugar is separated from the ..by passing the 

mixture through a . cylinder. 

16. Out of one spout comes .while out of the other .. 

. pours. 

Social studies IX. 

Test One 

1. What were the features of the industrial Revolution? 

2. Fully describe the process of: (1) smelting iron 

(2) refining iron. 

3. In what manner did the improved steam engine facilitate 
modern development? 

4. Write the life story of: (1) G-eorge Stephenson 

(2) Robert Fulton 

(3) Henry Bessemer 

(4) Newcomen 






























- 107 - 


5. Kow is coke made? 

6. What steps may be taken by producers and governments to con¬ 
serve our oil and forest resources® 

7. What new types of modern machinery 'ere made possible by 
the invention of the internal combustion engine? Who in¬ 
vented it? 

8. What advantages and disadvantages has the automobile brought 
to modern life? 

9. Tell the story of how the Wright Bros, developed the aero¬ 
plane. 

10. Do you agree with the idea that our aeroplanes should be 
scrapped? Why or why not? 

11. Recount the inventions of Edison, tell the story of his 
personal life and estimate his contribution to the world’s 
welfare. 

12. Describe how electricity changed the Social life of our era. 

13. How is electricity generated from water power? 

14 List ten steps in making paper from wood pulp. 

15. What new modes of communication have made the world smaller? 

16. What advantages has the rotary press over the flat type 
press? 

17. Would it cure our unemployment problem to scrap moddrn 
machinery? Why or why not? 

18. What do various governments do to stimulate research and 
discovery? 

19. Describe the condition of the workers in the first stages 
of the Industrial Revolution. 








« ■ 

♦ 






■ 





















. 



* 










. ■ 












. 

* 

•* 

. 

’ 


. 



















-108- 


20. Write life stories about: 


(1) 

Place 

(4) 

Fry 

(2$ 

Owen 

(5) 

Wilberforce 

(3) 

Shaftesbury 




21. Under these headings enumerate what governments have done 
to improve the conditions of labor: 

1. Factory Legislation 

2. Regulation of Working Hours 

3. Minimum Wage Laws 

4. Workmen’s Compensation Act 

5. Unemployment Insurance 
61 Technical Schools 

7. Night Schools 

8. Youth Movements i Training Centres 

9. Legislation of Strikes 

10. Housing Schemes 

22. Show how Canada and England are inter-dependent re food 
stuff and manufactured goods. 

23. Tell the full story of sugar from: 

1. cane 2. beet - to the table 

24. What were the features of the Agrarian Revolution? 

25. Tell the life story of: 1. Luther Burbank 

2. Charles Saunders 

3. John D. Rockefeller 

26. List the advantages of the use of fertilizers. 

27. Of what advantage is modernized refrigeration in world 


trade? 





















. 


- 

. 

* 
















* 

' 

, 

- 

* 

. 





-109 


28. Describe fully the process of manufacturing 

1. cotton 

2. wool 












PROBLEM POUR 


110 


Hov/ Industrialism is Revolutionizing Home and C o mmunity Life 

Living Conditions in Rural Areas 

1* Rural homes lack the modern conveniences of city homes. 

The World of Today (41-45) (71-72) 

The Story of Our People (237-240) 

Social Studies for Canadians (356-363) 

Social Planning for Canada (137-138) 

2. Water systems can he installed in rural homes. 

Our Environments - Use and Control (187-203) 

3. Sewage disposal plants should he installed in every rural 
home. 

Our Environment - Use and Control (204-212) 

4. The sewing-machine, the cream separator, the washing mach¬ 
ine and mechanical kitchen appliances can make rural home 
life less of a burden. 

The World of Today (45-46) 

5. On the farm, electrical equipment can he supplied hy small 
plants such as the "Delco"• 

The World of Today (46-52) 

Local Hardware Stores 
Windcharger Literature 

6. Alberta has unlimited power resources and yet few rural 
homes have electrical power. 

The World of Today (48-52) 

Studies in Citizenship (97-98) 

Social Planning for Canada (163-164) 

7. Electricity can make farm life less severeand more enjoyab 

The World of Today (48-52) 

The Makers of the Modern 'World (199-207) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (83-89) 

Science in Our World of Progress (13-14) 

8. A community is a group of people working together for the 
good of all. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (11-15) 

Studies in Citizenship (Ch. 2) 

Reader in Canadian Civics (Int. 11-15) 










- 

. 


' 








7.0* ' ■ 


•/ • U 5 0(5 r .'-0 0 ;:r,:r,‘. 

! . : OT,* - .071 




- r ' • - •• 






. . : ; . . ' : c t .. 5''-:-v:~. ,:.5: o . 

' 

. 

• ■ 

■: ; . ..... fi • •: : S. I- ' : 0 0 t ‘0 •* - ' ■ 

* ■ 0 5 5- : V .. i 5 

-•) r. '5 

i vV" .,5' I ooJ 

■ ; i • • o.bni 

, 




- , 

' - '» 5. i ' . 

■ 

l • *’ r -. ! ‘ : * ‘ ’ 








’ • • . ■ 





m- 


9* Health clinics and hospitals can be organized to care for 
the health of the people in a community. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (90-97) 

Studies in Citizenship (30-32) 

10. Schools and school dormitories are often built near the 
center of the community they serve. 

The World of Today (48-56) 

A Reader in Canadian Civiss (Ch. 7) 

Studies in Citizenship (Ch. 6) 

11. Games on the community sports ground, dances in the commun¬ 
ity hall, hockey on the community rink enliven the leisure 
time of the young and old. 

The World of Today (55-56) 

Studies in Citizenship (Ch. 5 & 8) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (Ch. 6) 

Science in Our World of Progress (15-23) 

12. Many rural communities establish a library. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (59-66) 

13. Nearly every rural community has its church. 

Studies in Citizenship (ch. 7) 

14. Rural isolation has been broken down by recent invention^, 
extending the limits of transportation and communication. 

The World of Today (51-53) 

a. Automobile 

Makers of the Modern World (207-215) 

b. Newspaper 

Calgary Herald Scrap Book 

c. Aircraft 

Makers of the Modern World (226-242) 

d. Telephone 


The World of Today 







« . ; 


. 

















■ 












' - ' : ■ 









' • J . 


. 



' 

r . : 

I 

. 

: r 







■ 

i'..... ... 




' 



' 



' yj:.-. 











■ 

' 



. 









" i ' ■ • ; 

. 

- .. •' r '' ,o r *. 

■ 




f)-, 

■ ' 

- 





- 112 


e. Radio 

The World of Today (52) 

Makers of the Modern World (216-226) 
Adventures in Science (138-164) 

f. Rural mail delivery 

The Modem World (43-45) 

g. Better Roads 

March of History (100-106) 

The World of Today (52) 

h. Trucking services 

i. Pedlars. 


Living Conditions in Large Centres of Population 

1. In the cities a fairly large middle class lives in comfort¬ 
able homes. 

The World of Today (58-60) 

2. Many laborers live in dirty hovels. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (105-110J 

Social Planning for Canada (184-185) 

3. The slum areas of large cities, such as London and New York, 
contain vermin infested, filthy, stinking homes, hardly fit 
for swine. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (105-110) 

Social Planning for Canada (22-30) 

4. A Modern home should have a complete water, toilet and 
sewage system. 

Studies in Citizenship (24-26) 

5. Modem homes have hardwood floors, plastered walls and 
stuccoed exteriors. 

Science in Our World of Progress (386) 

6. Scientific planning precedes building to ensure ease in 
household duties and a maximum of safety. 


The World of Today (58-62) 




„ ■ 

. 

' 

' . . 

♦ 

... : ‘ • 


* 

'• ■ 

L 


. . : . ‘ ■ ■; , 



- 




- 






• ■' ' -. ..’ i 

, 

. 








113 


7. Insulation of walls may be undertaken by constructing an 
extra air space or by stuffing the walls and covering the 
attic floors with preparations such as Mosstex, shavings 
may be used also* 

Mosstex Company, Edmonton 

Local Lumberyards 

Our Environment - Use and Control (Int. 244) 

8* Air-conditioning systems guarantee a supply of cool, fresh, 
moist air. 

The World of Today (60) 

Science in Our World of Progress (444) 

Our Environment 9 Use and Control (174-175) 

9. Indirect lighting seems to supply a maximum of efficiency 
in lighting with a minimum of eye strain. 

The World of Today (60/ 

City of Calgary, Electricity Dept. 

Light Conditioning at Low Cost 

10. Houses can be attractively decorated inside and out. 

The World of Today (60) 

11. Plain in design, colorful and attractive furniture adds 
to the charm of modern homes. 

The World of Today (60-62) 

12. Shrubs improve the appearance of the home. 

The World of Today (61) 


Social Services Reach the Highest Point in Cities 
The World of Today (65-66) (70-71) 

1. In cities an adequate police force protects the lives and 
property of the citizens. 

The World of Today (71) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (1-9) 

2. Firemen and fire equipment are ready to deal with almost 
any fire. 


The World of Today (70) 

A Reader in Canadian Cities (9-17) 
The Key to Fire Safe Homes 










' r-:- r, ■ 

. 


Li j ' t 0-" " C?. * 




. 


• l 

; 

' 

* •: 

'• ' \‘J : 

* . ... . \. '■> ■ ' - 
' ~ ' . : ' ’ " ■ 







. 










' 




- 114 


3* Main streets are usually paved, side streets should be 
gravelled. 

The World of Today (66-68) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (17-24) 

4, In cities an elaborate water supply system must be 
constructed. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (190-193) 

The World of Today 170-71) 

A Reader in Candian Civics (24-31) 

City of Calgary, Waterworks Dept, 

Studies in Citizenship (23-24) 

5, The distribution of electricity within a city is a com¬ 
plicated problem, 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (83-89) 

6, Gas provides comfortable, convenient heat. 

The World of Today (68) 

Economic Geography - Jones (304) 

71 Street cars and busses provide transportation. 

The World of Today (66-67) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (74-82) 

8. The Postman delivers mail to the home. 

The World of Today (70) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (59-66) 

9. Many people own telephones. The city telephone system 
is intricate. 

The World of Today (70) 

10. Nearly every city operates the last five items as public 
utilities. Should these utilities be owned by the tax¬ 
payers as a whole, or should they be operated by individ¬ 
uals and corporations? 

Social Planning for Canada (163-164) 

11. Cities must have elaborate sewage disposal systems. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (31-35) 

Studies in Citizenship (26-27) 




- 115 - 


12. The city provides trucks and drivers to collect garbage. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (35-58) 

Studies in Citizenship (27-28) 

13. Health Inspectors, usually doctors, inspect premises dis¬ 
posing of food, meat, milk and water to the public. 

Studies in Citizenship (24-30) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (90-97) 

14. The Public Health Board oversees the city health needs. 

The World of Today (64-66) 

Studies in Citizenship (28-30) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (90-97) 

15. Many cities provide a free Health Clinic where its inhab¬ 
itants may receive free examination and fee treatment of 
defects. 


Calgary Health Clinic. 

16. Sometimes hospitals are owned by the taxpayers. Municipal 
hospitals are growing in number. 

Alberta Dept, of Health, Edmonton. 

17. Whether publicly or privately owned, hospitals must conform 
to conditions laid down in the Provincial Health Act. 

18. Town planning is essential. 

Social Planning for Canada (451-455) 

19. The Dominion Government has passed laws regulating, controll¬ 
ing or prohibiting the sale of impure foods and adulterated 
drugs. 


The World of Today (68-69) 

20. Manufacturers are prosectued frequently for misleading 
advertising. Newspapers of high character, such as the 
Red Deer Advocate, refuse to accept advertisements making 
impossible claims for the product advertised. 

The World of Today (69) 

21. In cities, more and better schools can offer a wider variety 
of courses than is possible in rural schools. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (47-59) 









. • jo ■ .r ' ..• . 

« , ' 

■■ 

. 

' 

‘' " o' vr $ 

. ■ o: , ’ ■ ■ . ■ ' 

. 

. 

. 

' 

' 

• . 

•: t ■ 

- 



116 


22. Cities can afford a very extensive library. 

The World of Today (62-64) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (59-66) 

25. Parks, playgrounds, rinks and amusement houses are encour¬ 
aged. 

A Readerin Canadian Civics (38-47) 

24. Cities harbor many socially progressive voluntary social 
organizations such as men’s clubs. 

Studies in Citizenship (ch. 8) 

25. The church has organized extensively in cities. 

Studies in Citizenship (ch. 7) 

26. The Government of a city is composed of the mayor, one 
or more commissioners, the city council and a city civil 
service. 


A Reader in Canadian Civics (139-145) 
Studies in Citizenship (ch. 17) 


Rural and Urban Problems 

1. During the war prices were very high. Manufacturers paid 
high prices for factories. Later, lower prices could not 
sustain the burden of this over-expenditure. 

The World of Today (76; 79-80) 

Social Planning for Canada (40-68) 

2. During the war years (1914-1918) wheat rose to more than 
two dollars per bushel. Many people purchased land at 
prices corresponding to the price of wheat. When wheat 
fell to 190 per bushel in 1941 farm debts could not be paid. 

The Yforld of Today (72-76) 

Social Planning for Canada (127-138) 

Economic Geography (ch. 16) 

3. Many farmers went into debt to buy power machinery and 
large herds of pure-bred cattle. 

The World of Today (74-75) 

Social Planning for Canada (133-138) 

4. High pressure salesmen encouraged the farmer to buy on the 
instalment plan. Many purchasers over-committed themselves. 
Low prices for products made it impossible for them to meet 




117 


debt payments. 

The World of Today (75) 

5. The depression starting in 1929 had impoverished even good 
farmers by 1933. Prices of farm products collapsed. 

The World of Today (74-75) 

Social Planning for Canada (131-133) 

6. Mortgages bearing high interest rates promised to enslave 
our farming population in financial bondage for life. Many 
farmers had paid the total value of their land in interest 
alone and still owed the total principal. 

The "World of Today (74-75) 

Social Planning for Canada (141-143) 

7. Taxation of debt-ridden farmers became a problem. Especial¬ 
ly in dried-out areas, the maintenance of social services 
became very difficult. 

The World of Today (79-80) 

8. On the prairies the farmers devised a cooperative selling 
agency known as the wheat pool to handle their wheat. It 
too, suffered, but has served the farmers effectively. 

The World of Today (80-88) 

Studies in Citizenship (88a-88d) 

9. The U.F.A. Central Cooperative Purchasing Agency in Calgary, 

provides an example of cooperative purchasing. 

Head-Office, Calgary. 

10. Many urban and rural communities have established cooper¬ 
ative stores for handling groceries, clothing and oil. 

Social Planning for Canada (445-446) 

11. Mankind, in town, and country have been helped by devoted 
servants: 

a. Edward Jenner - discovered vaccination. 

Adventures in Science (45-67) 

Makers of the Modern World (172-176) 

Heroes of Science (111-120) 

b. Louis Pasteur - found that disease is caused by germs. 


Makers of the Modern World (176-180) 





118 


Heroes of Science (120-129) 

Adventures in Science (9-45) 

c. Joseph Lister - invented an antiseptic. 

Makers of the Modern World (183-184) 

Heroes of Science (138-149) 

d. James Simpson - discovered anaesthetics. 

Makers of the Modern World (180-183) 

e. Pierre and Madame Curie - discovered radium as a 
cure for cancer. 

Makers of the Modern World (187-191) 

Heroes of Science (70-80) 

f. Florence Nightingale - established a standard of 
nursing. 

Makers of the Modern World (165-170) 

g. Reid. , Banting and O olliip - collectively discovered 
insulin as a cure for diabetes. 

h. Thomas Edison - was a great human benefactor. 

Heroes of Peace (203-233) 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (500-506) 
Adventures with Science (85-109) 

i. Wilhelm Rontgen - discovered X-ray. 


Adventures in Science (109-138) 
Makers of the Modern World (185-137) 












_ 

- 

. ' . - . . ' 

- 

- 

,.. ■ 1 

- ■ ; 

0 






■ ■ 





- 







D # . . ' 

, ■ . . 

' : 

„ r ". ' ' •- - 


... 







119 


Problem Four - Industrialism and Home Life 

Living Conditions in Rural Areas 

1# Make a list of modem conveniences often found in a city 
home but seldom found in a rural home. Why has the rural 
home lagged? 

2. Draw an exact sketch showing how a cheap water system may 
be installed in a rural home. Include complete hot water 
system, bathroom facilities, kitchen sink and sewage disposal. 

3. Draw a diagram of and describe in a paragrah the operation 
of a sewage disposal plant suitable for farm use. 

4. How can each of these make rural life more enjoyable: 

1. sewing machine 

2. power cream separator 

3. power washing machine 

4. vacuum cleaner 

5. kitchen sink 

6. bath tub 

7. inside toilet facilities 

8. refrigerator 

9. electric radio 

10. hot water tank 

11. furnace 

12.full Basement 

13. electric lights. 

5. Describe how you could fix up a lighting plant by using a 
gasoline motor, a generator and some storage batteries. Draw 
a sketch of your power plant. Where would you locate the 









- ;: ’ _ _ . ; _ ] 












- 












* 


... . , ■ < 

* 


' 




- 

. 






. 


• • 

. 

- 

* 

. 

■ * • ’ 

* 










- 120 


motor? Is there any way in which you could e conomize on 
gasoline consumption by making the motor do other work as 
it turns the generator? What is meant by the word "Delco"? 

6. List the uses to which electrical power might be put in 
the farmyard itself. 

7. Draw a diagram of a dam used to generate Hydro-Electric 
Power. What do each of these terms re Boulder Dam mean? 

1. bedrock to crest - 727 feet 

2. crest length - 1282 feet 

3. head p 585 feet 

4. base - 660 feet 

5. arch-gravity design 

6. pressure 45,000 pds. per sq. feet 

7. weight of dam - 6,600,000 tons 

8. cement 5,000,000 barrels 

9. steel 51,000,000 pounds 

10. cubic yards of concrete - 4,400,000 

11. diversion tunnels 

12. workers - 3,500 for three years 

13. monthly payroll - $500,000 

14. Area - 146,500 acres 

15. upstream extension - 115 miles 

16. capacity - to every person on earth 5,000 

gallons of water. 

17. could store total Colorado river flow for 
two years 

18. power - 1,835,000 horse-power 

19. 15 turbines each of 115,000 horse power 




„ r ^ 

' 

‘ 

, 

* 


















- 121 


20. 2 turbines each of 55,000 horse power 

21. yearly electrical energy - 4,330,000,000 

kilowatt hours 

22. budgeted cost - $165,000,000 

23. self-liquidating scheme - 50 year period 

24. rates charged § to 1.63 mills per E.Y/.H. 

25. flood control 

26. irrigation 

27. water supply to Los Angeles. 

8. There are really three types of communities: 

1. the local community 

2. the provincial community 

3. the federal community 

A community is a group of people working together for 
the good of all. 

9. Tell how the rual community has helped its people. Use 
these headings: 


Health Clinic 

Picnic Grounds 

Hospital 

Literary Society 

Schools 

Political Clubs 

School Dormitories 

Calf Club 

G-ames 

Grain Club 

Hoads 

Hog Club 

Telephones 

Stores 

Libraries 

Blacksmith Shop 

Churches 

Garage 

Dance Halls 

Bands 


Ball Parks 


'. •• ' • • • 1 

. ' ' . r 

. • 

. 

* • 

* . 

* 


: - : '■ ■ . ■ - - 










. 




* 


























- 122 


10. Draw a diagram to illustrate how each of these has broken 
down the lonely isolation of early farmers: 


1. Automobile 

2. Daily paper 

3. Weekly paper 

4. aeroplanes 

5. telephone 

6. radio 


7. rural mail delivery 

8. good roads 

9. bus service 

10. trucks 

11. pedlars 

12. moving pictures 


11. Write a story entitled "The Farmer is no Longer Lonely" 
use the headings in question number 10, 


Living Conditions in Large Centres of Population 

1. What is a slum area? Why is it usually filthy? Why are 
the children in rags? Why did lice, bed bugs and cock¬ 
roaches thrive in slum areas? Can you name any notable 
people born in slums? 

2. How do each of these make a house into a home in the best 
sense of the word: 


1 . 

full bathroom equipment 

8. 

indirect lighting 

2. 

hard wood floors 

9. 

decoration 

3. 

sewage system 

10. 

painting 

4. 

plaster and stucco 

11. 

attractive furniture 

5. 

step-saving kitchen 

12. 

shrubs 

6 . 

insulation of walls 

13. 

lawns 

7. 

air conditioning 




Social Services in a City 

1. Write a paragraph about each of these to show how important 




























, 

: 

* 

4 , ■ • 

- 

, . ■ •: ' • '• * ■ 

, 

■ ‘ 
















each is to life in a city: 


!• police 


13. Health Inspectors & Clinic 


2. firemen 


14. Food Inspectors 


3. paved streets 


15. Health Board 


4. good water supply 


16. Hospitals 



7. street cars and trolley 
busses ; 


20. churches 


8. mail delivery 


21. city government 


9. telephones 


22. social clubs 


10. sewage disposal system 23. voluntary welfare leagues 

11. collection of garbage 

12. street cleaning 


2. Where does Calgary’s gas come from? From where does Edmon¬ 
ton’s gas come? 

3. Who selects city police? 

4. Write a story about the government of the city of Calgary, 
describing the part played by: 


1. Mayor 


3. Aldermen 


4. City Employees 


2. Commissioner 


5. Describe the governing of a rural municipality. What is a 
reeve? 

6. Make a list of all service clubs operative in Alberta and 
list the voluntary work each performs. 

7. Make a list of all churches in Canada. 'What social services 


do these churches perform? Do they attempt to educate the 





a 

* 


■ . : ’ * J. 

‘.Cl 

. 





. 

\v ch:. 1 




' ' 


• • ' ‘ . 

.. r- \ r; 'Ire 

* 




. 

■ 

: y f bav si ■ I**: 


. 

. 




■■ • _ ■ -: ‘ - ; 1 ‘ r : 'C 


♦ '• 1:1 


















- 124 - 

public? Who pays the Minister’s salary? What education 
must a Minister have? What is a manse? 

8. A lot of people still think that Chinese restaurant ovmers 
make soup out of cats and use scraps for hash. How could you 
prove this to be quite untrue? Who inspects public eating 
places? Who pays for the cost of such inspection? 

9. List four arguments in favor of "Hospitals Should be Owned 
by the Municipality". 

10. Support the contention, "Doctors should be hired by the 
municipality at so much per month to protect the health of 
the ratepayers. Operations would be free to all. Even 
the poor could afford to live." 

11. What do you think of this statement: "The state should hire 
dentists to fix the teeth of all people who need dental work 
done, without making an individual charge. Taxes would be 
increased to pay the dentists". 

12. Write a paragraph proving: "In a large city the street- 
cleaner is as essential as a doctor". 

13. Why must garbage be collected regularly? (Six reasons) 

14. List four arguments for and four arguments against the prop¬ 
osition: "The utilities - Gas, Heat, Light, r ater, Street 
Railways should be owned and operated by the City of Calgary". 

15. List ten types of misleading advertising. 

Rural and Urban Problems 

1. Why was the Rowell-Sirois Commission appointed? Who appoin¬ 
ted it? Who sat on the Commission? What recommendations were 
made? How did the Canadian people respond to the report? 

2. Why do prices rise during a war? 





. 

i' '. • :■ ■: o ; 

. ' 1 ' ' ' i-:;j : • ; 


5 


.... 

. : ’ 

: ’ ' . 

’ 

. : :' .. 1 " ■ ' ' •• 1 ■ ■ ■ ^ 


* : •: ' 

: ' 

* 
















4 



125 


3. If a man bought a farm of 640 acres at $60 per acre in 1918, 
balance payable in 20 equal payments, interest rate 8$, how 
much per acre would the farm actually cost before payments 
and interest were completed? What catastrophe might over¬ 
take him in 1932 and 1933? 

4. Check correct answers. Farmers were poor by 1933 because: 

1. they were poor business men 7. debts were too high 

2. farm prices fell 8. mortgage companies 

foreclosed 

5. they were too lazy to milk 

cows 9. too many schools were 

built 


4. Wheat hit an all-time low of 

19# per bushel 10. provincial government was 

wasteful 

5. taxes were too high 


11. they failed to oooperate. 


6. high pressure salesmen per¬ 
suaded them to buy too much 

5. Make a list of these names and beside each name list the 
benefits secured to mankind by him: 


1. Edward Jenner 

2. Louis Pasteur 

3. Joseph Lister 

4. James Simpson 

5. The Curie Family 
Choose from this list: 

electric lights 
X-rays 
vaccination 
food-plant grafting 
cure for hydrophobia 
moving pictures 


6. Florence Nightingale 

7. Reid, Banting, Collip 

8. Thomas Edison 

9. Wilhelm Rontgen 

10. Luther Burbank 

antiseptics 

gramaphones 

chloroform 

insulin 

cure for cancer 
nurses code of honor 



~ 

, s ' , 4 ‘ ■ 

' 

, 

: •' r : 


. 

" 

■ 


r " J. : ■■ . • 














- 

. 

, , ' . 1 v • ;* o ' . ■ J- ’ of: ' 




. 



. 




, 











, . 




- 

. 

: ■ • 1 • • • 

n:?\ 







- 126 - 


Problem Five 


How Britain an: 1 Canada have Developed a System of Democratic 
Governments. 


Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (627-638) 
We are Canadian Citizens (ch. I - IV) 

The World of Today (217-220) 

The Development of the British System of Parliamentary Govern- 

ment. 


1. Political parties arose in England. 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures 

2. Political parties usually hold nominating conventions to 
choose a candidate to represent them in the approaching 
election. 

The World of Today (249) 

Canadian Civics (57-60) 

3. The candidate holds public meetings to explain his party’s 
platform to the voters. 

Canadian Civics (57-58)(60-61) 

4. On election day voters choose their representative by means 
of secret ballot. 

Studies in Citizenship (180-185) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (133-138) 

Canadian Civics - Topic VII 
We are Canadian Citizens (208-209) 

How Canada is Governed (108-112) 

5. A political party usaally chooses a leader at a party con¬ 
vention. 

Studies In Citizenship. (176-177) 

6. The leader of the party gaining the greatest number of 
supporters in the election, is asked by the Governor Gen¬ 
eral to form a Government, If he forms a Government and is 
sworn into office he becomes Prime Minister. 

How Canada is Governed (89-91) 

We are Canadian Citizens(211-212) 

Studies in Citzenship (147-148) (ch.4) 

The Story of Our People (271) 

Cahadian Civics - Jenkins (Topic 5) 

7. Robert Walpole was Britain’s First Prime Minister. 

The Story of Our People (324-329) 








' 

. 







. 






. 
































- 










L ' 

* 


* 


































-127- 


8, Those who are chosen b their leader to aid in the operation 
of Government are called the Cabinet Ministers. They act 

as managers of Government Departments. They must have 
seats in the House of Commons or in the Senate. 

Studies in Citizenship (172-176) (178-179) 

The History of Our People (273) 

How Canada is Governed (86-89) 

9. We have representative Government which means we are re¬ 
presented in Parliament by some member of Parliament. 

Studies in Citizenship (185-193) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (140) 

101 We have Responsible Government which demands that the Cab¬ 
inet resign when it fails to obrain the support of a maj¬ 
ority in the House of Commons. 

Study in Citizenship (147-155) 

The World of Today (251-252) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (140) 

11. Our Parliamentary Government passes laws by a majority vote 
of Members of Parliament. A majoritjr must be gained in the 
House of Commons and in the Senate. 

Studies in Citizenship (165-171) 

The Story of Our People (270-271) 

How Canada is Governed (100-105) (ch.S) 

Canadian Civics - Jenkins (Topic 4) 

A Reader in Canddian Civics (154-155) 

12. Deliberations in Parliament are recorded in Hansard. 

The World of Today (252-253) 

13. Once a law 6s passed by Parliament it becomes the duty of 
the Cabinet to put the law into practise throughout the 
country. 


A Header in CanadiannCivics (155-160) 

Canadian Civics - TopiecVIII 

14. An efficient Civil Service providdw the machinery whereby 
the Cabinet administers law. 

Studies in Citizenship (177-178) 

The Story of Our People (273-274) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (160-161) 

How Canada is Governed (91-93) 










* 


. 









































. 







■ 

■ 














. 








. 








- 120 - 


15. The whole Cabinet sits once per week to discuss the state 

of our country and to propose remedies. The Cabinet usually 
decides what legislation will be enacted at any seesionof 
parliament. 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (157-160) 

A Social History of England- Guest (239-241) 

16. The Cabinet system of Government arose because the adminis¬ 
tration of public affairs became complex and required the 
hands of specialists. 

Studies in Citizenship (148-150) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (81-82) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (229- 
235) 

17. A Federal Union such as ours in Canada gives certain powers 
to provinces. 

Studies in Citizenship (16-1163) 

A Reader in Canadian Civics (152-153)(182-183) 

The World of Today (249-250) 

The Story of Our People (271) 

How Canada is Governed (36-50)-(ch.5)-(174-105) 

18. The Provincial Administrations look after those affairs per¬ 
taining to a articular province. 

Our Country and its People (224-226) 

Studies in Citizenship (ch. 16) 

A Reader in Canadian Civids (145-152) 

19. Municipal Governments manage the affairs of local commun¬ 
ities. 

Studies in Citizenship (ch. 17/ 

8 A Reader in Canadian Civics (139-145) 

Our Country and Its People, (ch. 24-25) 

This System of Government ^ros-s In T;v ’land 

1. England developed the Cabinet system of Government. 

The Story of Our People (221-223) 

2. The English people struggled against the king to establish 
the supremacy of Parliament. 

The Story of Our People (184-221) 

Changing Governments an Changing Cultures (162-180) 
The Story of Britaina and Canada (65-75) 


3. The Parliament system arose in England. 










' 






■ 











■ 

. 

♦ 

. • ; - ■ ■ ■ • 






. 

. 






. 














‘ 

. 














- 129 - 


The World of Today (220-224) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (155-161) 

4. George III struggled to regain the lost power of the king. 

He lost the American Colonies. 

The World of Today (223-224) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (83-85) 

5. Under William Pitt democratic forms were restored. 

The Story of Our People (329-332) 

Modern Times (ch.2) 

The Control of Parliament was Wrested from the Hands of the Priv - 

iliged Pew between 1832-1929. 


The World of Today (224-234) 

1. Prior to 1832 the control of Parliament was in the hands of 
a small clique of wealthy land-owners and bribers of all 
tyoes. 


The Story of Our People. (316-318) 

The Changing Governments an Changing Cultures (235- 
240) 

A Social History of England - Guest (239-244) 

Days of Democracy (78-83) 

2. The landowners fought ggainst the Reform Bill of 1832 which 
increased the number of voters from Zfo to 5$. 

The Story of Britain and Canada (86-87) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (240-244) 
(246) 

A Social History of England (244-245) 

3. The Chartists did not win their demands. 

The Story of Our People (318-319) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (246-249) 
A Social History of England (246-249) 

4. The Sedond Reform Bill of 1867 gave the vote to city workerS t 

The Story of Our People (319) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (89-90) 

Changing" Governments and Changing Cultures (248-251) 
A Social Historjr of England (249) 

5. The Third Reform Bill gave the franchise to rural workers. 

The Story of Our People (319-320) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (251) 

The Social History of England (250-251) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (251) 















. 




, 















■ 

' 






. 

. 


' 

. 























































- 130 - 


6. In 1872 the Ballot Act provided for secret ballot. 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (250) 

A Social Hisbtyy of England (250) 

7. The Parliament Act of 1911 reduced the power of the ouse 
of Lords to a shadow. 

The Story of Our People (320-323) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (91-92) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (251^252) 
A Social History of England (251) 

Days of Democracy (240-242) 

The Third Storey (273-274) 

8. Emmeline Pankhurst demanded votes for women. 

The Story of Our People (232) 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures (252-253) 

9. The war stimulated a demand for woman suffrage. 

Days of Democracy 

10. The Representation of the People Act, 1918 gave the vote to 
women 30 years of age. 

The Story of Our People (323) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (91-93) 

A Social History of England (251) 

11. Stanley Baldwin’s Elapper Act placed Women’s franchise on 
equality with male voting rights. 

A Social History of England (251) 

12. Under Ramsey MacDonald and the Labor party the workers of 
Britain controlled their Government. 

The Story of Cur People (323) (352-356) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (132-133) 

13. Three men are remembered in connection with Universal 
Suffrage: 

1. Benjamin Disraeli 

The Story of Our People (345-347) 

Days of Democracy (143-146) 

2. David Lloyd George 

The Story of Our People (347-351) 

3. William Ewart Gladstone 


'he Story of Our Peoole (338-342) 











- 

















. 

. 

, 












. 


















, 























- 121 - 


Days of Democracy (146-148) 

14. Has British Democracy permitted progress! 

Days of Democracy (289-293) 

Canada was forced to Struggle to Gain Complete Democracy 

1. Britain feared to grant sel-government to a colony having a 
dual nationality problem. 

The World of Today (254-237) 

History of Canada - Grant (120-123) 

2. The Quebec Act of 1774 was an attempt to reconcile the French 
. to British rule. 

The World of Today (237) 

History of Canada - Grant (123-127) 

The Story of Our People (226-230) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (152-156) 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (212-213) 

How Canada is Governed (13-17) 

3. The Constitutional Act of 1791 divided Canada into two prov¬ 
inces; Upper and Laver Canada. 


How Canada is Governed (19-22) 

The Story of Our People (241-246) 

The World of Today (237-238) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (156-160^ 

Historjr of Canada - Grant (ch. 13}) 

4. The Coming of the Loayalists brought a demand for a power¬ 
ful Assembly or a body corresponding to our House of Commons. 

The Story of Our People (231-241) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (88-96) 

5. Canada’s Government was controlled by privileged classes. 

History of Canada - Grant (181-183) 

6. A Reform Party protested all violations of British.principles. 

The Story of Britain and Canada (160-165 
History of Canada (188G195) 

7. In 1837 rebellion broke out under Mackenzie and Papineau. 

The World of Today (237-241)' 

History of Canada - Grant (170-196) 

How Canada is Governed (22-23) 












' 















, 






, 

' 

' . ' - . 














- 









































; 


v 

■ 







- 132 - 


8. The Act of Union was passed in 1841. 

The World of Today (241-242) 

The Story of Our People (247-254) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (142-143)(168-170) 

9. Lord Durham’s report on Canada’s problems was a vital doc¬ 
ument in our history. 

The World of Today (242-243) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (164-165) 

History of Canada (190-196) 

10. Responsible Government in Canada triumphed under Lord Elgin. 

How Canada is Governed (23-25) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (170-172) 

The History of Canada - Grant (204-205) 

11. The Governor General must obey the Canadian Parliament re law 

Studies in Citizenship (163-165) 

Certain Leaders are Outstanding in Support of Responsible Gov- 

ernment. 


1. William Lyon MacKenzie fought for reform in Upper Canada. 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (289-291) 

2. Baldwin and LaEontaine were cool-headed reformers. 

History of Canada (202-203) 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story 

3. Papineau struggled for responsible Government in Lower Can¬ 
ada. 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (292-294) 

4. lospeh Howe was the hero of Responsible Government in Nova 
Scotia. 

The World of Today (243)) 

The Story of Britaina and Canada (145-148)(165-167) 
Makers of Canada 

Some pages from Canada’s Story (294-297) 

5. Lord Durham died a martyr to the cruel reception of his now 
famous report. 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (297-300) 

Makers of Canada 

6. Lord Elgin ensured Responsible Government for Canada by sign¬ 
ing the Rebellion Losses Bill in 1849. 






* 




. 


. 


- 




, **'»■"* 






■ 

■ 






















' 








. 











■ 

. 

















- 133 - 


Studies in Citizenship (157-158) 

The Story of Our People (261) 

7. At the Quebec Conference of 1864 resolutions regarding Con¬ 
federation were drawn up. 

Studies in Citizenship (158-159) 

The Story of Our People (261-262) 

8. The British North America Act proclaimed July i, 1867, made 
a Federal Union of the Dominion of Canada. 

The Story of Britain and Canada (183-186) 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (355-359) 

9. Canada expanded from "sea to sea". 

How Canada is Governed (10-11) 

The Story of Our Peoole (274-280)(387-396) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (66-69) 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (359-362) 

10. For this Union the Fathers of Confederation were largely re¬ 
sponsible . 


The World of Today (245-248) 

Story of Our People (262-269) 

11. Canada has played a leading role at Imperial Conferences. 

We are Canadian Citizens (225) 

Kingway History - IV (ch!25) 

12. During the World War, Canada placed 500,000 men on the battle¬ 
fields of Europe. 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story (425-433) 

13. Canada gained complete Nationhood by the Statute of West¬ 
minster, 1931. 

A Header in Canadian Civics (162-168) 

The World of Today (256-264) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (203-204) 

Days of Democracy (208-213) 

Studies in Citizenship (197-201c) 

14. Canada exercised her Nationhood by declaring war against 
germany, September 1939. 

15. Canadian citizens have rights and duties. 

Studies in Citizenship (ch.2l) 




■ 








. 








. 

' ' ■ 


' 





■ 

- 

’ 




' 

■ 












* 

. 






. 










. 






: : 













-134- 


Problems of Democracy. 

1. All voters hsould be trained specifically along social lines. 

2. Democracy will function more efficiently when our represent¬ 
atives are required to have a definite range of economic 
and social and political knowledge. 

3. Voters must learn to exer&ise their franchise without pre¬ 
judice. 

|4. Specialists have their place in the civil service as ad¬ 
visers,, but they should not supplant the duties of the 
Members of Parliament. 

5. Political parties too often become the tools of small cliques 
of moneyed interests. 

6.2 Noisy organizations often wield too great an influence on 
Government decisions. 

Recent Canadian Leaders have Hastened Canada’s Nationhood. 


1. Sir Wilfrid Laurier was a renowned Canadian. 

The Story of Our People (367-373) 

The Story of Britain and Canada (191-195) 

2. Wm. Lyon Mackenzie King has been Premier for fifteen years. 

The Story of Our People (374-377) 

3. R.B.Bennett from Calgary was Canada’s Imperialist of the 
1930’s. 

The Story of Our People (377-379) 



















' 

- 

. 










♦ 








. 




. 


. 









■ 

















' 








- 135 - 


Some Tests on Problem live 

1. Which of these are political parties and explain the mean¬ 
ing of each term: 


Liberal 
Labor 
The C.I.O. 
Whigs 

C.C.F. 

Social Credit 
Tories 


A.F. of L. 

I.W.W. 

U.M.A. 

New Democracy 
Communist 

Independent Labor Party 

C.G.T.A. 


2. Check true statements in following: 

At a nomination convention the delegates: 

a. elect a candidate as M.P. 

b. Choose a party nominee 

c. raise funds 

d. fight their opponents 

3. By secret ballot we mean: 

a. to whisper our vote to the returning officer. 

b. to mark our ballot with an X or 1,2,3 

c• to stand up in the hall and say f, I vote for 
MacDonald M . 

4. A political party chooses a leader: 

1. At a national convention 

2. vote through the mail 

3. by pulling sticks 

4. by having the banks select one 

5. After and election: 

1. the defeated premier-' 








































* 


: 

. . 

♦ 

. 

. 


: 


. 

. * 

- 

. 

« 



- 136 - 


2. the leader of the opposition 

3. the leader of the oeople 

4. the leader who has the greatest number of elected 

followers . becomes Prime Minister 

6• Robert Walpole was: 

a. Britain’s first Premier. 

b. opponent of South Sea Bubble 

c. Premier during the Great War 

d. a manufacturer of Cod Liver Oil 

7. Cabinet ministers: 

1. have seats in local councils 

2. must be members of the Senate or House of 
Commons 

3. act as heads of departments of government. 

8. The Cabinet must resign when: 

1. the premier dies 

2. it loses a majority in the House of Commons 

3. Hansard says it must 

4. the Cabinet rows. 

9. Write a paragraph on representative government. 

10. Write a short story on the tonic: 

’’Responsible Government and What it Means”. 

11. Pnll the blanks: 

An Act must be voted on. times before being 

passed by the House of Commons . Then it is sent to the . 

.. If the .makes any change the bill 

must be re-passed by the.to p 

pass, a bill must—. a majority in the House of 













' 






' 

. ...... 

* 



















- 





* 








' 






* 




* 




■ 













. ! I 




. 

. 

. ■ . • . 

' 




















- 137 - 


. and in the . The final terms f the bill 

are .by the legal experts of the crown. The bill 

becomes law when it is signed by the .who 

represents the . in Canada. The bill is then put in¬ 
to action by some .minister aided by the Civil Ser¬ 

vice . 

12. Hansard is a: 

1. handbook of parliamentary rules 

2. a story of Parliaments history 

3. a record of debates 

4. a story of old women warring. 

13. The real work of carrying laws into effect is done by: 

1. the Premier 

2. the lawyers 

3. the Civil Servants 

4. Professors. 

14. Cabinet ministers meet under the Chairmanship of the Premier 
to: 

a. frame laws 

b. decide on the best policies fro Canada 

c. to gag parliament. 

15. Which of the following duties is performed by each of the 
following bodies: 

Pederal Government 

Provincial Government 

Municipal Government 

1. The Defense of Vanouver Island 

2. Hours of ^abor in Halifzx 













' .. 

....... 














. 


. 

♦ 




. 




■ 
















. 

. 

. 




















- 138 - 


3. Speed limit in Calgary 

4. A fridge across the Detroit River 

5. The O.N.R. 

6. The Eastern Irrigation Co. of Alberta and its Canals 

7. The Date of Provincial ^lections 

8. The busses in Edmonton 

9. Education in Quebec 

10. The Air Force 

11. Radio Wave Lengths 

12. The Price of Bacon 

16. What kind of Government is located in: 

1. The Regina City Council Chamber 

2. The Quebec Legislature 

3. The House of Parliament, Ottawa 
Where Parliamentary and Cabinet Government Arose 

1. How did British kings originate the idea of Cabinet Govern¬ 
ment? 

2. The Civil War occurred in England because parliament: 

a. did not want a king 

b. wanted control of the army 

c. had control of money 

d. wanted to choose a wife for Charles I. 

3. (a) What part did George III attempt to play? 

(b) Why did parliament permit George III to run the show 7 ? 

(c) Who was Grenville? 

(d) Write a paragraph of eight lines explaining how Gren¬ 
ville and George III combined to lose the American col- 
















. 


. ■ 




















* 




■ 












' 


. 


. 


- 

* 













, 

' 

'■ ' ' 






■ 
















( 1 




















- 139 - 


onies. 

e. What did Wm. Pitt say about their actions? 

4. Match these: 

(1) First Reform Bill - Secret Voting 

(2) Second Reform Bill - votes for women - 30 

(3) Third Reform Bill - votes for women - 21 

( 4 ) Representation of the People’s Act 

1918 votes for factory owners 

(5) Representation of the People’s Act 

1928 votes for farmers. 

(6) The Ballot Act votes for industrial workers. 

5. Write a paragraph on the demands of the Chartists. 

6. The Parliament Act of 1911: 

1. restricted the power of the-House of Commons 

2. Made the House of Commons the real ruler of 
England. 

3. increased the numbers of Lords 

.4. gave the Commons control of money Bills 
0. Write a brief paragraph on each of these: 

1. Benjamin Disraeli 

2. David Lloyd Geofge 

3. William Ewart Gladstone 

4. Emmeline Pankhurst 

5. Ramsay MacDonald 
William Ewart C-lad>st c::- 

1. Gladstone went to a school where the headmaster believed in 

. On One day he 1. over 80 Soys. 

2. Later Gladstone attended . There he was noted for 































r 























♦ ■ 

- 

























- 






. 

. 

. 














. 

* 










On this map show: 

1. Where the Unite Empire Loyalists settled. 

2. Names of Canadian industrial centres 

3. Provincial legislatures location 

4. Charlottetown. 

5. Quebec City 

6. Ottwaa 





























- 141 - 


his power of . 

3. He was elected to . inll833 

4. Gladstone entered Parliament as a member of the . 

party. 

5. Gladstone supported . in his abolition of the ... 

. laws in 1846. 

6. Gladstone passed a bill dis-establishing the . Church. 

7. Gladstone passed: 

Irish Land Act 
Elementary Education Act 
Ballot A’t 1872 
Second Irish Land Act 
Third Reform Bill 1884 

What did each Act do? 

8. To help - the Irish he brought in a bill called. 

. to give the Irish the right to Govern themselves. 

9. When Gladstone was .years of age he became Pre¬ 
mier for the . time. 

10. He made his last speech in Parliament in 1894 when he was 

. years old and died in the year . at the age 

of ..years. 

11. He was called the ". ." 

Canada and Parliament 

1. Mate the following pairs: 

a. Quebec Act - demand for assemblies 

b. Constitutional Act - Reform Par£y 

c. Loyalists - a Famous report 


d. Mackenzie 


- Rebellion in Upper Canada 


























- 142 


e. Privileged class 

f. Papineau 


- two provinces 


reconcile French 


g. 1841 


- Family Compact 

- Responsible Government 


h. Joseph Howe 


i. Lord Elgin 

j. Lord Durham 


- Act of Union 


- Responsible Government in 


Nova Scotia 


k. Montgomery’s Tavern 


- Rebellion in Lower Canada 


2. List the terms of the Quebec Act. 

3* Why did the Loyalists leave the United States? .here did 
they settle in Canada? 

4. Write a paragraph entitled: 

"Mackenzie, The Family Compact and Reform”. 

5. Tell the story of Papineau f s Life, to the class. 

6. List four main recommendations of the Durham Report. 

7. Underline the correct statement: 

a. The governor general caacontrol Parliament. 

b. The governor general can dismiss a Premier. 

c. The governor general is chosen by the Government. 

d. The governor general must obey the Government. 

8. Write a paragraph on: "Joseph Howe of Nova Scotia". 

9. List five causes that drove Canada toward Confederation. 

10. Match these pairs: 

a. The Great War - French Canadian Premier 

b. Sir John A. MacDonald - Liberal Leader 

c. Declaration of War-1939 - N.B. Confederationist 

d. Fathers of Confederation - July 1, 1867 



•“* 


* 




« 



' 





• 




• 




. . 


' '-.Cl . 

■ 

, ' ‘ : ' ‘ 

. 

' 



, i . 



; 


. 

. 




# 




- 







- 143 


e. Sir Wilfrid Laurier 

f. George Brown 

g. Hansard 


- Maritime Conferences 

- Imperialist from Canadi 

- Statute of 7/estminster 


h. British North America Act - National Policy 


i. Tupper 

j* Rowell-Sirois Report 

k. Etienne Cartier 

l. Wm. Lyon Mackenzie 

m. Canadian Nationhood 

n. R. B. Bennett 


- Premier of Canada 

- Canadian soldiers in Europe 

- Leaders of a United Canada 

- Report of Devts 

- notable French Canadian 

- Investigation of Provincial- 


Dominion relations 

o. Charlottetown Conference - Exercise of Nationhood 

R, B. Bennett 

1. Richard Bennett was born in the province of . 

2♦ During his early life he was a.. 

3. Later he went to.,.University to become a. 

4. In 1898 Mr. Bennett vms elected as member of the Legislative 

Assembly of the. 

5. In 1911 he was elected to the. of. Ottawa as a 

Conservative opponent of Laurier f s scheme for . 

with the U.3.A. 

6. Under Mr. Meighen he was Minister of.and later 

Minister of. 

7. In. he was elected leader of the .party 

at a party convention held in . 

8. In 1930 R. B. Bennett was elected £.of Canada. 

9. He believed prosperity would come from the imposition of 

high... 






























144 




10 # In 1952 the ., .was held at Ottawa 

and to it came delegates from all parts of the British Umpire# 

11. In the elections of . the Conservatives were defeated, 

and the Premiership of Canada passed from. to 


12. Mr. Bennett is now about .years of age and is in London 

directing.work under the supervision o^ Lord . 

David Lloyd George 

1. Lloyd George’s father was a.and he died when 

Lloyd George was . years old. 

2# He had an uncle who was: a.. who saw to it that he got 

an education. He became a . 

3. In 1890 David Lloyd George was .. to the British House 

of Commons. 

4. In. he became Chancellor of the . 

5. In 1909 Lloyd George offered Parliament his famous budget which 


taxed large .It v/as passed by the House of . 

but the House of..threw it out. An election was called 

to obtain the.of the electorate and the. 


under Mr. H. H# ..were returned to power. 

6. He was a prime power behind the Parliament Act of 1911 which 
declared: 

1 . 

2 . 

3. 

7. In 1911 Lloyd George’s National Insurance Act provided: 

1 ... 


2 

























. 



T 








■7 y >.. V • . 

i 




■ : ■ _ - . . 

, 

. . 




J> ■ 
















145 


8. During the Great Jar, Lloyd George was placed in charge of 

the Ministry of. to promote increased production in 

shells• 

9* In 1917 he became .v. of England. 

10. In the elections of 1918 he was ....and represented 

England at the Peace . which produced the Treaty of 


11. In 1922 the Irish ..Bill was passed creating 

the . 

12. He passed the Representation of the People's Act, 1918, to 

give the vote to women. years of age and over. 

13. He resigned as Premier in. 

14. Lloyd George later.Canada. 

15. He is one of the world f s most.and.speakers. 

16. He was distrusted in Britain after the war because he promised 

to .. the Kaiser, to make . .....pay huge 

amounts of money and in 1922 he nearly led.into the 

war against Turkey. 

Benjamin Disraeli 

1. Benjamin Disraeli was of . extraction. 

2. He became interested in . stories. 

3. In ... he was elected to . as a member of the 

.party. 

4. The first time he spoke in Parliament he was.down. 

5. In 1852 he became . of the .. 

6. In 1867 he was responsible for the passing of the . 

Reform Act which gave the vote to. 






































146 


7. He became Premier in . 

8. In 1874 he spent $20,000,000 to buy half the shares in the 

.canal from the . of Egypt. 

9. In 1875 he declared Queen Victoria, Empress of . 

10. Russia and Turkey were at war and Disraeli did not want to see 

Turkey beaten. Russia made . when England started 

to arm. However the .was too favorable to Russia 

and Disraeli faced Russia to .much of the treaty 

at a general meeting of European statesmen held at . 

in 1878 and known as the Congress of Berlin. 

11. By keeping Russia out of Constantinople, the Straits of 
Bosphorus}, the Sea of Marmara and the Straits of Dardanelles, 

he felt he had protected the .canal on the sea route 

to India against .He took the Island of. 

to strengthen Britain’s position in the ..sea. 

12. Disraeli dreamed of a great .. Empire. 

13. He died in.......... 


















i 


















, 

9 .. 

9 , 9 *.. 

' ? ' / . 

*9 A **•*!> l i, * » 






- 147 - 


PROBLEM SIX 

How Modem Indust rialized Nations Produce and Distribute 

Goods 


Buying and Selling 

1. In the early days of the "V7ild West" exchange of goods 
was based upon barter. 


The Modern World (93-94) 

An Introduction to Business (277) 

Our Business Life (25) 

The World of Today (101-102) 

2. Money replaced pure barter as a means of exchange. 

But skins, tobacco, salt, etc., was the first money. 

The Modern World (94-95) 

An Introduction to Business (277-278) 

Our Business Life (25-26) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (286-290) 

3. Metals, such as gold, became the standard by which 
the value of money was gauged. 

The Modern World (96) 

Introduction to Business (278) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (286-288) 

The World of Today (103) 

4. The Bank of England is the greatest financial instit¬ 
ution in England. 

The Modern World (98) 

A Social History of England - Guest 
The World of Today (103-106) 

5. Canada’s banking laws are severe and have restricted- 
charters to a few companies. Eailures seldom occur. 

Me Gibbon’s Economics 

6. Gold is scarce, and inconvenient as money. Paper curr¬ 
ency has replaced gold as the actual medium of exchange. 

The Modern World (96-98) 

The World of Today (105) 

7. Today, few nations have gold as basis for their currency. 

The Modern World (98-100) 

The Post War Warld (131-132) (460) (482) 













148 - 


8. It is claimed a paper currency can be based on the prod¬ 
uction of goods. 

Social Credit - Douglas 

9. Inflation results when people lose confidence in the 
Nation T s currency and refuse to trade their goods for it. 

The Modern World (272-274) (510-512) 

Production of Goods 


1. The manufacture of an automobile and its aale show how 
many costs enter into production, transportation and 
distribution of products. 

An Introduction to American Civilization 

(ch. 14) 

Kingsway Geographies - IV (ch. 8) 

2. A list of the total costs entering into the production of 
linen shows the final cost as made of: 

a. - cost of raw materials 

b. - factory costs 

c. - transportation costs 

d. - wholesale costs 

e. - retail costs 

Kingsway Geography - IV (ch. 14) 

The Cultivators (153-155) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (263) 

3. The packing plant industry shows the variety of amiable 
by-products. 

The World of Today (106-114) 

4. The drilling, piping, refining and distribution of oil 
provide an example of many costs. 

An Introduction to American Civilization 

(ch. 9) 

Kingsway Social Geographies - IV (ch. 10) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (198-200) 

5. The story of transformation from raw cotton to cloth 
shows the final cost per yard made up of: 

a. farm machinery costs 

b. costs of farm labor 

c. cost of land 

d. transportation costs 



. 

. 







- • 



















’ 







- 

; / . v. . 

























4 . 


' 









. -J- 

















A 

/ 





* 

\ 


' 





- 









: 


. 











... 









» 








• . . .... : • -!• 

- . 









- „ 









- A . 


















' 






— 








~ 


' 
































' ' c •' 

< 








* 

' 




- 149 - 


e. factory costs 

f. wholesaler charges 

g. traveller’s expenses 

h. retail costs 

i. profits 

A History of American Civilization - Rugg 

(Ch. 28) 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (208-223) 

6. A list of the elements in the cost of producing rubber 
tires demonstrates the fact that the consumer pays for 
hundreds of cofets in the final price paid. 

World Wide Geographies - VIII (158-166) 

An Introduction to American Civilization 
(574-577) 

The Modern World (143-146) 

7. "Production for profit" supporters claim that necess¬ 
ary goods will be produced more effectively and more 
efficiently when profits are permitted. 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind 
(536-542) (320-321) 

8. "Production for use" proponents urge that many necessary 
goods are not produced because the people who need them 
cannot afford to pay profits. It is claimed also that 
where profits are paid consumers must be content with less. 

Social Planning for Canada (246-248) 

The Outline of History (1104-1105) 

Man’s Achievement - II (494-498) 

Changing Governments and Changing 
Cultures (213-224) 

9. A system of planned prduction might eliminate such 
abuses as over-production, under-production, unemployment. 

The Post War World (462-470) 

Social Planning for Canada (210-240) 

10. Socialism urges state ownership or at least oversight and 
worker controlled factories. 

Man’s Achievement - II (496-498) (555-557) 

(563-564) 

Inside Europe (ch. 25) (327) 

The Cane for Socialism - Henderson 
Post War World(114-115) 

Social Planning for Canada (241-268) 

11. Can large factories survive when they consider the 
welfare of their workers? 


Life of Robert Owen - Modern Times (ch. 10) 




7 

* 

* 

! • ' '• h: ■ ' ‘h * \ ■' : 

■ ; 

' 

- 

- 

■ 

„ 1 - 

■ i 

, 

. 7 

, ' - . ■; 

5 





; 






- 150 - 


Changing Governments and Changing Cultures 

(208-811) 


12. Can depression be prevented? 

The Modern World (ch. 29) 

13. What answer besides war is there for unemployment? 

Post War World (139-143) 

14. How far is Government control necessary over business 
to protect the welfare of the people? 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind 
(536-548) (320-321) 

The World of Today (126-131) 


Large Business and Industrial Organizations 

1. Two hundred years ago the machinery of production was 
in the home. 

The March of History (17 Cent.) (32-40) 

Our Modern 'World (78) 

The World of Today (143) 

2. Today intricate and expensive machinery are required to 
make even the simplest articles. 

A History of American Civilization (ch. 20) 

Our Modern World (78-80) 

3. Large scale production is usually undertaken by a cor¬ 
poration which sells stock to raise money to finance its 
undertaking. 

A History of American Civilization (ch. 21) 

Our Modern World (80-82) 

An Introduction to American Civilization 

(519—532) 

The World of Today (118-120) (123-126) 

4. John D. Rockefeller's oil empire had small beginnings. 

Freedom and Organization - Bertrand Russell 
A History of American Civilization (494-500) 
Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind 
(490-500) 

5. Carnegie started a steel corporation. 

A History of American Civilization (500-504) 






- 151 - 


6. I. P. Morgan started a bank. 

A History of American Civilization (504-510) 

8. Henry lord’s huge factories had an old barn as ancestor. 

The Flivver King - Upton Sinclair 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (507-515) 

9. The Ford Motor Company provides an excellent example of 
the necessity in large scale production for the possess¬ 
ion of far flung resources. 

’'River Rouge” - Life Magazine 

Our Country Past and Present (225-227) 

10. Powerful corporations often interest themselves in money 
alone. 


Steven 1 s Price Spreads Commission 

Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (277-309) 

The World of Today (123-126) 

Social Planning for Canada (22-30) 

11. Large factories sometimes bring many advantages to the 
city in which they are located. 

A History of American Civilization - Rugg 
(426-433) 

12. Corporations often contribute heavily to the campaign 
expenditures of political parties from which they expect 
favors. 


Work, Wealth and Happiness of Mankind (647-679) 

The Post War World (399-400) 

13. The existence of great industrial enterprises is essential 
to a nation if it is to convert abundant resources into 
consumable goods. 

Whither Mankind (ch. 1) 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World 

(585-594) 

14. The tendency is for small corporations to be absorbed by 
large corporations. 


Our Modem World (82-84) 

An Introduction to American Civilization 
(533-534) 

15. Chain stores, in many instances, have forced the corner 
grocery to sell out to them or to form an association of 
grocers or go bank rupt. 


' 
















■ 


< • 

‘ ' .r XI * • : 

• 1 r . ■ ' ‘ . : , 

' - 










. 


■ ' T 

■ < 

' 




- 

. 


- 

. 

. , 

- 

* 

- 

( ' t '• 



-152- 


Social Planning for Canada (425-450) 

Our Modem World (84-87) 

An Introduction to American Civilization 
(531-533) 

See "Freedom and Organization" re Rockefeller 

16* Civic, Provincial and Federal Governments have had to 
pass laws closely regulating business* 

Our Business Life (531-541) 

The World of Today (114-119) (126-127) 

17. A Member of Parliament, the Hon* H. H. Stevens of 
Vancouver was the original Chairman of the Steven’s Price 
Spreads Commission. Appalling conditions in Canadian 
business vie re discovered. 

Price Spreads Commission Report (Ottawa) 

The World of Today (127) 

Social Planning for Canada (22-30) 

18. Sometimes business concerns, in the same industry, and 
governments and laborers set up a code of governing 
regulations. 

The World of Today (128-132) 

The Modem World (541-544) 

19. Consumers set up cooperatives. 

Our Modem World (87-92) 

The March of History (19 Sent.) (143-148) 

International Trade 

1. It is an advantage for each nation to sell abroad the 
goods it cannot consume at home. 

i.e. Canada and her VJheat 

The Modern World (111-124) 

The World of Today (132) 

3. From 1846 until 1931 Great Britain developed the practise 

of - and arguments for Free Trade. 

The World of Today (136-139) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (78-82) 

Britain’s Story (260-266) 

The Story of Our People (333-337) 

4. Recently, i.e. during this century the United States has 
become the chief proponent of protective tariffs as trade 







) . • <■" : 

' 

- 

. 

:::r 



. 






* 


* 














' ■. . ' 

• • 

- 
















— 

- 









* . 


• 




T 


• * t 











153 - 


barriers. 

The World of Today (136-138) 

The Post War World (296-299) 

5. Canada has had a high tariff policy since the time of 
Sir John A. MacDonald. 

The Story of Our People (356-362) 

The World of Today (137-141) 

6. In the early 19th Century Britain’s Parliament was com¬ 
posed of land owners who imposed heavy duties on foreign 
products. 

Man’s Achievement - II (446-450) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (78-79) 

March of History (17 Cent.) (206-210) 

The World of Today (136) 

7. An Anti-Corn Law League was formed. 

Man’s Achievement - II (456-457) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (79-80) 

8. The Irish famine of 1845 showed how the Corn Lav/s could 
starve poor peasants into the grave. 

Man’s Achievement - II (457) 

Kingsway Histories - IV ^80) 

March of History (17 Cent.) (280-281) 

The World of Today (136) 

9. Under Robert Peel the Corn Laws were Repealed. 

Modern Times (158-168) 

Kingsway Histories - IV (80-81) 

The World of Today (136) 

10. Britain got an early industrial start and was the lead¬ 
ing industrial nation until the war of 1914. 

The World of Today (136) 

Changing Civilizations in the Modern World 
(ch. 3-4) 

The Modern World (131-133) 

11. During the war Britain threw all her energies into 
the war and thereby yielded her markets to American 
traders and Manufacturers. 

Changing Civilizations (365-366) (376-377) 

The World of Today (136-137) 

An Introduction to American Civilization (544-547) 









- 154 - 


12. After the war tariff barriers practically prohibited 
world trade. 

The Modern World (128-129) 

The World of Today (137-138) 

13. In 1931 Britain set up a system of tariff. 

The Modern World (529-533) 

The World of Today (138) 

14. At the Ottawa Conference in 1932, Empire trade agree¬ 
ments were set up imposing high tariffs on foreign 
goods seeking an Empire market. 

The Modem World (532) 

The Story of Our People (377-379) 

The Post War World (446-448) 

15. In 1854 Lord Elgin negotiated a treaty with the United 
States for Reciporcal Trade with Canada. 

The Story of Britain and Canada (122; 180) 

The Story of Our People (257) 

The World of Today (138) 

16. British Preferential Tariffs offered lower tariffs to 
the Mother Country than to foreign nations. 

The Story of Our People (367-373) 

The World of Today (140) 

17. In 1911, Sir Wilfred Laurier’s Liberals were defeated 
at the polls because of their proposed Treaty of Rec¬ 
iprocity with the United States. 

The Story of Our People (372-373) 

The World of Today (140) 

18. In 1936 a Reciprocity Treaty was signed by representatives 
of Canada and the United States. 

The World of Today (140) 

19. Most-favored-nation agreements provide for lower tariff 
rates against some countries than would be charged under 
General Rates. 

20. Is Mankind’s ^reat problem to distribute the abundance of 
machine production throughout the world? Is free trade the 
answer? Would a real federation help? Vould the extension 
of the British Empire by force help to this end? Is man 
afraid to take drastic reform steps? Do corrupt and noisy 
politicians bar man’s advance? Is the Ignorance of the 

Masses responsible? 


r-; 0 : 


- 

' ■ - " . . » v ' 

' . - ; : 

( * ■ ; ■ 1 • •' 

' 








X ; •' 


o 0 riT I :qt.o .. Nk 


. 

X \ ' \'X 


jX/V : 






■ / ■ < ' ..V ' ■ ; ’ri~ ' ■ 

- ' - 

< • • \ 


■ ■ ’• , 


, .* ■ 










: <" [. 


‘ :jOT V-' r;< '- ’"i l 







' 










■ .'v. .• .j r 

• ‘ 

t ’-'.rloo 

• ■ ' -i 



-155- 


Problem Six 
Buying and Selling 

1. What kind of a system of exchange is used when I: 

a. Trade a spavined horse for a broken-down binder 

b. sell a brindle cow for $25 

c. exchange 40 bus. of oats for 60 bus. of barley 

d. $400 and 400 bus. of wheat is exchanged for a 
1936 Ford sedan. 

2. What is money? List tend products other than gold that 
have been used as money. Why was gold finally chosen 
in preference to any of them? 

3. What is meant by: 

a. Gold standard d. worthless money 

b. inflation e. baloney dollars 

c. deflation f. bank currency 

4. What effect has inflation on: 

1. people who owe money 

2. people who are owed money 

3. taxes already announced - not collected 

4. the value of real estate 

5. the price of bread 

6. confidence in money 

5. Why was the Bank of England set up? When? ./ho established 
the Bank of England? Who is the Governor today? 

6. What do each of these Regulations re Canadian Banking mean 
and v/hy was each established: 

a. double liability re bank shares 








-156- 


b. $500,000 deposit with application for bank 

charter 

c. $250,000 paid up capital 

d. Bank of Canada Act 

e. Bank Circulation Redemption Bund 

f. Government Bank Inspection 

g. Dicennial Revision of the Bank Act. 

h. no money to be loaned on real estate as security 

i. Bank Charter granted by finance minister 

j. Banking under Federal Government 


7. List five advantages that paper currency has over gold in 
carrying out business transactions. 

8. If coins and paper money had not come to be used as alter¬ 
native to barter, modern commerce would be under a treman- 
dous handicap. For example try to envisage the plight of 
our local theatre manager were you to present the following 
articles in payment for a ticket: 


i doz. eggs 


J bus. of potatoes 


2 lbs. baby beef 
i a chicken 
1 qt. gasoline 


2 qts. of milk 


2 bskts. of strawberries 


a mince-meat pie 


a qt. of cylinder oil 5 lbs. of apples 
second hand flashlight a bundle of shavings 


2 trout 


second hand monkey-wrench 


3 cans of 5£ 

sardines 


with a chipped jaw 


9 


How did the United States get nearly all the world’s gold? 
Why do few nations base their currency on gold? When is a 











. ' : • : t 

. 

■ 

* ■ 

. 

■ ' ■ • «■ ■ 

: • 

. 

; 

. 

■ 






-157 


nation off the gold standard? Are any countries today 
forging ahead with little gold behind their currencies? 

10. Under these headings ennumerate the possible cost 3 in 

the production of an automobile, that is in niangement phase 
of building the care: 

1. overhead 

2. machine tools 

3. assembly line equipment 

4. proving grounds 

5. warehousing 

6. packing for shipping 

7. sales organization 

8. financing 

9. labor 

10. debt charges 

11. collection of tqm materials as indicated in this 
outline at another place. 

Production of Goods 

1. Outline under these headings the possible costs a farmer 
might have to undergo in order to equip a wheat farm of 
160 acres: 

a. farm machinery costs 

b. costs of farm labor 

c. cost of land 

d. transportation costs 

e. costs of Seed grain 











' 




. 

: 

* 

. 

" ' ' ' ‘ 
' ' 




- 

. 







' 

' 

- 


* 

* 

. 




-158- 


n f. threshing charges 
g. storage rates 
hi return on investment. 

2. Check true statements: 

a. Production for profit means: 

1. producing as cheaply as possible 

2. producing goods at a loss 

3. paying high wages 

4. charging enough for goods sold to leave a 
surplus 

b. Production for use means: 

1. goods will be made when needed even if consumers 
cannot bear full cost. 

2. governments will produce goods 

3. production at a loss 

4. production at cost 

c. planned production means: 

1. producing all you have raw materials for 

2. estimating community needs and manufacturing to 
meet them 

3. production to make a maximum of profit regardless 
of community needs. 

d. Socialism demands: 

1. state ownership of all factories 

2. state ownership of some factories 

3. state ownership of key factories 

4. workers run some industries themselves 

5. farmers set up cooperatives 



. ' . 

- 

- 

: 

; '■ ■■ • 

: ' 

* 

« 

; ' " r! 

. 

♦ 

' 

:■ ■ • * 1 

- * ■ 

* 

. 

: ’ ' 












-160- 


6. workers share profits, 

e. Depressions: 

1. are necessary 

2. are good for people 

3. are due to lack of planning 

4. are due to inefficient leadership 
5, are due to profits and gambling 

f. Unemployment is caused by: 

1. people too lazy to work 
2* lack of money 

3. machines 

4. wars 

5. lack of planning 

Large Scale Industrial Organization 

1, The Corporation 

1. Who starts a corporation? 

2. Where do they get the money? 

3. Who appoints the board of directors? 

4. How many votes has each shareholder? 

5* What is stock? 

6, Which is most valuable to own: common or preferred 

stock? 

7. What guarantee of repayment has a corporation bond¬ 
holder? 

2. Match these names and industries: 


a. Rockefeller 


steel producing 




' • „ 

: 

■ 

. 

' 

' ‘ 








. 




* 

' 

' 

■ ' l> / ; • " / J r ; 1 












-161- 


b. Henry Ford 


50 and 100 stores 


c. 1. P. Morgan 


munitions 


d. Zaharoff 


oil refining 


e. Carnegie 


sleeping cars 


f. Woolworth 


automobile factories 


g. Pullman 


banking 


3. Mark true or false. 

The Steven’s Price Spreads Committee found that: 

a. scales were fixed to cheat the customer 

b. large tobacco concerns refused to allow any vendor 
to sell their products if he sold another brand 

c. clerks were ordered to plan to short-weight customers 

d. wages were cut by the ”piece method” 

e. prices paid for raw materials were scandalously low 
whereas salaries of higher officials reached $260,000. 

4. To a city a large corporation brings these advantages: 

1 . 

2. 

3 . 

4 . 

5. The machine age has been of advantage to 'Testdrn peoples 
because it: 

1 . 

2 . 

3. 


4 














. 

r , v . : ^ ;• ' c, 













- 162 - 


In China the people endure the hard toil of coolie labor 
because they have failed to use machines. 

6. Chain stores are usually operated by a. 

from a.office. Often they extend right across a 

. They aim to.prices. But often this 

reduction comes because they pay very.wages. Too 

often money is . out of the community and the . 

have no interest in the local community. They often drive 

the .trader to the wall. It seems scarcely fair to 

allow a large .thus to drive a man from the fruits 

of his life’s labor. 

7. Draw three columns on a sheet of paper. Mark Civil, 
Provincial, and Federal at the head of each sheet and then 
list under these headings the work done by each government 
to regulate business and hours of labor. 

8. Write a paragraph entitled: "Cooperatives in Alberta 1 * * * * * 7 ’. 

International Trade 

1. Check correct statements: 

Free Trade is desirable because: 

a. workers can buy goods cheaper 

b. each country can produce that which nature has fitted 
it to produce easily and well. 

c. all nations will have a higher standard of living 

d. nations will be more friendly and wars will occur less 


often 















-163- 


2. Mark these statements as true or false: 

1. the Corn Laws - were taxes on foreign imports of grain 
to England 

2. The Corn Laws increased the price of bread 

3. In England the word "corn" means "grain" 

4. The Corn Laws were repealed in 1846 

5. The Corn Laws were repealed by Disraeli. 

6. Since the Great War all the countries have followed 
the policy of high protective tariffs laid down by 
the U. S. A. 

71 Sir John A. Macdonald’s policy of "Canada first" was 
a high tariff policy. 

3. Check correct statements: 

Britain was the greatest industrial nation prior to 1914 
because: 

1. She had an abundance of engineers 

2. She got an early start 

3. She controlled the seas 

4. She believed in Eree Trade 

5. She had raw materials 
Sir VJilfrid Laurier 

1. Wilfrid Laurier was born in the year.in the province 

of. 

2. His father was a. 

3. He attended .University in Montreal and studied 

law. 

4. In 1871 he was elected as provincial member of parliament 







: 






/).■• Go 

* 

: r ’ • - 1 . 
















: - 1 , 








* 

' .! . i.■’' V ■: • ' •« 

' ’ * ■ 

. 





















-164 


for the seat of. 

5. In 1874 he was elecged to the House of. 

6* He became prominent when he made an address in English supp¬ 
orting.for his part in the Red 

River Rebellion of 1869. 

7. In 1887 Laurier was chosen as.of the Federal Liberal 

Party. 

8. In the elections of 1896 the Liberals won the.and Laurier 

became . of Canada. 

9. He sucessfully settled the religious and educational controv¬ 
ersy regarding . schools in Manitoba. 

10. Actually he lowered the. on imports very little. 

11. He established a system of trade .which gave 

Great Britain trade advantages in the Canadian market. 

12. He saw that a new country like Canada must have more. 

so he encouraged increased . 

13. In 1899 the Boer War broke out and Laurier sent.to 

aid Britain. 

14. In 1911 Laurier T s party was beaten because it stood for 

..with the United States. 

15. During the Great War he . conscription of men 

for military duty. 

16. Sir Wilfrid Laurier died in . 


























:■ ' : [ 









' 






J 1 









. 

. 

' 









- 165 - 


4. In 1932 the Imperial Conference met at Ottawa. The chairman 


was . of Canada. The British delegation was headed 

by . The British hoped to reduce tariffs 


bu£ actually tariffs were .against the rest of 

the. 

From the Conference Canada gained: 

1 . .. 

2 . 

3 . 

4 . 

5. Check correct statements: 

1. Lord Elgin made a favorable Reciprocity Treaty with the 
U. S. A. in 1854. 

2. A Reciprocity Treaty means a treaty whereby one nation 
undertakes to fight for its neighbor. 

5. In 1911 Sir Wilfrid Laurier failed to persuade Canadians 
that Reciprocity with the U.3.A. has virtues. 

4. In 1936 we agreed to alio vi certain products into Canada 
from U.S.A. free of duty in exchange for a like privilege 
in the American market. 

5. The benefits of Reciprocity were largely nullified by the 
necessities of Canada’s war time exchange condition. 

6. Empire preferential tariffs give lower rates of tariff to 
Empire countries. 

. Most favored nation treaties give lower rates to some 
nations than the general tariff alows. 


7 
























APPENDIX 2 





















166 - 


Aeroplane 

Aviation 

Aeronautics 

Air Force Review 

Beaver 

British World 
Canadian Forum 
Collier’s 

Christian Science Monitor 

Canadian Geographic Journal 

Christian Herald 

Country Gentleman 

Country Guide 

Canadian Home Journal 

Current History 

Daily Mirror 

Farm and Ranch Review 

Flying Manual 

Family Herald 

Flying Aces 

Furrow 

Fortune 

Good Housekeeping 

Geographic Magagine 

Hansard 

Look 

Life 

London Times 
Liberty 

Morning Albertan 
MacLean r s 

Manchester Guardian 

Monetary Times 

Montreal Standard 

Magazine Digest 

McCall * s 

New ’World 

New York Times 

New Republic 

Nation 

Newsweek 

News. Review 

National Home Monthly 

National Geographic 

New Outlook 

News and Views 

News 

New Statesman and Nation 
People’s Weekly 
Picture Post 
People’s ’Week 
Punch 

Popular Science 
Popular Mechanics 
Parade 

Reader’s Digest 








' 

r 

' 










- 167 - 


Science Digest 
Sunday Mirror 
Star Weekly 
Spectator 

Toronto Saturday Night 
Time 

Time and Tide 
Overseas 

Winnipeg Frpe Press 
Western Producer 
Western Farm Leader 
















APPENDIX 3 















- 168 - 


Some Useful Books For Social Studies 


A History of American Culture - Rugg 
A New Wonder Book of Knowledge 
A World Geography - Denton &'Lord 
Blackfoot Trails 

Britian's Story - Williams, Gill, Baird 

Boys and Girls of the British World 

Builders of the West - Howay 

Changing Civilizations In the Modern World 

Changing Governments and Changing Cultures - Rugg 

Courtship of Miles Standish 

Courageous Woman 

Canadian West 

Economic Geography - Clarence Jones 

Eat, Drink and Be Wary 

Economics - M'cGibbon 

Freedom and Organization - Russell 

Heroes of Science - Cottles and Jaffe 

Heroes of Peace - Chamberlain 

Heroes of Civilization - Jaffe 

How Canada is Governed 

Human Geographies 

History of Canada - Grant 

History of England - Mowat 

How to Win Friends - Carnegie 

Human Use Geographies 

Introduction to American Civilization - Rugg 
Inside Asia - Gunther 
Inside Europe - Gunther 

Kingsway Social Geographies - (Miners and Manufacturers, 

The Cultivators) 

Kingsway Histories - Books I to IV 

Kingsway Histories - Book V 

Little Known Facts About Well Known People 

Makers of the Modern World - Searle 

Men Who Found Out - Ellis 

Modern Times 

My Struggle For Peace - Chamberlain 
Modern World 

Makers of Canada Series - (MacLean's) 

Outline of History - Wells 

Our Country Past and Present - Nida and Webb 

Our World Today - Stull and Hatch 

Our World Today 

Old World 

Our World Today 

One Hundred Million Guinea Pigs 
Policing the Arctic 
Principles of Economics - Cole 
Post-War World - Hampdon and Jackson 
Poisons, Profits, Potions 
Pathways in Science 
















- 






~ 

- 

« - 

. 

- 

- 

' - 

- 

- 

• . 

- 

- 

•-* ; 

- 

- 

- 

■ 

- 

' 

- 

- 

- 













- 


- 







- 169 - 


Piers Plowman - V 

Romance of the Priarie Provinces 

Rise of American Civilization - Beard 

Social History of England - G-uest 

Story of the Empire - Bowman 

Since Then - Gibbs 

Story of Mankind - Van Loon 

Studies in Citizenship 

Science in Our World of Progress 

Social Studies for Canadians 

Story of Cur People 

Story of the British•Empire 

Seven League Boots - Haliburton 

Story of Britian and Canada 

Some Pages from Canada’s Story 

Traveller’s Tales 

Van Loon’s Geography 

World Wide Geographies - Book VIII - Stembridge 










- 

• - 

- 

- 

- 

! 


r 

- 





APPENDIX 4 








































- 170 - 


1. The Romance of Copper 

Copper and Brass Research Association 
420 Lexington Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 

2. Review of the Nickel Industry in 1939 

The International Nickel Co. of Canada Ltd. 
Copper Cliff, Ont. 

3. The History of Salt 

The Morton Salt Company 

Morton Building, 208 W. Washington St. 

Chicago, Ill. 

4. The Telephone*s Message 
Telephone Almanac 1940 

The Miracle of Talking by Telephone 

American Telephone and Telegraph Company 
195 Broadway 
New York, N.Y. 

5. Light Conditioning at Low Cost 
Light Service Department 

City of Calgary Electric Light, 

Calgary, Alberta 

6. The Key to Fire Safe Homes 

Portland Cement Association 
33 West Grand Avenue 
Chicago, Ill. 

7. The Romance of Cheese 

Educational Department 
Kraft-Phoenix Cheese Corporation 
Chicago, Ill. 










- 171 - 


8. The Romance of Leather 

Tanners Council of America 
100 Gold Street 
New York, N.Y. 

9. Health Through the Ages 

Metropolitan Life Insurance Company 
Ottawa, Ont. 

10. The Story of Salman 

American Can Company 
250 Park Avenue 
New York, N.Y . 

11. From Wheat to Flour 

Wheat Flour Institute 
309 W. Jackson Boulevard 
Chicago, Ill. 

12. The Story of Leather 

Ohio Leather Company 
Girard, Ohio 

13. A Wonder Book of Rubber 

The B.F. Goodrich Company 
Akron, Ohio 

14. Diesel, The Modern Power 
When the V/heels Revolve 
Modes and Motors 
Chemistry and 7/heels 
Metallurgy and Wheels 
Research Looks to New Horizons 









■ 















• . . 











* 


. 







. 


















. 










. 




« • 




' 













- 172 - 


Department of Public Relations 
G-eneral Motors Corporation 
Detroit, Mich. 

15. Silk Exhibit 

International Silk Guild Inc. 

250 Fifth Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 

16. Flying Acfcoss Canada 

Trans-Canada Air Lines 
218 - 8th Ave. W. 

Calgary, Alberta 

17. A Story of Progress - Re Fire 

Man’s Enemy Since che Beginning of Time 

America-LaFrance and Foamite Corporation 
Elmira, N.Y. 

18. How Paper is Made 

The Whiting Paper Co. 

Holyoke, Mass. 

19. The Story of Cotton Thread 

The American Thread Company 
New York, N.Y. 

20. How Modern Shoes are Made 

United Shoe Machinery Corporation 
Boston, Mass. 

21. The Picture Story of Steel 
Safety in Steel 




. 

- 

. . 




. « : . ... 





















■ • 










. ’ t 

* - t 







- 173 - 


Arnerican Iron and Steel Institute 
350 Fifth Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 

22. Rubber Samples and Latex Samples 
The Story of the Tire 

Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company 
Akron, Ohio 

23. Aviation Atlas 

Gulf Oil Corporation 
Pittsburg, Pa. 

24. Mining and Preparation of Anthracite 

Hudson Coal Company 
Scranton, Pa. 

25 . History and Description of Paper Making 

Crown Zellerbach Corporation 
343 Sansome Street 
San Francisco, Calif. 

26. Grand Coulee Dam 

United States Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Reclamation 
Los Angeles, Calif. 

27. Story and Paint Book of Some of America’s Famous Men 

Wilkes-Barre, Penn. 

28. What do You Know About Peanuts? 

Wilkes-Barre, Penn. 


29. Corn in Industry 
































I \ ■ 







. 


. 


* 


. 




. 











. 

c ‘ ■ 










. 

. 5 

c 

■* 

. 












-17 4. 


Corn Industries Research Foundation 
270 Broadway 
New York, N .Y . 

30. The Story of Vanilla 

Joseph Burnett Company 
437 - 447 D. Street 
Boston, Mass. 

31. Marketing of Dairy Products 

The Meat Packer 

32. Dairy and Poultry Products from Farm to Table 

Union Stock Yards 
Chicago, Ill. 

33. Water Wheels of Progress 
Los Angeles Witter Supply 

Los Angleles Dept, of Water and Power 
Los Angeles, Calif. 

34. The Water Miracle 

American Water Works Association 
Los Angeles, Calif. 

35. Mining of Asbestos 

Asbestos Corporation Ltd. 

Thetford Mines, Que. 

36. An Outline History of Transportation 

Fisher Body Division 
General Motors Corporation 
Detroit, Mich. 

37. Metallurgical and Chemical Operations 










« ■ 







' 


. 

. 






* 




. 

•- 

. 









- 























- 173 - 


Tne Consolidated Minin- and Smelting Col of Can. 

Ltd. 

Trail, B.C. 

38. Boulder Canyon Project 

Bureau of Power 
Los Angeles, Calif. 

39. The Story of Coffee 

Bureau of Coffee Information 
230 Park Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 

40. Boeing School of Aeronautics 

Seattle, Wash. 

41. Energy for Breakfast 

Canadian Sugar Factories 
Raymond, Alberta. 

42. Behind Your Sugar Bowl 

The California and Hawaiian Sugar Refining Corp. 

Ltd. 

San Francisco, Calif. 

43. Men of Algoma 

Algoma Steel Corporation 
Sault Ste. Marie, Ont. 

44. Producer and Consumer 

G-eneral Office 
Swift and Company 
Chicago, Ill. 

45. Concrete Improvements Around the Home 

Portland Cement Association 
33 West Grand Avenue 
Chicago, Ill. 
























. 


. 









t< 4 







* 4 « 

- 

* 












* ■ '' - • . ■ 





































« « 

. 

« 























- 176 - 


46. The Natural Resources of Newfoundland 
Lobster Industry in Newfoundland 
Dogfish Industry and How it can be Used 
The Dried Codfish Industry 

Trout and Their Conservation 

Department of Natural Resources 
St. John's, Newfoundland. 

47. The Story of Chocolate and Cocoa 

Hershey Chocolate Corp. 

Hershey, Pa. 

48. The Royal Visit 1939 
Chart - From Mine to Market 
Canada’s Aluminum Industry 

The Aluminum Co. of Canada Ltd. 

Toronto, Ont. 

49. How Wool Blankets are Made 

Kenwood Mills Ltd. 

Armprior, Ont. 

50. Review of the Nickel Industry in 1938 

The International Nickel Co. of Canada Ltd. 
Copper Cliff, Ont. 

51. Abraham Lincoln 

The Lincoln National Life Insurance Co. 
Kitchener, Ont. 

52. Half a Million Men 


Dollars Behind Steel 








* 





t 





' - . 


1 

. 

. 









. 


. 










4 

















-177- 


American Iron and Steel Institute 
305 Fifth Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 

53. Seeing Armour's 

Armour and Co. 

New Beef House 
Chicago, Ill. 

54. A Brief History of the Hudson's Bay Co. 

Hudson's Bay House 
Winnipeg, Man. 

55. Nova Scotia's Deep Sea Fighters 

Hon. A.S. MacMillan 
Minister of Highways 
Halifax, N.S. 

56. The Home Almanac and Facts Book 

Ford Motor Co. 

Dearborn, Mich. 

57. The Wonders of Anthraciet 

Lehigh Navigation Coal Co. 
Philadelphia, Penn. 

58. The Telephone in America 

Information Dept. 

American Telephone and Telegraph Co. 
195 Broadway 


New York, N.Y 













* » 



















APPENDIX 5 
























178 


To demonstrate the type of program and the extent of material 
I include herewith a copy of a broadcast made by a Grade Nine Class 
in Social Studies* 

Ladies and Gentlemen: Teacher: P.N.R. Morrison 

This broadcast was planned, orignally, to induce research 
work among pupils in Grade IX Social Studies, who mastered 
easily the essentials of the prescribed course. 

However, with the co-operation of Inspector John Schoffield, 
we have widened our first purpose* He has informed the schools 
of his Inspectorate, concerning this venture and has urged teach¬ 
ers to arrange for their pupils to hear this broadcast. If radio 
education proves successful here, as it has in other countries, 
we hope to devise a scheme of co-operation among schools for a 
permanent series of broadcasts based upon the New Course of Studies. 

In addition, Alberta T s new curriculum upholds, and in man 
ways it leads, the world's progressive educational ideals and 
practises. We believe that a number of parents are vitally 
interested in the type of work their children are doing under 
the new course. This program may assist them to a new and tol¬ 
erant consideration of the whole purpose of education. 

Parents may ask, "What is Social Studies?" In answer we quote 
Professor Harold Rugg of Columbia University: "The essential pur¬ 
pose of Social Studies is to introduce young people to the probi 
lems that will confront them as adult citizens. The chief aim 
is to understand modern life and how it came to be. The chief 
goal of social Studies is active, intelligent participation in 
our own civilization and the tolerant understanding of other 
civilizations." Unquote. 



. 








' 


. 


1 '• ’Oil 








. 








: • ■- * • . 

. 

. 

- 

• < 










. I 








< 

. , . ■; 









- 179 


Social Studies demands fair-mindedness. To gain that}, an 
abundance of ideas must be available to the pupil. It is the 
lack of ideas and not their abundance that constitutes mankind’s 
real peril. It is well for the community to remember that 
Social Studies tolerates only the tnth; that truth can be found 
only by examination of all the evidence available re the prob¬ 
lem at hand. Sheltered minds are prejudiced; ignorant brains 
are intolerant; both make for social disaster. 

We claim also for this program, that it is close to human 
realities. We have tried to get into the other fellow’s shoes; 
to see the thoughts that whirl in his head, and to feel the 
suffering that makes them whirl. That is true education. 

The Hoad to Disaster Norman Chandler 

In the "Rise of American Civilization" by Beard, some trem? 
endous facts are given regarding the Great Tar. From this book 
we learn that the cost of the last Great Tar in lives, money and 
property, ran into frightful totals. Dr. Butler, President of 
the Columbia University, gives the following figures: At least 
50 million lives were lost and at least 400 billions of dollars 
in money. With that money we could have given to every family 
in the United States, Canada, Australia, the British Isles, Prance, 
Belgium, Germany, and Russia, a $2500 house, furnished with 
$1000 worth of furniture and placed on 5 acres of land, worth 
$100 per acre. We could have given to every city of over 20,000 
people, a $5,000,000 library and a 310,000,000 University. The 
remaining sum, put out at interest, would have paid to the end 
of time, $1,000 per year to each of 125,000 teachers and 125,000 


nurses 



j .I I 

* 

: 

. fl 

« 

c " : ■ 

' 

, ' ' ■: v. ; 

■ . ' 


■ - L U ■ 

, ' ‘ t ' • 

‘ / • '; t \ r '■ r * ’ . 

00.j ■ l +r : .Or;.-; 

Y : o- • : : '; J \ .' jJin 

- ' ■ •• ; < • 

H ; • ' < 5 ' t ' 

■ 


. • r; 

t . • ' ' d‘ • 

< ' e 



180 


Despite these enormous sacrifices, permanent peace was not 
secured. 

Woodrow Wilson Irene Oswald 

For a few months in 1919, the hopes of millions rested on 
President Woodrow Wilson. A former university profressor, he 
became President of the United States in 1912. In 1917, he led 
his country into the war on the side of the Allies, thus insuring 
their victory. 

At the conclusion of the war he made the fatal blunder of att¬ 
ending in person the Peace Conference of Paris. 

In the "Outline of History" Wells says: "He brought his wife 
with him. That seemed no doubt a natural and proper thing to the 
American mind. Many representatives brought their Ives. Unhapp¬ 
ily, a social quality, 7 ", nay, almost a tourist quality was introd¬ 
uced into the world settlement by these ladies. Transport facil¬ 
ities were limited and most of them arrived in Europe with a rad¬ 
iant air of privilege. They cane as if they came to a treat. 

They would visit Chester or Warwick or Windsor en route, for they 
might not have the chance of seeing these celebrated places again. 
Important interviews would be broken off to get in a visit to 
some old "historical mansion". This may seem a trivial matter 
to note in a History of Mankind, but it was such small human 
things as this that drew a miasma of failure over the Peace 
Conference of 1919". 

On his way to and around European capitals people wepty b 
millions at the sight of their hero. But during this tourist 
delay, others wept unheard. In Russia, they clawed open the 
graves and fought for the rotting human flesh; German children 









r.: : ; /: ■ ■.' 


. 






t 




' 


' 




■r ; o ," . ’■ t aiv. si 

■ 




■ ■' r ■ ; :- v 






■ ( ■. - - 



n, 








. 

















181 


and their parents bloated and died by hundreds of thousands, 
while the President’s vain craving for applause was satisfied. 

Ten precious weeks were wasted during which the continental 
blockade denied food to the enemy. Probably a million human 
souls were destroyed. The President’s glory began to fade. 

To the Peace Conference he brought his famous Fourteen 
Points—but returned home with much less. Ignorant of European 
realities, aloof from his advisers, stunned by rival claims, slov. r 
in mind, he was playing blind man’s buff against the experienced 
European diplomats. On trivial points he fought violently and 
valiantly but allowed the great issues at stake to pass over his 
head unheeded. He quarrelled continually with his colleagues. 
They seemed to get the best of him. As a final resort he would 
dig his toes in, refuse to budge and threaten to go homej 

He had insisted on the inclusion of the League of Nations in 
the Peace Treaties, but he returned from Europe to find America, 
led by Congress and the Senate, definitely hostile to his scheme. 
President Wilson appealed to the American people who so lately 
had regarded him as a Messiah. They did not respond; failure 
seized him; something snapped; he wept before his audiences. He 
later suffered a paralytic stroke in the barthroom of the White 
House. Whispers claimed his mentality had gone. In 1924, he died 
a broken and disappointed man - crushed by an ideal too great 
for his direction. 

Lloyd George Margaret Bryholt 

Lloyd George, the Welsh Wizard, represented Great Britain at 
the Peace Conference. As pre-war chancellor of the exchequer he 
had gained for himself the reputation of a daring fighter in the 






182 


duel between the Commons and the Lords, re the Parliament Act 
of 1911. Luring the war he replaced Asquith as Premier of England. 

It is claimed he was the cleverest of the Peace delegates. 
Working with six or seven senses simultaneously he appeared to 
anticipate his opponents arguments and to frame in advance a 
reply calculated to win. 

Blame for the blunders of Versailles must not be denied Lloyd 
George. By his wild promises during the November Khaki Elections, 
he made reaeonable peace treaties out of the question by promising 
the electorate exhorbitant impossibilities. He promised to hang 
the Kaiser; t<h make Germany pay the total cost of the war; to 
search her pockets for the last farthing. 

For his own country he gained, as H.A.L. Fisher points out, 
the total destruction of the German fleet, and of her commercial 
ships, control over Mesopotamia, Palestine, Tanganyka and also a 
share of German reparation payments. 

In his favor, we must admit his desire to hold the Peace 
Conference in Geneva, far from the bitterness of Paris, where jus¬ 
tice to the enemy was branded pro-German. Near the end of the 
conference he became alarmed at the brutality of the proposed 
terms and took the field of moderation for Germany. 

Shortly after the war he fell from British favor, and now 
at the age of 75 he is a retired statesman very much against 
his will. 

Clemenceau Dick Hinton 

Premier Georges Clemenceau had been in turn, journalist, 
politician, doctor, a fierce and experienced duellist. He 
had lived in America, worked there as a teacher, and had one 











\ 

, 

' 

■ 

, 








4 

. , 





- 

4 < 

' 


' 











. 

, 




















t ; 

« ' ' 






183 


divorce to his credit. At the time of the Peace Conference 
he was Premier of Prance. 

0n the motion of President Wilson, Cleameceau was elected 
President of the Peace Cc ace "as a special f ut ■ tc tl 
suffering and sacrifices of France". Unfortunately, the whole 
Conference was limited b ■ that formula. Clemenceau’s main pur¬ 
pose was to crush Germany beyond any hope of revival, undo the 
humiliation of 1871, cripple Germany for all time to come, so 
that she might never again stand up to Prance. His main idea was 
not to make the world safe for democracy, but to make it safe 
for Paris. 

Keynes, reports that Clemenceau sat by his colleagues in a 
semi-circle before a fire place. He always wore his long frock- 
coat and leather gloves. It is said that the old man dozed 
now and then during the discussion, but he was always awake when 
some point was raised that seemed to threaten the security of 
Prance. 

He was skilful in compromise and knew what to do at the right 
moment to secure all that he desired for France. In a large 
measure the failure of the Conference was due to his limitations. 

Despite the Carthaginian Peace he had arranged, he fell from 
favor for what the Pranch called his "moderation" at the Peacd 
Conference. 

Signor Orlando Jean Newby 

The allies secured Italy’s entrance into the forld War on 
their side, by the treaty of London, 1915, which promised Italy 
numerous territorial gains. Scarcely had the Armistice been 
signed in the clearing of Campiegne Forest, when the Allies 
forgot their promises. 



. 








. 




c . 















. 




•v; e . ■ 

. 


. 




f ;• 










. 










0 


« ? < * 







- 184 


In "Europe Since 1815" Hazen says, "Italy had 500,000 soldiers 
killed and one million more wounded. There was a widespread feel¬ 
ing among the Italians that their allies did not appreciate the 
magnitude of these losses". 

On Signor Orlando as Premier of Italy, fell the responsibility 
of securing Italian demands. President Wilson had seen his famous 
’fourteen points’ warped and twisted so often that he decided to 
deny Italy her claims to the Dalmatian Coast and the Adriatic Port 
of Fiume. 

Signor Orlando pleaded that his political reputation was at 
stake and that his government would fall if it failed to satisfy 
Italian territorial ambitions. Said Wilson "I know the Italian 
people better than you do". This, on the strength of a three day 
visit with them. Orlando was furious when he opened the Paris 
Times one warning to find that for the first time news stating 
that President Wilson had appealed over his head and directly 
to the Italian people. At this outrageous conduct, Orlando 
stormed and wept bitterly. He took the next train for Rome, only 
to find his people solidly behind his demands and also definitely 
hostile to President Wilson* 

Italy finally secured most of Austria and a strip of territory 
connecting it with Fiume, but not Fiume itself. Italy renounced 
most of Dalmatia but secured much of the Austrian Tyrol, with a 
population of 650,000 people. 

Orlando fell from power in 1919. Up until 1925, he favored 
Fascism but later opposed it. In 1928 he retired from politics. 


« l! ' , ■ 


• ■ ; 


t : * • \ i 

■ . ‘ o ■ ' ■ 







■ 

- 

. 








- 

< 

. 

* 




















' 




c '. .. ’TO 

. 


. 












185 


The Treaty Makers go Home Eric Irvine & Teddy Isaacson 

1. "You know these four men did some very childish things?" 

2. "Just what do you mean by that?" 

1# "I refer to the repeated threats thrown out by each member of 
the ’Big Four’ to go home*" 

2. "Yes, They must have forgotten that the future of mankind was 
in their hands". 

IE. Lloyd G-eorge was the first to threaten to leave the Conference 
because it was not making enough progress, 'ilson and Clem- 
enceau coaxed him to stay and so he yielded." 

2. "Clemenceau, the Old Tiger, was most fortunate of all - ho did 
not have far to go. When Wilson refused France’s claims to 
the Saar coalfields a scene took place. Said ./ilson "Then 
if France does not get what she wants she will refuse to act 
with us. In that event do you wish me to go home?" The 
Tiger replied: "I do not wish you to go but I intend to do so 
myself". — and with that he flung out of the room. However 
it must be remembered that he lived around the corner and 
could easily come back." 

1. "Then Wilson got huffy. He telegraphed for the "George 
Washington" to come over from Anerica to get him. His faith¬ 
ful secretary, Tumulty, wired back that his return would be 
regarded as a desertion, so Wilson stayed to fight it out." 

2. Then Orlando really did go home because '/ilson refused to let 
Italy have Fiume. He baxae back though in two weeks time because 
Italy needed an American loan." 

1. perhaps it would have been better had all these men gone home. 

2. "I believe you are right. These were ©en of great ideals but 









- 












, 

? ' ? 

. 

' 










■ 



• 

' 


* 




< 












. ' . ;> 


■ 


- . 








- 


. 




■ < 

. < 

« ■ 

. 






* 




186 © 


but they had no training for the task before them. The 
total work of the Conference should have been turned over 
to sipossionate experts”. 

1. ”That would have been ahappier arrangement. This Conference 
was the political grave of every member of the ”Big Four”. 
These men who understood how to do good work in their own 
countries fell from favor because they failed to accc plish 
what they had never been trained to do”. 

The League of Nations Willie Strohschein 

Provision in the Peace Treaties for the creation of a League 
of Nations was insisted upon by President Wilson. The idea 
originated with Lord Cecil in England, and was spread by Gen¬ 
eral Smuts of South Africa and finally seised as the pet shheme 
of President Woodrow Wilson. 

The Leaue of Nations was to be composed of a permanent staff 
of officials called a secretariat, located at Lake Geneva, Switz¬ 
erland. Every country joining the League was to have represen¬ 
tation on the Assembly of the League. There was to be a League 
Council composed of five members, representing Great Britain, 
France, Italy, Japan and the United States. Cases of threatened 
conflict were to be considered "by the Council, and in no case 
were members to resort to war until the expiration of three 
months after the council had reported. If they failed to obe" 
League orders, economic sanctions would be applied and all 
League members would break off trading relationships with the 
agg-ressor nation. 

The League of Nations was able to regain peace between 



, 

. 

■ 


, 




. 




. 

. 














. .. ' - ■ ■ "::OS. , ■ ■ 




















, ' 


< - ' ' ‘ < t 
















5 

\* - 





















187 


Albania and Yugoslavia in 1921, and again between Poland and 
Lithuania in 1222. But these are only small countries, and 
everyone knew the real test of the League of Nations would 
come when it tried to stop a World Power. 

The worst fears regarding the League of Nations proved to 
be true when Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931 and left the 
League for the triticism it offered. Germany withdrew in 1934. 
Again in 1935 the League lost ground when Italy, a League 
member, invaded Ethiopia. Today the League stands by utterly 
helpless as Japan invades China, and Germans, Italians and Moors 
wage war against the Spanish Government. Thus when prominent 
statesmen claim the League of Nations has not failed they are 
talking fiction and not fact. 

The ideal of a League of Nations is essential to world happ¬ 
iness, but during our time, failure resulted from many disab¬ 
ilities. 

Reasons for the failure of the League of Nations maybe 
found in the answer to these two questions: 

a. Why was 1919 the particular year in the millions of 
years gone by, when an organization could declare that 
never again in all the ages to come would there be any 
territorial changes? 

b. How could the TT have-not" nations regard the arrangement 
as reasonable or permanei when, at the very moment of 
its creation it was being used to grab more territory for 
the very nations who promoted the scheme? 

Some Terms of the Treaty Helen Scheske 

The Treaty of Versailles contains 453 pages, and weighs Just 









. 





, ' ' :0 c 

. 






. 

* 

. 


, 

■ 

■ 


r « l 


; 













, 







188 


under three pounds, and can be purchased for 75£. It bears the 
reputation of being the most bitter document in human history. 

After the sacrifice of 9,000,000 men in the actual blood 
bath of war, and the needless sacrifice of 15,000,000 more to 
the ravages of disease and starvation, the peace makers sat down 
to what has been called a poker party among bandits, for the div 
ision of the spoils, Far from planning permanent peace, they 
made future wars certain. 

From Germany they took her merchant marine and her navy, 
her army and her rivers. They imposed a temporary indemnity 
of 30 billion dollars, and then smashed her economic structure 
so that payment became impossible. 

They transferred millions of Germans to foreign soil, and 
dismembered the German Empire. Alsace-Lorraine and the Saar 
coal-fields went to France; North Schleswig was given to Denmark 
Posen and West Prussia, forming the Polish Corridor, the 96$ 
pure Gdrman city of Danzig, the valuable iron mines of Upper 
Silesia were given to Poland. Germany was totally stripped of 
her colonial empire, and shw the spoils divided among her 
Christian conquerors. She saw millions of her pure nationals 
condemned to live and die on the foreign soil of Poland, France, 
Czecho-Slovakia and Denmark. She felt condemned to eternal 
poverty. 

The only defence to be offered for this short-sighted and 
selfish treaty was the question: "’./hat kind of a treaty would 
Germany have saddled on the world had she won the war?” 

The Rise of Mussolini Billy Fead 


Benito Mussolini was born in 1883, of a mother who T :as a 






189 


school teacher and a fat’ . 

describes Mussolini’s early crushing pverty in ’’Inside Europe”. 
Quote: "He never tasted coffee until he was twenty. He slept 
on a bundle of hay instead of a mattress. He was a school 
teachdr on pay at $10.25 per month, until he fled to Switzerland 
to avoid military service. He was nineteen nor, and earned his 
living as a brick layer and by working in a chocolate factory. 

He was often hungry and on ene occasion he snatched food from 
two English women picnicking in the park. He got into trouble 
with the police and altogether was arrested elven times. 

At the age of 21, in 1901, he returned to Italy and became 
a violent socialist leader - the very people he scourges today. 
In 1916 he spent 38 days in the trenches and then 7 months in 
bed as the result of the explosion of a gun near which he was 
sitting. 

He is only 5 ft. 6 ins. tall, but has powerful shoulders; 
he is now 54 years of age and in excellent health. In the 
early 20*s he suffered a severe stomach ailment and since that 
time has eaten only milk and fruit. He neither drinks alcohol 
nor smokes tobacco. 

His rise is certainly due to the effects of the Treat; of 
Versailles. His rise in Italian politics is due to the unem¬ 
ployment and industrial disorganization following Italy’s war 
effort and also the discontent caused by the Treat:?- of Versailles 
on post-war Italy. His party began as gangs of ruffians amash- 
the faces and skulls of workers who dared to strike for higher 
wages. Fascists seized many Italiah cities. The two preceding 










■v | 


. • . V 

« * 


. 




■ 

, .'■■■■ ; , 


■ 












? • ■ ■ . - 






’ 




. .■ 





. 










■ 
















* 




' 




190 


premiers - Nitti and Giollitti - were weaklings so King Victor 
Emmanuel invited Mussolini to become Premier. Mussolini’s much 
touted march on Rome was not really a march. In fact he made 
it in the sleeping compartment of a railroad car. On his ay 
to dictatorship he found it necessary to have a band of roughs 
murder his chief opponent - Matteoti. Other opponents were 
similarly treated, beaten, robbed, or doused with gallons of 
castor oil. By these methods he has become dictator of Italy. 

Formerly he was apacifist, but in 1935 he led (by means of 
the radio) his soldiers against Abyssinia and added that region 
of doubtful value, to his so-called "Soman Empire". 

Last fall he visited Hitler and strengthened the Rome-Berlin 
Axis. He is one of the world’s greatest peace problems. 

In October 1936 he said, "I hold out a great Olive Branch 
to the world. This Olive Branch springs from an immense forest 
of eight million bayonets, well-sharpened and thrust from 
intrepid young hearts”. 

The Rise of Hitler Della Condie 

The rise of Hitler was made possible by the Treaty of Ver¬ 
sailles. 

Adolph Hitler was born April 20, 1889, in Austria. Gunther 
says: "Hitler’s father was truculent and over-bearing; he died 
over a bottle of wine in a public house, of a sudden stroke. 

The father thought that Adolph was a weakling and a worthless 
idler and dreamer; he called him moon-struck, and bullied and 
beat him". 

As a yought, Hitler was a poor painter of landscapes in 
Austria. Alone, as a boy of 17, in Vienna, he met his first 








191 


Jew. Outraged, he asked himself: "Can this creature be a Jew?" 
and then bursting forth again: "Can he possibly be a german?" 

During the war, he won the Iron Cross for valor on the battle¬ 
field. In No Man’s Land, he captured, singlehanded, 

Frenchmen, who crawled from a dugout when they heard Hitler giv¬ 
ing orders to an imaginery company of men. 

During his jail sojourn, he wrote a famous book "Mein liampf", 
in which he outlined the future policy of the Nazi Party. He 
organized bands of ruffians called Storm Troopers, to beat up 
his opponents. 

He capitalized on the brutality of the Treaty of Versailles 
and promised to smah it. 

He preached a crusade against the Jews, and his roughs beat 
them. 

Soon after he came to power, he consolidated his authority 
by having a dutchman set fire to the Reichstag. This was 
blamed on the Communists, and therefore taken as an e::cuse 
to exterminate that party. 

He has defied the Treaty of Versailles. He re-armed Germany, 
entered the Rhineland, and regained control over Germany’s 
rivers. Observers believe he awaits a favorable moment to reclaim 
Danzig. His war machine is being oiled for the day when Germany 
will retake the Polish Corridor, make a drive to regain her col¬ 
onies, and endeavor to bring into one Fatherland all her nationals. 
Paths of Peace Stanley Henderson 

Tes. Something must be done. But what? We all concede that 
war is mankind’s greatest vice. Surely everyone will agree that 






- 192 


something must be done to avert the impending catastrophe. 

Let us search for peace in realities, 

First: Peace will not and cannot come by pointin'; fingers 
of hatred and scorn. It cannot come by accusing other coun¬ 
tries of perpetual v;rong-doing. We must accept our share of 
the responsitnlity if this generation is to be saved from the 
fate of the last. 

Secondly: German^, Italy and Japan ask: "Are we not follow¬ 
ing the paths Britain discovered during the last four hundred 
years?" Japan asks: "Are Japanese intentions in China differ¬ 
ent than Britain’s in India?" Italy inquires: "Did Mussolini 
do more to Abyssinia than you did to South Africa?" Germany 
demands of Britain: "Why should we be denied colonies, when 
you have so many?” These are the questions the world’s have- 
not powers are asking. Naturally we disagree with their con¬ 
tentions but we must remember our disagreement with them will 
not bring peace. 

Thirdly: Is Germany unreasonable in the demands she is 
making? Here again, pretend you are eating cheap lard instead 
of butter so that the beloved fatherland may be re-united. 
Should Danzig be returned? Should the German territory of the 
Polish Corridor remain under control of Poland? Shoudl German 
industrial life be deprived of Upper Silesia? Should a few 
countries glut on colonies, while those who need them cannot 
have any? Should millions of pure Germans be separated from 
the Fatherland? If you -ere a German you could give the Kit- 
leristic answer to each question. However, not being one, 
you can guess at what answer a German would give, which is 


- 




. 











, ■ 

: . .. ■ ? 

y 

- 


■ 


-‘v/o" o.t M: is o '-; 




. 


















< 




i ..J : 0 ■' ' ' « 


















- 193 


all that matters if peace is to be preserved. 

Fourthly: When Germany recovers these possession , slowly, 
as she intends to do, are we going to stop her or will Hitler 
present us with a series of accomplished facts in defiance of 
the treaties as he has done hitherto? If we are not prepared 
to stop him, then common strategy should persuade U 3 to beat 
him to it. Meet at least some of his demands and thus prevent 
vast accumulations of hatred from growing greater. 

Our Empire has two alternative. It must either make some of 
the concessions demanded or. else it must assume the role of world 
protector and arm itself so thoroughly it could and would anni¬ 
hilate any challenger. There must be no half-way measures. 
Concessions must be made to preserve peace or else aggressors 
must be smashed into the principalities from which they have 
sprung. But settlements’ similar to the Treaty of Versailles 
must not be permitted in the future. Enormous sacrifices must 
do more than pave the way for a greater catastrophe. 

P. N. R. Morrison concluded thus: 

We acknowledge, with thanks, the splendid assistance given 
by Miss Patricia Parker and by Mr. E. M. Sanderson of the 
V/etaskiwin High School Staff toward the production of this 
program. We also thank Mr. Nick Oswald and Vellner and Pearson 
of Wetaskiwin Motors for supplying transportation facilities 
on this trijj. We feel indebted also to Radio Station C.F.R.N. 
for their courtesy. Thank you, and Good Afternoon. 
















: 




. 















c - ? 





. 












* 


, 1 : . ■ .. 




. ' 






. 

. 

■ 








. 

. 




























