













©X UBBI* 

auwnswaas 

aUBKMlHSJS 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/someobservationsOOmorr 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


SOME OBSERVATIONS ON 
THE CONTRIBUTION OP HAROLD HUGG 
TO THE TEACHING OP SOCIAL STUDIES 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE GRADUATE FACULTY 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 


BY 

PETER NEWTON RUSSEL MORRISON 


CALGARY, ALBERTA 
MARCH, 1949. 





TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

I. DEMOCRACY AND EDUCATION 1 

II. RUGG*S ANALYSIS OP INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY 11 

III. RUGG? THE EXPERIMENTALIST IN PHILOSOPHY 23 

IV. RUGG r S EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY 31 

V. RUGG PACED THE PROBLEM OP SOCIAL IMPROVEMENT 

THROUGH EDUCATION 40 

VI. EUGG AND THE OLD SCHOOL 5S 

VII. RIJGG AND THE NEW SCHOOL 6l 

VIII, THE PSYCHOLOGY BEHIND THE CURRICULUM (RUGG) 6? 

IX. THE MATERIAL OP THE CURRICULUM 75 

X. FUNDAMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL PRINCIPLES IN 

THE SOCIAL STUDIES S4 

XI* A DETAILED METHOD OP TEACHING THE SOCIAL STUDIES S3 

XII. WHAT DO PUPILS GET OUT OP THE RUGG COURSE? 107 

XIII, A CRITICISM OP RUGG-*3 WORK 113 


















' 


; 

ip 

■ 



■ 


: 















' 


' . ' ■ E 












CHAPTER I 


DEMOCRACY AM) EDUCATION 

15 Democracy is far more than a form of government, • • • It is an 
attitude of mind to which the exploitation of man is abhorrent, a way of 
life in which human personality is judged of supreme, of measureless worth, 
an order of social relationships dedicated to the promotion of the individ¬ 
ual and collective interests of common folk; in other words, it is a society 
of the people, by the people and for the people.^ 

And yet, in America 

f8 A realistic analysis of the democratic process in America shows 
that it is carried on largely through the interplay of many small and large 
special interest groups. • • .which constitute the dominant political force 
of the community. m2 

Social invention has lagged behind technological advancement. The 
schools must, says Rugg, accept a share of the blame. 3 

tt The lag of the academic mind behind the creative mind of America 
in 1919 was wide and, I think thoroughly exponential of university pedagogy 
and school practice. I cannot recall a single professor of education or 
teacher in school history or the social sciences who was aware of the forces, 
trends, attitudes or ideas (herein) or who took steps to being them into the 
life and program of the schools. 

The results of this failure to build democracy, Rugg declares, is 
economic dislocation. w 5 


1. Rugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum , Yearbook III. John Dewey Society, 
P. 190 

2. Rugg H, That Men May Understand , p. 233 
3* Rugg H. The Great Technology , p. 256 

4. Rugg H. That Men May Understand , p. 1J2 

5. Rugg H. Ibid -Foreword, pp XII - XIII 













... L . .. ' ... ; •; •' i.r V I.:'-' 

f 

f 




■ ' ■ ' t ■ ?0i ; ' 


r. ' ' ' 
















no 









; • •; J . • : '• s' \ • ' 

. • . 

.. . 

■: ■ V.-,' ' . : • f - 




- 




4 r f flt 



,, • i 




■ ., ■ ■ ■ f. I 

’ 







- 2 - 


"At bottom* our current social problems hinge upon three factss 
18 The first fact is that Americans now possess an actual going 
economic system capable of producing enough goods and services to give 
every family in America the purchasing power needed to buy a decent stand¬ 
ard of life. • •••••••••• 

13 The second fact is that we simply have not yet devised a way to 
give to the people generally sufficient purchasing power to buy the maximum 
amount of goods and services that the system can make available* In other 

words* distribution lags behind production* • *..•« . 

"The third fact* • .popular consent has advanced less rapidly 
than either economic productivity or social invention* 

And yet* for the first time in history we have* says Bngg* the 
technological information and equipment to produce abundance* ^ 

THE GREAT TECHNOLOGY 

"Th© first epoch on the time line of history in which man can 
bring forth a civilisation of abundance* of tolerance and of beauty. 

88 A potentially great culture* because* having invented efficient 
prime movers* man need no longer be a cringing slave of nature. 

19 Great - not because the twelve hour day can become the four hour 
day* but because work of any prolongation can become a happy and creative 
experience* 

"Great - because of the possibility of the successful union of 
technology and democracy. 


1* Eugg H* That Men May Understand , pp. 103-105 
2. Bugg H. Ibid.- Foreword XII-XXXI. 







i 




i 



:v 


c 

5 . »0 ' A ' 







Y/ Oj'n? ' {?> ' -j 






3 


w Great « because the scientific method can at last be applied 
to the man-man relationships as well as to the man-thing relationships. 

B In a word - great - because man can live creatively both as 
artist and as technologist. 

w We stand at the crossroads to a new epoch; in one direction 
lies the road to the Great Technology; in others lie various pathways to 
social chaos and the possible destruction of interdependent ways of living. 

Sugg* writing in 1939» regretted that the ^Social machinery of 
American life is badly jammed. w2 Twelve main causes exist; 

1. The lag of some parts of omr culture - ie., distribution behind 
production. 

2. Undue control over wealth, communication, and government by min?® 
ority groups with individualist philosophy. Needed changes are prevented. 

3# Democracy with its creed of maximum development for each indivi¬ 
dual. 

4. A nation-wide conviction that the free play of intelligence 
should determine social policies. 

5* The failure of mass education to practise the democratic method. 

6. Lack of real understanding by the people of the problem. 

7. Widespread apathy of the people to public affairs. 

8. The powerful appeal of mass suffering but the failure to remove 
causes. 

9* Interest groups in government. 


1. Sugg H. That Men May Understand, p. 143 

2. Eugg H. Democracy & the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Dewey Society , 

Foreword VI-VII. 







i 










f, 




' ' 






" 






‘ 


.. . 








10 


- 4 - 

Danger that people will believe demogogic propaganda* 

11* Complex interdependence of society. 

12* Menace of lack of time. 

America,, says Bugg, must face these problems head on. ^ 

11 Democracy tends to move slowly, but delay of action now may 
prove disastrous* One of the great battles of mankind is being fought 
out on the earth today. It is nothing less than a worldwide struggle 
between democracy and dictatorship. One or the other of these two ways 
of life must die? they cannot collaborate in an interdependent world* 

The victory by democracy can be won only when people have 
that intelligent understanding which gives meaning to the expression 
”government by consent”* 

“Government can be democratic only when it is based on the 
consent of the people « and consent is given only when people understand. 
This conception makes government in a democratic state synonymous with 

education* ”3 

The American problem,, he declares, is based on the need for 
real democracy, economic democracy, abundance and character. ^ 

n By the “American Problem” we mean to bring forth on this con¬ 
tinent * in some form of co-operative commonwealth - the civilization of 
economic abundance, democratic behavior, and integrity of expression 
which is now potentially available. 

The problems 9 controversial and otherwise, must be introduced 
to and form the very backbone of our educational program, Bugg declares. D 


1* Bugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Dewey Society, 

Foreword ppTviI-VIII 

2. Bugg H. Ibid. P.VXII 

3* Bugg H. Ibid. p» X 

4. Bugg H. Ibid. p. V 

5. Bugg H. Ibid. p. V 

6. Bugg H. That Men May Understand, Foreword, p. XV 







’ 

. ' 




j',v 


- ' 










0 




Social studies as a school subject will provide educational 
opportunity to grapple with the problems of American life* 

"Social Studies! What is that! 18 

"All the materials that have to do with how people live to¬ 
gether.” 

18 You mean the facts of history, and geography and civics!” 

18 Yes, and economics and sociology and anthropology - everything 
that has to do with social life. There will probably be two kinds of 
changes? first, the new content will deal with conditions and problems 
of modern civilization that have never been in schools at all and second, 
there will be a new organization of materials - probably a kind of general 
oreunified” social studies. .......... 

”W@ need a new principle, something like this? that all the 
facts, ideas and generalizations needed by a child’s mind or an adult’s 
mind, should be brought into close relationship with one another. • • . fl ^ 

Rugg, with his associate George S. Counts, reviews American 
democracy and the educational problem to be confronted.”^ 


Re Joint Authorship? To clarify responsibility for statements 
quoted, Rngg has issued this explanation re I 3 

w DEMOCRACY AM) THE CURRICULUM” 


11 This book is the product of co-operative effort. Its nineteen 
chapters were written by ten authors, but the writing was done on outlines 
prepared jointly after prolonged exchange of views. ..... .Thus, the 
group designed together the purposes, the content, and the general form of 
the book. ..... .Although individual Authorship is thus assigned to 
each chapter, it is fair to say that the book as a whole is a joint state¬ 
ment of position. , r v 

(Continued-Page b.) 


1. Rngg H. That Men May Understand, pp. 19^-195 

2. Counts G.S. "The Promise of American Democracy 98 , Chapter VII, Democracy 

and the Curriculum. Yearbook III B John Dewey Society. 

3* Rugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum 9 Yearbook Ilia John Dewey Society 
Poreword pp. XI-XII 


















r 




{ 











-* 6 — 

,s Education as a creative factor in history, is dependent on the 
democratic conception of society and the democratic way of life. 55 ^ 

The democracy of America has been a great experience in social 
relationships* From 1820 to 1920, thirty-four million persons crossed the 
Atlantic as immigrants to the XJ.S.A* The meaning of America was democratic 
opportunity* American democracy embraces the great ethical conception of 
the fundamental H equality, brotherhood, and moral worth of all Demo¬ 

cracy in America embraces political, economic and social ideals. The term 
democracy must not be relegated to the realm of politics only. 

The most fundamental form of early American democracy was economic* 
There was almost complete equality of living conditions* In the early days, 
America was a land of freehold farmers* At the time of the Constitutional 
Convention of 1737, nine-tenths of the people were freeholders*3 Each house¬ 
hold was in itself almost an entire economy* Most men were engaged in the 
hard struggle against nature in a frontier community in which a feeling of 
fraternity and the growth of democracy were encouraged by that struggle. Eur¬ 
opean visitors remarked upon the personal independence of all, including ser¬ 
vants* 


While there are minor differences among the authors in theory 
and practice, they see eye to eye on the crucial issues of our times* This 
comparative unanimity is the product of many years of co-operative study of 
the problems of education and the culture* 

In fact three members of this committee - Messrs* Pugg, Kilpat¬ 
rick, and Counts - have worked together on such problems sine© 1924-26, 
when they collaborated in the preparation of Foundations of Curriculum?- 
making, The Twenty-sixth Yearbook of the National Society for the study 
of Education. 


1. Counts G* S. H Th© Promise of American Democracy 51 , Chapter VII, Democracy 
and the Curriculum, Yearbook III* John Dewey Society * p. 187 
2* Counts G. S*' Ibid, p* 188. 

3* Counts G. S. Ibid* p. 192* 









' 





7 


tt A free government can remain free in fact only so long as it 
rests on free men. And men cannot be mad© free by having political rights 
bestowed upon them* They are made free or are enslaved by the conditions 
under which they live and gain their livelihood* If those conditions en- 
courage in them a spirit of independence* dignity* and integrity* then they 
will be free and capable of establishing and maintaining free government• m3 ‘ 

In the 1930*3# much of that was changed* Only a small percentage 
of the population remained on the farm* Of that remainder, 40$ were tenants, 
and of the balance, the total land values was mortgaged to the extent of 40$ 
of its full value* 2 * 4 

Counts explains another menacing change *3 During the nineteenth 
century* an aristocracy of industrial capitalism arose and created the pre- 
sent national economic structure* It fully exploited the resources and ris¬ 
ing population of the nation® The corporation* the stock market* the mono¬ 
poly were devices of economic organisation. It gained substantial control 
over the press* the school, the church* and the legislative* executive and 
judicial branches of government. In the 30 r ®, the vast majority of the 
American people found themselves without title to productive property and 
with little control of their economic destiny. Fewer than 20$ of the people 
own nearly everything; the balance own practically nothing beyond their 
chattels, says Counts.^ 

In spite of these changes* democracy in social relationships re¬ 
mains relatively characteristic of the mass of the American people. In the 
main* they tend to judge an individual by his power and achievement* There 
are, unfortunately* developing signs of the decay of social equality. Over 

1* Counts 0. S. M The Promise of American Democracy 1 * Chapter VII, Democracy 

and the Curriculum* Yearbook III* John Dewey Society * p*198 

2. Counts G-.S* Ibid. P. 200 

3* Counts G.S. Ibid. p. 200-201 

4. Counts G.S. Ibid p. 202 









V: 


* 





- 8 - 

against this rise, we must place the fact that such governmental institutions 
as the senate are more completely in the hands of the people than they have 
ever been* In theory, at least, the American people are in a position to make 
their political institutions serve their purposes* However, there are essen¬ 
tial liabilities developing* The greatest liability of all is the concentra¬ 
tion of economic power in a few hands® A second disability lies in the inca¬ 
pacity of the individual to comprehend or to control the vast forces at work 
in the far-flung economic empire - forces which may control profoundly his 
whole future* A third liability of American democracy, says Counts, lies in 
the fact that large numbers of our people ar© the possessors of a legacy of 
ideas, attitudes, and loyalties which unfit them for building social, or co¬ 
operative ownership and regulation of large productive property.^ They are 
imbued, because of relatively recent history, with the idea of individual 
ownership. They constitute easy prey for economic aristocrats* Too many of 
the American people are formally attaching allegiance to historic symbols* 

These symbols should be used as a foundation for building a better democracy 
in the future* 

The increasing spread of spectacles and circuses leaves little 
opportunity for the average citizen to study basic social problems® 

Chronic unemployment is an explosive liability in a democracy. 

The dole may perpetuate outworn institutions and certainly does tend to 
convert free men into slaves. In the American nation, there is some vio¬ 
lence and there is considerable intolerance. Finally, the judiciary has 
moved into a too solid control of the machinery of government. 

American democracy, says Counts, has many assets®^ it lacks an 

1. Counts G. S. M The Promise of American Democracy®’ Chapter VII, Democracy 

and the Curriculum® Yearbook III. John Dewey Society , p. 206-207 


2® Counts G. S 


Ibid. pp.213-222 














■lit 




r 








' 





. .-p -t 1 .- , ;Y . 












9 


hereditary military caste* The American people have a great heritage of 
freedom. It needs only to he understood more fully and used* The Ameri¬ 
can people are profoundly experimental in nature* Community relationships 
are guided hy good neighborliness and this quality tends to defeat "the 
devil take the hindmost 9 ® philosophy* The contemporary aristocracy is weak* 
America has natural and technical resources which may “be used to make life 
“bountiful and therefor© assist benign conditions for a democracy. America# 
containing the rich bounties of nature can b® easily defended* 

America is relatively secure from attack and# sine© war and dem¬ 
ocracy# are incompatible, this is an important asset* The cultural level 
and the political sense of Americans is unusually high* Perhaps their 
command of systematic social knowledge is lacking on the surface. Never¬ 
theless# in times of crisis# they are pressed to study and understand pol¬ 
itical and economic values. Research in the social sciences has been ex¬ 
tensive so that the nation is in possession of a vast potential of social 
knowledge. One of the tasks of the nation’s educators is to make this 
knowledge functional. 

"American democracy and organised education are equally depen¬ 
dent on one another. While the defense and advance of democracy cannot be 
completely compassed by education# since both social invention and organis¬ 
ation of forces are also required# education is fundamental to the entire 
undertaking. Indeed, even the release of the inventive and organizing ener¬ 
gies of the people depend® at bottom upon the work of education. Understan¬ 
ding of the present status of American democracy# awareness of the problems 
and hazards ahead# guidance from the lessons of past and present# achieve¬ 
ment of a practical program of action, and utilization of the available 













* 




10 


resources of the heritage - all of these must rest in the last analysis on 
a comprehensive and relevant program of education. ... .If the American 
people are not able to direct this institution to the service of democracy, 
then clearly they can scarcely hope to save themselves from the further ad- 
vance of undemocratic forces." 1 

On the other hand, the future of American education is inextric¬ 
ably involved in the fate of the democratic process. Education will be aff¬ 
ected by any profound change in society. In America, democracy and education 
are interdependent. The public school has been looked upon as the bulwark of 
free men in America, and organized education, if it cherishes freedom for it¬ 
self, will marshall its forces for perfecting a society in which liberty may 
survive. 


1* Counts G. S. "The Promise of American Democracy" Chapter VII, Democracy 
and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Dewey Society. 

pp. 222 - 223 . 










ZYi- 


t 



; i n 


j 


X " 





’/ 








; 0 • '*• ' ■ ■ ■ . '" - l ■ 






.r; 


r 




0 


£:*% 


' •' 1 ' e ’ 







f 


u 





CHAPTER II 


RUG&*g ANALYSIS OF INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY 


n My thesis is that this century and a half movement of affairs 
has inevitably brought us to the closing years of the first great epoch of 
industrialism# We are called now, or will be in the next few years, to pay 
the piper for the dancing we and our fathers have done* The production sys¬ 
tem has become too efficient and the distribution system too ineffective for 

further tinkering# The debt has become too great, the interdependence too 
vast, the conflicting emotions of millions of men too deep for further make¬ 
shifts* Like the mighty engine that it is, industrialism is running wild, 
out of control* Hence my thesisi the depression is not a mere fourteenth 
installment m paying times it is a day of inventory and final reckoning* 

This, in summary, was Rugg J s view of economic chaos in 1933® He 

saw as alternatives the pathways of inertia, business dictatorship, prolet¬ 

arian revolution, planned economy, or a recognition and us© of the great 
technological possibilities of the machines of the world# We are, he said,^ 
in possession of the physical plant, the creative intelligence, and the 
power to produce a civilization of abundance* 

M Our great intellectual tasks now ares first, to apply the scien¬ 
tific method to economic government - that is, to the owning and distributing 
of things as well as to the production of things** * 2 3 4 3 

The life of the early American family was comparatively secure, 

Rugg reminds us*^ It was a life of scarcity but was practically all guaranteed 


1# Rugg H» The Great Technology * p. l6 

2. Rugg H. Ibid, pp» 18-19 

3* Rugg H. Ibid, p 21 

4. Rugg H* Ibid p 21 


11 - 










;■ } 


T 


7 


-t 


; $ 




. 


'I 









a 


< - 





12 


by labor on the soil* At rare intervals* a few necessities were purchased 
at a distant town. The characteristics of the early social order*- were* 

(1) Production to meet well known needs* 

(2) Consumption of goods by members of the family* 

( 3 ) Ho unemployment* 

(4) Exchange by barter. 

( 5 ) Human relationships were by direct contact. 

(6) Control over the production-distribution system resided with the 
farmer and his family* 

(7) Meagreness of standard of living. 

(8) Within the limits of nature economic life was secure* Except for 
the possibility of drought or flood* and similar acts of God* life was secure* 

However* asserts Pugg, 1 2 the order of the machine age is directly 

opposite* 

(1) It is unplanned* The worker produces without much regard, to the 
needs of consumption, 

(2) Pew goods produced by the worker are consumed by him. 

( 3 ) There is recurring unemployment* 

(4) Exchange is by means of money, 

(5) Much of life is impersonal and anonymous* 

(6) The worker has little or no control over the economic system* Con¬ 
trol resides in the owners of the system* 

(7) In times of prosperity* the urban worker enjoys a fair standard of 

living. 


1. Bugg H. The Great Technology . pp.3°“3* 

2. Bngg H. Ibid. pp,31-33 







t ■ ■ .. ■ ' ' ' 

■ 

' T : • ■. £ . ' . . ■ ‘ T X-'. " . ' 

'• ■ ' • . • . • ' ' | V V 

' * 


T '■ 












I 











, 














... 




* 

y 

. t -.. v x ■ 

. • ' ' 9 . 

;■ 

. 




13 


(8) The life of the worker is insecure* 

As a result of two industrial revolutions (l) from the lJ00 5 s 
to 1914; (2) from 1914 to the present at least five powerful, national sys¬ 
tems of production were built up.^ Bach system could produce more then its 
own population could buy* In each producing unit, the people were maintained 
on a niggardly level while surplus production was invested in corporate pro- 
duction. In most cases, there was little relationship between political boun¬ 
daries and industrial needs* National competition and world wars were inevit¬ 
able. Agencies of communication in the hands of the owners of the production 
machine left the masses of the people as pawns in the program of propaganda#. 
The struggles of competitors were dressed up as the battles of the people. 

The worker steadily lost control over his work and his food as the 
industrial system arose. Machines in the factories could produce quantity 
goods better than could the craftsman. The latter became a wage-employee and 
a machine-tender. An increasing array of agents came between the worker and 
his work. The rise of vertical corporations took control out of the hands of 
manufacturers-and placed it in the hands of promoters and bankers. Often 
these controls were held by remote bankers. A long queue of middlemen - 
bankers, jobbers, wholesalers, manufacturers, managers, superintendents, 
bosses - formed between the worker and his share ©f the economic surplus. A 
complicated system of exchange replaced the simple economy of individual pro¬ 
duction. The decent living of all came to depend upon the smooth working of 
a vast system ©f production, transportation, communication, money, and credit. 
Control was taken from the worker and given to a body of non-producers - espe¬ 
cially to manipulators of money and credit* 2 


(1) Hogg H. The Great Technology , p. 3^ 

(2) Rugg H. Ibid, pp. 4J-59 




I 


■ r) 


r 


' 

' 






14 


Bugg chooses to speak of two Industrial RevolutionsThe second 
revolution he dates from l$l4 and insists on a second because of the far- 
reaching industrial changes dating from that time - changes which were already 
underway hut which were vastly accelerated by the war* 

w Indirectly it created a new America by bringing about the decline 
of Europe and by moving potential world leadership across the Atlantic* It 
did this by upsetting the European interdependent system of continental trade 
and credit* by depreciating national currencies, by wiping out a whole middle 
class, by creating trade - destroying tariff barriers, and by bleeding Europe 
with staggering burdens of debt and armaments * 1 ® 2 3 4 * 

The second industrial revolution developed society technologically 
to the point of almost manless factories* The factories themselves showed 
tremendous productive capacity even with a decline in man-hours* Automatic 
machines commenced to displace persons and cause unemployment even in prosper¬ 
ous periods* Population growth and therefore expanding needs, is slowing 
down and at the same time man-hours required in production are declining* Our 
economic system can now produce a fine standard of living for every family in 
America.* w The important fact is that for th© first time in history, a whole 
nation has a potential economy of plenty within its grasp. tt 3 And yet millions 
live close to starvation! Why! Interfering agents stand between the people 
and their livelihood, says Raagg*^ Our economic system is marked by powerful 
production and impotent distribution. * 8 Th@r© is poverty in the midst of po¬ 
tential plenty. • .Rolls Boyces and bread lines, chaos and misery instead of 
economic paradise*"5 

1* Rngg H. The Great Technolo gy pp. 60-63 

2. Rugg H. Itiid. prsr~ “~ 

3 . Rugg H. Ibid. p. 84 

4. Rugg H. Ibid. p. 85 

5* Rugg H. Ibid. p. 86 









I 



f 


4 in 


c ; : ' 



• * i : " 


' 



r 






15 


The real control of the economic system resides in the owners® 
These are the capitalists who 9 cumulated surplus profits from the return 
from the property and labor of others 1 ®This group of owners has come to 
control the political system and therewith clinches control over the econ¬ 
omic system® And now, as in the past two hundred years# one of these great 
problems of government is associated with the problem of property owning® 

Sven in a democracy the idea of control by the people is a myth# 
declares Sugg®2 The people no longer get their infomation in face-to-face 
groups® Information comes to them now through the press# the radio, the 
movies# and political pronouncements® The agencies of communication# says 
Sugg#3 are controlled by the owning class® The common man rarely gets all 
the facts and seldom does he get true ones® The necessary study of economic# 
political, and social problems to place democratic consent in the hands of 
the people is lacking® 11 Lite racy must not be confused with education* There 
is grave doubt# indeed# whether it should have been taken as the first objec¬ 
tive of education® Every country which has done so has produced a top-heavy® 
white-collar class# a false hierarchy of social classes® Also# the literate 
masses of the people have been made easy subjects for propaganda® 18 ^ 

The chief social problem before the nations of the world todays 
the swift building of a realistic education for all the people® 

One thing# Rugg says# is clears ©ur present economic system lacks 
design. In particular the money system lacks design and only insignificant 
efforts are made to right the situation.5 


1® Rugg H® 
2® Rugg H. 
3® Rugg H. 
4. Rugg H. 
5® Rugg H* 


The Great Technology , pp. 87*»%8 

Ibid, p® 102 

Ibid, pp® 100-101 

Ibid® p® 102 

Ibid, pp 102-103 




■ 

■ t \ 




- l6 - 

w Our philosophy of life - laissez-faire - free competition - was 
organized for individual success hut not for group disaster. Each individual 
was left free to look out for himself# The collective machinery which this 
philosophy had produced had left 1,1 government^ impotent to move for the re¬ 
lief of millions ©f the American people#”^ 

Rugg examines all programs of magnitude and concludes, that, ex¬ 
cept for socialism, students of reconstruction do not want to abolish priv- 
2 

at© capitalism# They tend toward imposition of collective control by indus¬ 
try or by government# They recognize that free competition,, laissez-faire, 
and individualism ar© incompatible with the interdependent mechanism of 
current society# 

Rugg then enunciates his axioms of the economic system# 3 The 
first axiom recognizes an economy of abundance since we do possess energy, 
resources, production facilities, research ability, to produce a high stand¬ 
ard of living in America# 

The second axiom declares that the number of man-hours per commod¬ 
ity unit is so ©mall that the price of commodities and the wages of labor bear 
no relation to productivity# The production system must be designed on the 
assumption that quantity of goods will be determined by the consumption needs 
of the people and not by the desire of any individual for personal gain , 
and to achieve distribution of goods, some other unit of purchasing power 
than wages must be devised. 

Rugg ! s third axiom states that an over-all plan of production must 
be supervised in the nation by trained personnel# This job must be taken from 
the sphere of political manipulation and carried on as a scientific and 


1* Rugg H# The Oreat Technology # p# 132 

2. Hogg H. Ibid. p. 162 

3 . Ragg E. Ibid ,pp. 173-181 









r 



■ - .. 




i i 





% 










- 17- 

techno logical enterprise, and his fourth axiom follows from the static con¬ 
dition of population - there must, as a consequence, he control over invest¬ 
ment and there must he planned restriction of the expansion of new plants* 

Our units ©f exchange, Hogg asserts in his fifth axiom, are unre¬ 
liable. A stabilized social order demands a new set of units of exchange. 

The design of such a managed currency must he left to scientific masters of 
such problems* 

Axiom six suggests that only food, shelter, and clothing, and 
other physical form of wealth can he regarded as real wealth* Money, stocks, 
bonds, notes, mortgages, etc*, are fictitious wealth* The sound design of 
an economic system will provide only for the production and distribution of 
real wealth* 

Axiom sevens Surplus wealth has been diverted from the workers to 
build competing producing plants* The new economic order must control the 
cumulation of surpluses and their investment in producers 1 goods* 

We have, says Bngg, a debt-creating economic system. Debts have 
been growing, he asserts, faster than population or the production of basic 
commodities* Scientific students claim that these debts can never be paid. 

A new economic system must, therefore, devise a new method of handling cre¬ 
dit and debts* 

Axiom nines A vast preponderance of the national income is taken 
by a small minority* This compels large sections of the community to live 
in insecurity and poverty while a small section of the community lives in 
conspicuous luxury » This surplus of wealth must be recovered by means of 
income and inheritance taxes* 

Axiom 10? A large and, growing group of middle men and manipula¬ 
tors - non-producers - are exploiters who add large items to the cost of 



- 


r 


) 


' 


c:-OlQ0 


■ 


"'7 . ■ 




- 18 - 

commodities* This cost must he borne by the rank and file of consumers. 

They take an undue proportion of the price paid for commodities and then 
manipulations are responsible for the glaring inefficiencies of the econ¬ 
omic system* 13 The postulate follows that the economic system can be oper¬ 
ated efficiently and humanely only by the elimination, re-education, and 
assignment to productive work of the parasitical members of this group of 
middlemen® ®^ 

Axiom 11s The interdependence of the economic system has taken 
away from the wage-earners the control over their jobs, their wages, their 
products, and their standards of life* This control is in the hands of a 
small body of people - possibly three to five percent of the population. 

This small number is able to deny a decent standard of living to the masses# 

Axiom 12s concerns the ownership of productive machinery. Bugg 
anticipates that the next major experimentation will be along the line of 
public utility control# He believes that it will be exceedingly difficult 
for the next step, at least* to be one of socialism. 

Axion 13 s Industry has controlled government and government has 
therefore left industry free to develop as it would# The national economic 
system must be reconstructed to provide for central control of the whole 
enterprise with power to develop a designed system and to provide for its 
operation by expert personnel® 

Axiom l4j Control and government by consent must be re-establi¬ 
shed. A great program of adult education will need to be launched and 
continued indefinitely in order to re-establish government by consent# 


1® Eugg H* The Great Technology , p* 179 







r 


f 




.J. 


5 


I:' 


. 




■V 







- 19 - 

Engg notes that many leaders claim that these axioms can be effec¬ 
ted only by dictatorial control*** He holds that we can transform our exploi¬ 
tive civilization by uniting a centrally controlled technology with represen¬ 
tative democracy* He is not thinking of socialism as a solution* "That 
either a business dictatorship or socialistic control is a practicable possi¬ 
bility and a danger of some imminence cannot be denied 9 since even now a few 
thousand persons exercise central control over our major industries*® 8 ^ 

But Bugg sees two real alternatives^ (|) a real democracy based 
upon the consent of the governed, or ( 2 ) a dictatorship of business organiz¬ 
ation* Social reconstruction in a democracy would means^ 

(1) Technological experts design an economic and political 

system* 

(2) An intelligent minority will create a large supporting body of 
public opinion, 

( 3 ) Legislative, executive, and judicial representatives will sub¬ 
ject the plans to experimental trial and error* Every industrial country 
must face two large problems - the task of designing a social structure 
that will produce the economy of abundance and the problem of securing 
consent* These problems are intensified by certain dominating doctrines* 

The gospel of success, the doctrine of conformity lead actually to a cul¬ 
ture of hypocrisy. The heart of our civilization, says Bugg, is covered 
by a false front of respectability which is" sheer racketeering*5 


1. Bugg H. The Great Technology * p. 185 
2* Engg H. Ibid* p* 

3 . Bugg H* Ibid, p. 186 

4. Engg H* Ibid, p* 186 

5* Eugg H* Ibid, p. 192 




f 







£ 










t 







- 20 - 


Persons of creative talent - those of I* Q. 150 or more would he 
the inventive leaders in machine technology* economic organization, in gov¬ 
ernmental reconstruction® Then, in the U.S.A®, Rugg predicts, 1 one would 
find from twenty to thirty million people, who given the facts, have the men¬ 
tality to understand, the workings of our economic system® In addition, among 
the rani; and file of the nation, possibly 30 , 000,000 would understand much 
about the operation of modem society® Another 15*000,000 will accept what¬ 
ever social organization is given to them® These latter could be taught the 
superficial characteristics of our economic order but they would not perceive 
the subtle factors involved in the reconstruction of society® Two or three 
million mentally deficient cases should be cared for institutionally® The 
second group - the potential thinking minority- the 25 * 000,000 - can trans¬ 
form democracy and upon their behavior depends the theory of government by 
consent® The mental capacity for sound political action is available® The 
capacity of these people must be transformed into dynamic understanding® We 
are faced with the need for an emergency program of adult education®^ The 
radio, the press, the pulpit, the theatre, the movies, must be harnessed to 
this task. The techniques of high-powered salesmanship must be used. We 
should organize a dramatic nation-wide campaign for social reconstruction, 
concentrating directly on the 25 , 000,000 men and women who constitute our 
thinking minority® 

In the depression crisis heretofore described, Sugg insisted on 
increased education.3 Instead of extending education, politicians and gov¬ 
ernment were reducing it, cutting staff, shortening school terms, and empha¬ 
sizing the traditional education. Rugg boldly called^ - 193^ - for a 

1. Rugg H. The Great Technology , p. 200 
2® Rugg H. Ibid® p® 201 
3® Rugg H® Ibid® pp.203-209 

4® Rugg H. Ibid. pp.233-242 







d# 


< 


imi / ' *■ 

■ '. < >. /, » l i 

. ■ - :- c 1 . . i 






■ I • ' : - ■' : 




1 ]" ; < 

' 


: . ' 


o 


' 




. , ■ • • . : ' X. . 

i r . • 4 ■ ■ ■: ;• —- ■■ i r *i h fa .. 0$) '• i 


: 


:cvj, ; pxi- 






.* . . 


- 


1 - 

::vi \ ■ ’/£ 

■ | *;? ‘ ' : : ' * 

•r, r; - •' ^100CpiS»pj 

'4. . ' ' ' ■ ' C ' 1 ' L 

• , • ■■■ ^ ' ' «■- ' 

. ■ ; : '■ ’ .» ' ' ■' 

r , ?. *- . ., ; ;■ , . > - - ' : .v ./„ 0 hSi'Ol ! 3 

- 0 

• t 

, ' 

' . 

, . r ■ ' ■ 

. 

• • • 


f 'CBCl ! 


Iw 


ryr.? :t 
' - :> . 


* 

V * 








- 21 


scientific study of the educational needs of the community. There should he 

a vigorous program of adult education. Culture group activities should he 

organized to maintain the concept of education as continuing through life. A 

decent budget for education should he supported. Co-operation with economic 

and political leaders in a program of social reconstruction is essential. 

The school system of America, asserted Eugg,^ is inadequate to 

meet an economic crisis. The American school system set up in the nineteenth 

century was based upon concepts of exploitive competition and conformity. 

Method lagged with philosophy and the school became a listening school rather 

than an active one. ,9 The teacher’s intention to teach, rather than the pupil l 2 3 4 s 

2 

intention to learn, dictated educational procedure . n 

This school system created a top-heavy white collar class and a 
hierarchy of social classes which denied that very democracy so clearly need¬ 
ed. Economic advancement through intellectual education became the goal. It 
is clear, he says, that the people of the nation need a complete education 
rather than a book ©ducation. ^ 

Machinery has placed in the hands of man, power to abolish economic 

insecurity. The constituents with which to bring forth a great culture ar® at 

hand. The problem of changing men’s minds must be faced. Citizens must be 

mad© to see that design is essential. Until now, those who have been in the 

saddle opposed design, and the great thinking masses below them followed in 

conformity of thought hoping to get a chance in the saddle. Any fundamental 

social reconstruction must be based upon educational reconstruction. The 

h 

present is a strategic time for action. 

1. Bugg H. The Great Technology , p. 243. 

2. Hogg H. Ihid. p. 244 

3. Bugg H. Ibid. pp.248-249. 

4. Bugg H. Ihid. pp.254-256 






iX ' 


ff 



f 1 


T 


1 


< 


1 











THE GREAT TECHNOLOGY*' 


"A civilization of abundance, tolerance, and beauty can be ushered 
in 

"If man, having built an efficient production system, designs and 
operates a controlled and equitable system of distribution; 

"If man combines technological operation with democratic control; 

"If man establishes government by consent of the governed through 
education in tolerant and critical understanding; 

"If man, having reduced the twelve-hour day to the six-hour or 
four-hour day, develops also the capacity for creative labor and the wise use 
of leisure; 

"In a word - If man applies the scientific method to man-man re¬ 
lationships as well as to the manr-thing relationships and lives creatively 
as artist as well as technologist® 

"We stand at the crossroads to a new epoch; in various directions 
lie divers Pathways to Tomorrow* Some lead to social chaos and the possible 
destruction of interdependent ways of living. 

"One leads to the Great Technology and the surest guide along that 
route is - Education,, 

• ••*»• 

Rugg wrote his main books on economics and politics during the 
depression of the hungry thirties® If the conditions which then inspired 
his efforts should return, Rugg 1 ® organization of thought in these fields 
will no doubt attract attention® 


1® Rugg H® The Great Technology ® p. 289. 







r 








it 




) 


i 


i 






t 


j ' , : ! j 





CHAPTER III 


RU&Si THE MPBRIMMTALIST IS PHILOSOPHY 1 2 * 

Bigg adopts the position of the M Experimentalist” in philosophy® 

A philosophy of education is essential to criticise the assump¬ 
tions of educators® to clarify educational aims and to evaluate educational 
methods. 

An adequate educational program will help each child grow from a 
state of dependence into full participation in the richest possible life. 

Human knowing must go within human experience. Experience is not 
a private affair but can best b© understood in the terns of culture and the 
growing up within a social group. This process of experiencing implies re¬ 
action between organism and environment. And out of this interaction grows 
self-hood. This self-hood develops in view of the knowledge held of self 
and others* 

Experimentalism t as a philosophy® holds three conceptionss 

(1) Ideas mean their consequences in experience. 

(2) Experience is essentially social in origin and predominantly 

social in purpose* 

( 3 ) We find out what to expect in life by studying experimentally 

the uniformities within experience. 

In the moral field a person learns because he understands others 
in terms of what he sees in himself. And he understands himself in view of 

An excellent exposition of the Experimentalist view-point is 
presented by W. H* Kilpatrick. His explanation of the philosophic basis 
for a sound education is acceptable to Rugg. (See also footnote P. 6 ) 

1. Kilpatrick W.H* ’"Philosophy of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook”, 

Forty-first Yearbook for the national Society for the 

Study of Education. Part 1. pp. 39-&6. 

2. Rugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum - Foreword p. XII 











- 


■ 
















24 


what he has seen in others* Particular experiences bring more clearly to the 
mind what one has felt# possibly vaguely# before. They bring forth a sharper 
consciousness of how he feels regarding his own wishes and he learns that 
others feel much the same way. H© may feel a conflict between equals and a 
need to find a solution. A seemingly fair solution is offered® This provides 
a beginning notion of justice which may grow with practice. A regard for the 
rights and feelings of others and the acceptance of fair play may thus b© 
built as a characteristic of group life® And this characteristic may expand as 
the senior members of the group feel some responsibility to support measures 
and efforts for the group good® Members of the group should act as they do act 
because they understand what they are doing and why® 

The estimation of the qualities of the good life may be agreed upon 
in the same manner as the acceptance of good music was arrived at through ex¬ 
perience® The standards of music which was good to hear were set by some per¬ 
son more expert or more talented than others® Similarly men decided on their 
physical wants® Later arose the necessity for accepting certain modes of be¬ 
haviour as providing the greatest good life to all concerned® In the moral 
field# as in the musical field the history of ethics shows that men of sup¬ 
erior sensitivity to the moral problem# men with superior insight and creat¬ 
iveness have found moral solutions® 

Certain philosophic principles apply to ethics® Every person must 
be treated as an end - never as merely a means* Each person is under moral 
obligation to foster the good life of all® Honest and careful study will 
produce good results and the free play of intelligence playing upon exper¬ 
ience is our final testing ground® In the field of ethics we have no absolute 
principles standing above criticism. And# 

^Democracy follows as the effort to ran society on the combined 




y 




- 25 


basis of the good life and ethics, as these are managed co-operatively by the 
members themselves* 

“By the group culture we mean all those transmitted results of pri¬ 
or human experience and contrivance through which the group now carries on its 
life." 1 

Without culture little would remain to us except the primordial im¬ 
pulses of animal nature* Our advance depends upon the degree to which law and 
order persuade men to live decently together* Children must learn the group 
culture if they are to live in the group* Culture sets the aim of education 
just as psychology sets the method* The culture of a race is built into the 
child*s organism and is thus preserved. The task of responsible educators is 
to see that the child shall live the group life with the acceptance of adequ¬ 
ate responsibility therefore® 

Or as W* K* Clifford puts it, says Kilpatrick, 

48 It is the peculiarity of living things not merely that they change 
under the influence of surrounding circumstances, but that any change is not 
lost, but retained, and, as it were, built into the organism to serve as found- 

p 

ation for future action 11 * 

The child learns what he lives, and what he learns he builds at once 
into character to serve as a foundation for future action. 

The child learns by living* 

“If the child is to learn anything, he has first of all to live that 
very thing! it has to enter actually into the content stream of his life. If 
it is a feeling he is to learn, he has first to feel it in his life, feel it as 


1. Kilpatrick W,H* “Philosophy of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook 81 , 

Chapter II, Forty-First Yearbook of the National Society 
for the Study o f Educati oiT p* 547 
Lectures^and Essays * p» 5^- 


2* Clifford W.K 








I# 





c 


tr 







- 26 - 

his own appropriate response to something then happening in his life# If it 
is a thought, an idea, that is to he learned, this has to arise in the lear¬ 
ner^ mind as an appropriate response on his part to a situation calling it 
forth. If it is a moral decision that he is to learn, he has to live that 
moral decision in his own life! that is, he must in some actual life situa- 
ticn, probably in several successive situations, to ensure strength of lear¬ 
ning - make this decision as his way of meeting each situation where the dec¬ 
ision is pertinent. If the child is to learn the culture, he must live it in 
his own life as his way of living that li£e, H ^ 

In static societies the transmission of culture was relatively 
simple. Parents could teach their children the ways of living they learned 
from their parents. We are moving into a dynamic, changing society and the 
home cannot now be the educative influence it once was. The school is now 
forced into a position of greater responsibility for the transmission of 
culture. The school has inherited a new duty increased by the social changes 
of a dynamic society. The static school of one hundred years ago cannot cope 
with the situation. The cultural contribution must be lived if it is to be 
learned. The young must learn the essentials of civilisation. To learn these 
they must live them. 

This is a changing world and we must teach our young to live amid 
conditions yet to come. We do not even know what these problems will be. 

They must learn to adapt themselves to the world about them. Each child must 
make an adequate personality adjustment. We must work to build certain social 
- moral principles. We must prepare them to solve our increasing social 


1* Kilpatrick W.H, "Philosophy of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook 19 , 

Forty-First Yearbook for the National Society for the 

Study of Education, p» 83 





1 


y 


i 







* 



-, 












- 27 - 

problems# We must build social intelligence# 

What is learning? 

w 3y learning is meant the state of affairs when some part or asp- 
ect of experience stays with one to influence pertinently one 1 * 3 * s further exp¬ 
erience®’^ Such learning is going on all the time when one is alert and ac¬ 
tive but its presence and work are necessary to give coherence to experience 
itself as well as to allow intelligence a chance to serve within experience# 
’’The content of life consists psychologically of what happens to 
us and what we do in response® • » # »Fence* for learning purposes# we can say 
that life for us consists of our responses* our responses to what happens 
about us| and that we learn these responses as we accept them to act on * 11 
And ■ 

n Sack one learns his responses* only his responses| he learns all 
his responses as he accepts them to act on* some to do# others to ignore! he 
learns his responses in the degree that they are important to him and in the 
further degree that they are interrelated with what he already knows * 18 ^ 

What is learned is ©ne f s own reaction# and since one reacts to the 
situation as he understands it* each item is learned in its relations as then' 
experienced® Each item learned affects further living. Each item learned is 

connected with the past learnings and is itself a basis for further learning# 

Therefor©! 

(1) Each child learns what he lives® 

(2) He learns it as he accepts it in his own heart to act on# 

( 3 ) He learns in the degree that the item is important to him and in 


1. Kilpatrick W.E. ’’Philosophy of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook”, 

Chapter II* Forty-First Yearbook# Part I* of the National 

Society for the Study of Education # 

2* Kilpatrick W&H® Ibid® pp 68-69 









] 














- 2S - 

the degree that he already has meaningful learning. 

(4) What he learns he builds at once into character* 

The child must therefore live a quality of living fit to he built 
into character. Learning saves and organizes the child f s experiences. 

The relationship between the teacher and the student is this5 T*or 
a child to learn an idea that idea must spring up in the child*s mind as his 
response, his thinking response to a situation. The teacher may help that 
particular idea to arise in the child*s mind, but he learns it only as his 
own response. The teacher cannot simply hand the child an idea and tell him 
to learn it* Compulsion is a last resort - not a main resort. It is an emer¬ 
gency way out of a difficult situation. 

It is the quality of the child 8 s day to day living that is vital. 
The learner learns exactly his own responses. The child*s day to day living 
is built into character. The quality of his living is the responsibility of 
his elders. 

Mind and character are built by living in the social group. The 
child builds his self-hood on the group model. An effective self-hood con¬ 
sists in accumulating and organizing one*s experiences. The organization of 
these retained experiences is called character. Or when we consider the 
meanings that enter into the whole we refer to mind. 

Based on the foregoing philosophy one would observe that the type 
of school i© very important. “Since children and youth learn what they live, 
the school must be a place where living goes on, the best and finest type of 
living we can help our young people to create* 

The term live must take on a vital meaning. In the sense of bodily 


Kilpatrick W.E* “Philosophies of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook”, 
Chapter II, Eorty-First Yearbook. Part X B of the National 
Society for the Study"of^Education * p* 7 h 






( 





, 





29 - 


existence all students have ”lived” in school and some have been able to flou¬ 
rish even in the worst schools. For the most part the old school failed to 
develop educative living. Good, rich, wholesome living is essential to he 
built into character. Students must be eager and they must have opportunity 
to pursue their own purposes. Their undertakings must be difficult enough to 
challenge them but not so difficult as to develop permanent discouragement. 
Under wise teacher guidance life must sprout even higher standards. Morally 
the teacher must get students to think through their relationships with others. 
There must be opportunity for aesthetic types of living such as creative draw- 
ing, painting, music, dancing and writing. The activity school will not dis¬ 
own the old line subjects of spelling, arithmetic, reading and writing. On 
the contrary the quality of living in the new school should encourage and deve¬ 
lop even higher standards of excellence than was possible in the static school. 

The curriculum would be an emerging curriculum. Wholesome and vig¬ 
orous living is essential. Efforts to raise the quality at each age are essen¬ 
tial. Students would be grouped according to social age. 

Democracy is very closely associated with ethics. Young people can 
learn democracy only as they live it. Democracy cannot be taught by indoctrin¬ 
ation. Schoolrooms must become living democracies. 

The Industrial Revolution brought changes to society but not balan¬ 
ced changes* The ability to produce goods has increased rapidly but no similar 
change has been wrought in those institutions which uphold privilege. Some 
social changes are so far reaching that they threaten social stability unless 
corrective changes are effected. We are left in this position by industrial 
changes. There must be further social changes* 

In the American scene, in the early days, it might be said truly 
that all healthy men had real equality of opportunity. Since the coming of 


. 




i'L-' 


, 



t 


t 


- 








f ^,-v 










30 


great industry this actuality is only a dream. The simple life has given way 
to the complex interdependence of practically all families who must now huy 
and sell. They have hecome dependent upon complex business conditions, over 
which the individual has little or no effective control. Therefore in times 
of stress the good life is denied. In such times this system can produce more 
than it can dispose of, and yet leaves millions stranded. Such a system cannot 
he defended.^ 0 

We have now come to the position where each one before he acts must 
examine alternatives and choose a course of action, which brings the best, pro¬ 
mise of a good life to as many as possible. This is an enlarged doctrine of 
moral responsibility. We must remake our instruments of distribution. With 
proper production and distribution we ought to be able to banish poverty. 

We need to build a social intelligence to enable society to grapple 
more effectively with social problems. The schools can lay a foundation of 
social knowledge. Work on current problems will help the rising generation 
to understand our society - its strength and weaknesses. We cannot await the 
full growth of young people in order to undertake the study of their basic 
problems. Their minds may then be set in prejudice and never again be able 
to gain a true picture of the real problem. We must study live issues in 
the schools if we are to produce a generation which can solve real problems. 

The teacher should help the students to becoxae capable, independent thinkers. 
Possibly with such teaching we can move into a society of abundance, says 
Kilpatrick. 1 2 


1. Kilpatrick W. H* ’’Philosophy of Education from the Experimentalist Outlook", 

Chapter II, Eorty-Pirst Yearbook. Part I, of the National 
Society for the Study of Education , p. 82 


2. Kilpatrick W. H, 


Ibid. p 9 85 









f 










1 A r 











CHAPTER IV 


HUGH'S EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY 


The foundation for Rugg®s educational work may he found in the 
teachings of John Dewey»^ Dewey emphasized education as participation of 
the individual in the social consciousness of the race® Child interests, 
he insisted, are stimulated hy the demands of social sitush ions * Educa¬ 
tion must he based upon child interest and activity® Education is a pro-* 
cess of living. Social life should he the basis of correlation for all 
growth® The curriculum should make a unity out of social life, says Dewey® 1 2 
The basis of education is the child ! s power at work along the lines which 
brought civilization into being® Education is the fundamental method of 
social progress and reform. Education should give shape t© human powers 
and adapt them t© social service® The teacher is engaged not simply in 
the training of individuals but in the formation of the proper social life® 
Educators must recognize that life is a contincus process of development 
and education itself must become a training in creative thinking® The true 
method of education, must be the development of a social environment which 
creates problems for the student® The function of education is t© direct 
the native impulses into harmony with socially recognized meanings ©f life® 
Training in the art of thinking necessitates provision of genuine problem 
situations. Knowledge must b© integrated into character® 

Dewey as philosopher, psychologist, and sociologist, laid the 
foundation for the work of Dr. Harold Bugg. lagg admits the tremendous in¬ 
fluence of John Dewey* 3 lugg mass produced outlines of education basically 


1. Bigg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School ® pp 

2* Dewey J. Democracy and Education . Chapters I to IY 

3* Rugg H. & Shumaker A* The Child-Centred School , p* 55 

- 31 - 
















- 32 - 

founded on the previous work of John Dewey. 

Rugg insists that the first problem of educational reconstruction 
is the development of a new philosophy of life and education. There must 
he a new philosophy for a new social order.^ 

He says} 

58 1 put first the task of conceiving a new philosophy of life and 
education. It is a truism of educational history that the school program is 
determined by the theory of those who make it. As we look upon life* so we 
teach. What we believe, the loyalties to which we hold subtly determine the 
content and the method of our teaching. Each of us has a ^philosophy 18 , 
whether or not he has thought it through and definitely phrased it. Every¬ 
thing we say and do, as well as what we think, reflects that philosophy. 

Our courses of study, the atmosphere that surrounds our educational, work, 
our statements of objective* our methods of instruction - all reflect the 
general orientation and attitudes toward life which we subsume under the term 
philosophy of life and education. Hence it is of the greatest importance 
that our philosophy shall be a consistent and thoroughly grounded one 88 ^ 

The theories of educationalists, Hogg insists, are not the products 
of design.^ They are casual thoughts, stereotyped concepts, slogans of lead¬ 
ers - a general drifting with the tide* There is a lack of courage and crea¬ 
tive imagination. Conformity is a serious obstacle to educational reform. If 
the schools are to be used in the production of a new social order, teachers 
must develop a totally new outlook upon life and education. Teachers must 
adopt the scientific attitude and an attitude of receptivity. 


1. Rugg H, 
2* Rugg H, 
3* Rugg H, 


The Great Technology , p. 258 
Ibid. p. 258 
Ibid. p. 25S 





. ';C' u.ifv 


bii3 




t 


t 




- 33 - 


Rugg offers a three-fold basis for the new education , 1 
“Three Big Axioms for the New Education: 

First, “For the concept of “school” as being restricted to the 
conventional activities of the isolated “school house”, we must substitute 
the concept of school as including all of the educational activities of 
community life. 

Second, “For the concept of “school age“ as that period of four 
or five to eighteen or twenty years, we must substitute that of the entire 
life of men, from infancy to old age* 

Third, “For the concept of education for literacy, we must sub¬ 
stitute that of education for a whole life, the maximum development of man," 
Education will be seen going out into the community making use of 
the community. The students will go forth into the community as observers 
and students of industry and business, of community planning and administra¬ 
tion, All members of the community will participate. This does not mean 
that educational direction of education is unnecessary. It means that there 
must be a wider curriculum to embrace the community in the school and the 
school in the community, ... 

TEE KM EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM OF WOHK 2 3 
Sugg insists that, instead of a narrow scheme of intellectual sub¬ 
jects, the community school will build its course around six principal strands,^' 
In the new school, the work of assemblies, councils, organizations, and school 
groups are recognized as school activities. The intellectual core of the 
curriculum should be a first—|iand study of community, national, and world 

1. Sugg H. The Great Te chnology , p. 26l 

2. Rugg H„ Ibid. pp7 263-268 

3. Rugg H. Ibid. pp. 263-268 









( 






)>: 


r 


■l;U 






vJj 




affairs. The creative and appreciative acts must he introduced. A creative 
work period must he included in the school organization. Informal physical 
exercise, including dance, music and pageantry should constitute a has© for 
much of the new activity. The school, he says, must provide also for an in** 
troduction to the physical, and natural world as well as to human behavior.^ 
n 0ne of the very first steps in the reconstruction of education 
is the building of a new program of work, a new content for the curriculum, 
directly out of the problems of our changing society. The great central con¬ 
cepts which epitomize the characteristics of our society will constitute the 
very skeleton of that program. 

wT he construction of a new program will demand the concentrated 
study of modern problems. Educational workers must become students of econo¬ 
mic, social, and political life, as well as students of artistic self-expres¬ 
sion and of growing childhood. Ho longer can the educationist remain aloof 
from the frontiers of social and artistic life for it is the problems on the 

p 

frontiers which constitute the nucleus of the educational program. HC 

Bngg demands a course of studies in which the following basic con¬ 
cepts provide the nucleus of the educational program.^ 

The youth of every land must learn a sense of responsibility con¬ 
cerning 9 the fragile interdependence of the world 88 ^ we have created. 

Secondly, the generation which will shortly b© responsible for gov¬ 
erning the nation must learn to aspect change in all fields from the mechani¬ 
cal to that of government. 

Thirdly, the powerful role of private property, the desire for 


1. Sugg H. The Great Technology, p* 2 d7 

2. Bugg H. Ibid, pp 268-269 

3. Hogg H. Ibid pp. 269-273 

4. Sugg H. Ibid. p. 269 




: , 


!■ 




< • ' ' * 


.. 



■ 




- 35 - 


economic gain, and the doctrine of individual success through, competition 
must he explained as concepts that color all group problems* 

“They will be brought to see how the concept of laissez-faire in 
the marriage of politics and economics has produced enormous inequalities 
in wealth and social income, the export of large amounts of capital from 
Europe and America, the disastrous imperialistic exploitation of agrarian 
and non-militarized peoples, and thus to make international rivalries and 
world war* They will understand that underneath most of the activities of 
individuals, and the political manoeuvrings of nations and groups, is the de¬ 
sire for economic gain? that throughout the history of the race the desire 
for trade has been the central thread of continuity? and that the political 
history of the past few centuries has been largely the story of the conflict 
between struggling economic classes* 5 ^ 

Fourthly, we must build an attitude among the young people of the 
world that the trend toward representative democracy has produced experiments 
in government* 

Fifthly, it is vital that youth understand that effective democracy 
postulates the adequate education of the people and that the people learn to 
take a dynamic interest in collective affairs* Young people should grasp the 

2 

fact that people herded into cities have lost interest in collective problems* 
Sixthly, young people miist be made aware of the utter lack of eco¬ 
nomic government in the modern world* W@ must show young people fearlessly 
and dramatically the consequence of the lack of planning and control over 
production and distribution. They need to be shown the necessity for scien¬ 
tific control and operation of economic activities* 


1* Hogg H* The Great Technology, p* 270 
2. Bugg H. Ibid, p* 270 



r 


.4 


4 


r 













- 3 $ - 


Seventh, the young people must he shown the danger of economic na¬ 
tionalism as exhibited by the mad erection of tariff barriers. 

Eighth, a well-planned course must show how a central world econo¬ 
mic government would be advantageous in the control, allocation, and exchange 
of basic commodities. 

Ninth, young people must be taught to understand the physical as 
well as the social dangers attendant upon over-crowding in the great cities. 

Tenth, young people must b© led to understand the respective roles 
of the creative minds as well as the conditions of society which place the 
exploiter, the aggran&izer, the financial promoter or practical politicians 
in positions of power. 

Eleventh, young people must be brought to an understanding of the 
psychology of individual and group behavior. They must understand the role 
of fears such as economic insecurity, and social disapproval. They will learn 
that those who control the formation of attitudes, opinions and beliefs, those 
who control communication, are in a powerful position to control the mind of 
the nation. 

Twelfth s There must be an educational attempt to build attitudes 
which will control men in problem-solving situations of life, and there must 
be an attempt to develop methods of thought. 

In other words, there must be an introduction into the schools of 
a courageous and intelligent description of our new society. 

TH3 THBBE I-BTELS OF HfeTIOHtL C'OIglGB 1 

In the years from six to fourteen, children will grow in understand¬ 
ing of the surface civilization - transportation, communication, system of 


1* Bngg H. The Great Technology , p. 273-274 











t 

i > 


t 



t 


? 


v 




t 


;. Q 



jf 


r 




-Si 








37 - 


farms* mines, methods of trade, outline of community government* 

In the Junior High School, young people should master the general¬ 
izations concerning institutions and culture. They should learn about the 
rise and problems of the economic system. 

In the secondary school the minds of the students will be focussed 
on the axioms of the great technological society in which we live. In open 
forum discussions, their minds will be focussed on a frontal attack on vital 
issues of the day. 

THE EDUCATION OF THE ARTIST 1 

The curriculum must provide time in which the young people can en¬ 
gage in creative, s el f« esqp r es s i v e activities. The allotment of time for crea¬ 
tive and appreciative arts must be sufficient to permit the development of per¬ 
sonal self-cultivation. 

AH ECLECTIC PSYCHOLOGY 2 

A vast body of psychological concepts has been built up. It is 
necessary to make a synthesis of these® 

The concepts of each group are necessary, but those of no one al¬ 
one will be sufficient upon which to build a complete educational program. 

The concept of active learning that we respond with meaning and the concept 
of wholeness of situation and response, integration of organism is common to 
all schools* From each school comes concepts indispensable to the founding 
of a new education. 

From the behavior!st comes the concept of the conditioned reflex. 
Note the two-fold significance of the concept of practices first* that no 


1. Eugg H. The Great Technology , pp 27*4-275 

2. Eugg H. Ibid, pp 275-276 







;.v a ::" 


tel' 


< 



t. 
































- 38 - 

trait will develop to even approximately its maximum power except by the con¬ 
sciously directed exercise of it "by the person hims&lf; second, that specific 
associations needed in precise form throughout life must he learned by many 
verbatim repetitions# This concept applies to many skills of the curriculum 
but especially to the techniques or skills of the program# 

**From the Gestalt Psychologists and other schools of generalization 
come the closely related, almost synonymous, concepts of w problem-soXving M , 

18 reflective*®thinking*®, 58 reasoning 58 , seeing relations between parts, 18 the mean-® 
ing of a part is determined by relation between it and other parts 58 , and the 
like# These concepts will play the leading role in the 88 content-core 51 of the 
curriculum - that is in the social sciences and the physical and natural sci¬ 
ences* It is the concept of problem-solving that will mold the study of chang¬ 
ing cultures, each unit being organized around problems which compel young peo¬ 
ple to confront options and choose between alternatives* 

59 From the psychoanalysts and the psychologists of the new schools 
come a very important set of concepts* Perhaps the most important one on the 
positive side is that of "purpose 58 . It is around this idea that the progres¬ 
sive schools are building much of their new program* It is enlisting purposes 
of youth that they seek to make learning vital and effective* 18 ^ 

From the psychoanalysts we also receive important concepts of a 
more negative nature* Conspicuous among them are the so-called "defensive 
mechanisms of behavior 88 , rationalization# • * compensation* * * escape* * •de¬ 
fense* » .projection, and the Xike*^ These constantly remind the educational 
worker of the egocentric nature of the individual, of the difficulties in the 
way of building the habits and attitudes of social co-operation, and of 


1. Pugg H* The Great Technology * pp 275-276 

2. Bigg H* Ibid. p. 277 





< 









39 


positive gains to come in building a fine sensitive individualism* 

From the creative artists emerge still other concepts - notably in¬ 
tegrity and appreciative awareness* Ho school is complete that ignores these 
- yet the conventional schools of psychology tend to do just that. 

A broad psychology is needed embracing the established concepts of 
all the valid schools of thought. 

However, Bugg asserts, that in spite of new curricula, new psychol¬ 
ogy, new philosophy, the ultimate success in reconstruction rests upon the 
teachers*^- Most of the positions, he avers, are filled by teachers trained 
to work under the conventional, regimented school. A comprehensive emergency 
plan of adult education is needed to face this problem* The teachers* coll¬ 
eges will need to face the necessity for reconstruction. The college curricu¬ 
lum will need to introduce young people to our changing civilizations and cul¬ 
tures. They must introduce young people to the chief concepts of various 
schools of psychology. They must introduce our young people to a dynamic con¬ 
cept of living. The new teachers must understand the new needs of a curricu¬ 
lum* The course must provide opportunities to enable young teachers in trains 
ing to become creative artists* 


1* Bugg H, 


The Qreat Technology , pp. 277-280 









i 





t 





I o 


' 







x 





CHAPTER V 


RUG-G PACED TEE PROBLEM OP SOCIAL IMPROVEMENT THROUGH EDUCATION 


“That men may understand, has been my theme from the very beginn¬ 
ing. Tolerant understanding has been set up - in articles and pamphlets, 
essays and books, during the entire history of the enterprise - as one of the 
great goals. The American people must come to understand the American pro¬ 
blem and, I have believed, there is no other way to bring that about except 
through education of youth and children. The American problem is the task, 

I say, of building in North America the fine way of life that is potentially 
possible* w 

H:, rhe task was a huge ones Ho thing less than preparing a total 
word portrait of contemporary society, one dealing with all phases of the cul¬ 
ture - social economic system, government and other institutions, the arts and 
the psychology of the people. And the vast panorama is the result of careful 
and costly research and study of the works of the most profound scholars of 
the world and domestic scene. 93 ^ 

Rngg describes the principles he espoused and the policies he 
2 

followed in these words} 

"Alone among the textbooks of America, I had refused to dodge the 
problem of public and private ownership. From the beginning I took the posi¬ 
tion that school histories of America were obligated to tell what the Ameri¬ 
can people had actually done about regulating free enterprise, how they deci¬ 
ded to carry on some of their enterprises through public ownership, etc." 

"In book after book I have developed the fact that the United 


1. Rugg H. That Men May Understand , pp. 47-48 

2. Rugg H. Ibid, p* pi 


40 - 









'} 





4l - 


States is the greatest haven of liberty in the world# I have reiterated the 
view that the American people have the most favorable opportunity of any peo¬ 
ple in history to build a civilisation of physical and spiritual abundance# 
of true democracy and of real integrity of expression* 1 ® 

H I have never believed in or preached social reconstruction by any 
means except through education* I do not believe and have never believed 
that the American people will ever resort to the use of violence or any other 
non~democratic method to bring about social change#*®^ 

In the years 1920 to 1922 Bugg produced the Social Science pamphlets 
as mimeographed sheets® In 1922 and 1923 he had two assistants* Ten books 
were printed® The project was financed by teachers who bought 100*000 copies 
of these books* In the years 1923 to 1927 he had sixteen assistants who help¬ 
ed develop the pamphlets for the second edition® In the years 1927 to 1931 
the old pamphlets were scrapped and six volumes# six workbooks, and six guides 
for teachers - all for the Junior High School# were produced* In the years 
1933 1936 Louise Kruger and Bagg wrote eight books for Grades III to VI* 

From 1936 to 1940 the Junior High School Series was reconstructed and three 
new books on citizenship# America# and world problems were written* As a re¬ 
sult the following productions were developed 1 

VOLUMES Iff THE SECQID COUBSB 

I An Introduction to American Civilization* 

II Changing Civilizations in the Modern World* 

III A History of American Civilization* 


1* Bugg E* That Men May Understand . p» 90 






Xo v'X- 








42 


IV A History of American Government and Culture. 

V An Introduction to Problems of American Culture. 

VI Changing Governments and Changing Cultures* 

REVISED VOLUMES 

I Our Country and Our People* 

II Changing Countries and Changing Peoples* 

III The Conquest of America* 

IV America f s March Toward Democracy* 

COMMUNITY AKD HATIQKAL LIFE 

V Citizenship and Civic Affairs. 

VI America Rebuilds. 

World History, 

America Rebuilds, 

The Struggles of Dictatorship and Democracy* 

VOLUMES IH THE FIRST COURSE 
I The first Book of the Jferth 

II Hature Peoples® 

III Communities of Men* 

I? Peoples and Countries® 

V The Building of America* 

VI Man at Works Sis Industries. 

VII Man at Works His Arts and Crafts* 

VIII Mankind Throughout the Ages® 

Workbooks and Teacher S s Guides have been prepared for each of 


the above volumes 





■ 

n 


- * l : 


.ii . :< 


f • 




- 43 


FOR TEACHERS 

American Life and the School Curriculum* 

That Men May Understand* 

Curriculum Making - The 1926 Yearbook* 

Democracy and the Curriculum. — (Chairman) 

Foundations for American Education, 

Rugg sees this period as a critical one in our history "because 
three basic social trends have gotten out. of step with one another®^ Eco¬ 
nomic productivity, social invention « especially as 'regards .control of 
the machine of production, and the ability to carry on a government with 
the consent of the governed - these three « and the lags between them hold 
the keys to our social problems* 

Because he has stressed control of the technological machinery of 
our age, because he has insisted on placing the full problem before the Am¬ 
erican people in their educational program he has been the subject of ,8 witch- 
hunting 1 *® Rugg denies any ulterior motives® 2 

**The real crux of the issue before us was the kind of interpreta¬ 
tion of American life and especially of **American enterprise 9 *, that was to 
hold sway in the schools® * * ® * which brand of the American Way are we to 
hold and teach 1 ? 

**A full account of American life, unbiased as it is humanly poss¬ 
ible to .make it, should be presented. All sides' should be studied® Ho pro¬ 
blems and issues should be omitted® Nothing should be covered up, kept away 
from the young people® , . *A democracy can exist on no other basis* 


1® Rugg H» ' That Men May Understand ® p. 103 
2® Rugg H* Ibid® Chapter YII, 

















•tif.' 



T 









r 








J, The program of education must 136 "built around problems. There 
is no other way to develop the knowledge and thinking of young people « de¬ 
scribe American life fully, accurately, and present the problems. Thinking 
ability comes only from confronting problems and choosing between alterna¬ 
tives# To keen issues out of the school is to keen intellectual life out of 
it . Certainly more than one side should be told. Young people must be taught 
to take sides about American life only after they have taken thought** 8 ^ 

To achieve his purpose, Eugg formed a Social Science Research Group® 
This group started work by planning to organize a history ** geography course 
together with contemporary community life in one long class period* The work 
was started at Lincoln College, 

This research group took its cue, says Eugg, from Comte® M The 
whole social order would fall into a clear picture if we would organize it 
around the great ideas that rule the world or throw it into chaos® 8,2 
The Social Science Research Group faced five frontiers!^ 

(1) The Educational Frontier - building the story of man and his 
changing society, 

(2) The Social Frontier - the study of man and his culture® 

(3) The Personal Frontier - the study of the organic life of the 
living creatures® 

(4) The Psychological Frontier - the psychology of man and his 
changing society «• the study of his methods of inquiry and 
work, especially the creative act® 


1, Eugg H. That Men May Understand , pp 125-126 

2® Ragg h® im: - 

3® Eugg H® Ibid. p. 214-215 













- „ ' 

■ I • ** j- ■: r: '■ .. 

J 

— - 

, 

-■.rn . 









** 45 *• 


(5) The Aesthetic Frontier - the study of man * s statement of his 
own view of life* 

The He search Group turned to recognized authorities on the frontier 
of thought for opinions and judgments* 

H Our chief reliance then "became the frontiersmen of thought and feel¬ 
ing* We fell into the habit in those early days of calling them the “frontier 
thinkers“* 

“First their persistent attempt to see life whole, to maintain an 
overview, searching constantly for interrelationship between academic fields. 
Second, their honest tracing of factors, causes and relationships to their in¬ 
evitable ends; this they did without regard for conflicts with prevalent con¬ 
cepts and norms* Third, their experience in documentation, in the handling of 
carefully recorded and classified data in several related fields; they were 
critics of validity, well-grounded in the commonly known facts %n& generaliza¬ 
tions of several areas* Fourth, their ability to stand aloof from the surface 
pathology of current problems and movements, searching for underlying trends 
and deep-founded traits and causes 

Hugg reports that his research group turned to these scholars 
incessantly to get a view of life as a whole and to achieve valid generaliza¬ 
tions*^ The following list provides some of the authorities and references 
studied; 

Turner ; Significance of the Frontier in American History. (1893) 
Beard s Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the U.S* (1913) 
Veblen; Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) 


1, Hugg H* That Men May Understand , p* 215 

2. Hugg H* Ibid. pp. 195-200 







1 



f 






- 46 - 

Cooley s Human Nature and the Social Order (1902) 

Keynes s Economic Consequences of the Peace (1920) 

Angell s The Great Illusion (1913) 

The finite of Victory (1921) 

Bussell s Proposed Beads to freedom (1919) 

Hobsons The Evolution of Modern Capitalism (1906) 

Hobsons Taxation in the New State (1920) 

Laskis foundations of Sovereignty (1921) 

Laskii Studies in th© Problems of Sovereignty (1917) 

Tawneyi Acquisitive Society (1920) 

Tawney i Religion and the Else of Capitalism (1926) 

Wallas 3 The Great Society (1914) 

Wallasi Social Heritage (1920) 

Turner f s § frontier (1920) 

Commons! History of Labor in the U* S« (1913) 

Van His a s Conservation of Natural Resources (1910 <* 193*+) 

Ross i Social Control (1901) 

Hamilton ! Current Economic Problems (1941) 

Marshall s Readings in Industrial Society (1913) 

Moultons financial Organization of Society (1913) 

Merriams .American Political Ideas 
Smith s Human History 

Robinson s Mind in the Making (1921) 

-Robinsons The History of Western Civilization (1924) 

Beards Cross Currents in Europe 

























•'Vi 


" 1 , 





- 47 - 


Hayes; Political and Social History of Modern Europe (1917) 

Goochs History of Modern Europe (1923) 

Vehlen ; The Engineers and the Price System (1921) 

The problem was to build a social studies course* It was a consi¬ 
derable problem; 

'*Taking the young people and the society as they were, we had to 
paint the comprehensive portrait of man and his changing civilization by de¬ 
signing and building as vital, as exciting, as mind stretching and as valid 
a program of materials and activities as was possible® We were facing a 
problem to be solved not a tradition to be perpetuated, • • • • • 

M There were really three jobs to be done, the building of insight 
concerning the 15 good concepts 58 - the ideas that rule the world* » • • .The 
second was the technical job of locating and documenting thousands of gener¬ 
alizations* The third was the writer*s task of finding the most favored 
"words to convey the indispensable meanings needed to build understanding 55 , 
"Did we make 58 scientific 59 validation of the concepts and general¬ 
izations ? Yes, as far as possible. ... .We sought to maintain a critical 
attitude toward the reliability of our sources, using only factually documen¬ 
ted materials. We resorted to the most valid judgments we could find, multi¬ 
plying cases and searching for unanimity in generalization. Thus w© tried to 
portray with fidelity current to earlier modes of living by utilizing the 
statistics of social life and the judgments of frontier thinkers. 

"On the whole we found little use for the intricate technical 
methods of determining "probable errors 55 , "correlation" and "reliability". 

"We strove to maintain the attitude of experimental inquiry; coiw 
frenting problems, collecting objective data, classifying and grouping them 









48 


to discover similarities and dissimilarities, seeking recurrence and yet re¬ 
maining skeptical of it, attempting to reduce errors of observation and judg¬ 
ment, generalising and yet testing reliability. 

’’Twenty years of hard study, research and. scientific experimenta¬ 
tion have gone into the social science enterprise, 

M Xt was part of our creed to refuse to accept any concept or gener¬ 
alization as fixed and final* 

Rugg looked upon certain groups as the opposition to the stereo- 

type ~ 2 

(1) Scientific students of the living creature 

(a) Students of evolution - documented the idea of 
things growing, 

(b) Laboratory Physiologists « explored behaviour of 
animals (men) 

(c) Students of animal learning - especially processes 
of generalization and perception of relationships, 

(d) Laboratory Psychologists who extended this inquiry 
to the behaviour of human beings - 

(2) nd Group 

The philosophers who laid bare the organic nature of experience, 
the generalizing characteristics of thinking and of all progressive living 
as growing, the experimental method of inquiry, and the intuitive way of 
working » 

The Sociologists, anthropologists, social psychologists who 


1* Rugg H, That Men May Understand, pp, 218 - 221 
2* Rugg H* lbIdr^r23B - 23t" 














;JCf 










< 


< 







- 49 - 


developed the concept of the culture as the process of the interaction of dy¬ 
namic individuals. 

The regional geographers who revealed the interactive impact of 
physical and social environments and human modes of living upon on© another. 

The new historians 
new economists 
new political scientists 

who documented the deep-running social trends and clari¬ 
fied the unified interrelationships of economics, politics, and social psy¬ 
chology. 

(3) rd Group 

Poets, literary, and social critics, sculptors, etc., - all see 
man as artist - emphasizing life as H organic form, as integrity of expression, 
as self-cultivation 11 

(4) th Group 

Teachers in laboratory schools exploring such concepts as active 
response, integration, purpose, balance, self, integrated personality. 

H As the years passed by, I became more and more convinced that 
democracy could not survive the attacks upon it unless young Americans came 
to a thorough understanding of the world in which they were living. The 
democratic process in America was not sure, could not be guaranteed unless 
our youth were introduced to the full story - the deficiencies as well as 
the achievements of our society, the problems and issues as well as the 
narrative of adventure. 1 2 


1. Rugg H. That Men May Understand, p. 237 

2. Rugg H. Ibid. p. 239 

















Ragg l 2 s attempt to formulate an account of modern society was a 
stupendous task in scholarship, followed by mass production and mass distri¬ 
bution. 

In the years from 1920 to 193^ twenty five studies of modern civi¬ 
lization were made. These studies phrased the them© concepts, social trends, 
and problems for the curriculum. The experimental publication of 20,000 pages 
of material covering the main aspects of human society was completed. These 
were the Social Science Pamphlets of 1922 to 1928, This material was financed 
and used by several thousand administrators during these years. During the 
same period a new educational theory was sketched, A body of psychological 
principles on curriculum content and. organization as a result of experimental 
analysis of learning and growth was prepared. These principles have been put 
to practice in the Beading Books and explained in the Teacher f s Guides, Years 
of experimentation resulted in the production of the Workbook of pupil activi¬ 
ties. 

The financing of curriculum reconstruction was a major problem from 
the beginning, Lincoln r s College contributed Bugg 9 s salary, that of an assist¬ 
ant and a secretary® The college also supplied a home and its rather invalu¬ 
able institutional connection, 1 

In 1922 educational foundations refused assistance. The schools of 
the country needed materials and between 1922 and 1930 several thousand teach¬ 
ers and administrators purchased and used 700,000 copies of the twenty-two vol¬ 
umes of Social Studies Pamphlets, By 1932 a total of $378*698,00 h&d been 
spent on this project. Up to that time Sugg had assumed a total deficit of 
$31*755*00, The main income cam© from experimentally minded teachers. 


1* Ihtgg H, Building a Science of Society for the Schools , p, 10 

2, Bugg H, That Men May Understand , p, 223 






T 


t 



. . . i 

t 


! 





c 






- 51 - 


Rugg pays tribute to the educational leadership of Ginn and Co,, 
and attributes singular educational adventuring to that corporation*^ Rugg 
describes the development of the new curriculum as a thoroughly co-operat¬ 
ive enterprise. 

Objective research was the keynote of the whole problem, Tech¬ 
nical investigations and the assembling of materials were essential features 
of the plan. Technical investigators had to examine the present content and 

development of .American culture and they had to settle grade placements of 

2 

material. The technical investigations included twenty-five studies! 

(1) Three studies of existing curricula in history, geography 
and civics, procedure of national committees 1892 « 1921 , 
pupils® abilities and attainments, 

(2) Thirteen studies of what problems of contemporary life to 
teach the chief trends of civilization. Central concepts 
and principles which educated minds use in thinking about 
them, 

( 3 ) Three studies of the grade placement of curriculum materials 
and of the development of pupils® abilities, 

(4) Six studies of learning and the organization of curricula. 

The assembling of materials was the second aspect of the enterprise. 
It demanded a survey of a vast amount of narrative, descriptive, pictorial, gra¬ 
phic, and statistical data, pertaining to industry, trade, population, govern¬ 
ment, social life - all aspects of modern culture. 

The portrait of the new world could not be left to the individual 
textbook writer. A description of the complicated mechanism ©f production 


1, Rugg H. That Men May Understand , p. 43 

2, Rugg H. Building a Science of Society for the Schools , p, 12 





t 



I 


1 



( 




- 52 - 


and distribution, institutions, etc., could not be built on a narrow basis. 

A creative portrait could be secured only by reference to the best minds with 
the deepest insights. A synthesis of the work of frontier thinkers was essen¬ 
tial. Frontier thinkers are men of insight, who see society from a height.^” 
They detect long-term trends. Usually they are leaders. Very seldom are they 
conservatives. They differ among themselves but they do attempt to see life 
as a whole? they ignore surface features? they search for causes? they 
trace relationships to their inevitable ends? without regard to the discom¬ 
fort to established norms. They usually display skill in several related 
fields and have ability in formulating generalisations. 

Research by itself brought a confused mass of episodes, statistics, 
graphs, narratives, and the like. The location of some six hundred generaliz¬ 
ations left a body of knowledge too voluminous to serve as a framework* Rngg 
and his associates hit upon the plan of using the great theme - concepts of 
human cultures, as the intellectual skeleton of society. Sugg describes this 
as perhaps “the most important single educational contribution of these years 
of research 15 • ^ 

These central ideas ares 3 

A* The all-embracing concept is the Culture of peoples. 

(1) The surface civilization - the economic system, production, 
distribution. 

(2) The Institutions of the people, - family life, political 
organization, government, language, systems of measure¬ 
ment, etc. 


1. Rugg H. Building a Science of Society for the Schools, p. l4 

2. Rugg H. Ibid. p» 16 ~~ 

3. Rugg H. Ibid, pp, 17-20 




I 





(3) Psychology and Philosophy of People - traits, attitudes, 
loyalties, drives, taboos. 

The Program distinguishes three types of culture in the modern 
world. 

(1) The Interdependent Industrial Culture. 

(2) The fairly self-sufficient agrarian handi-craft cultures. 

(3) Cultures of semi-nomadic, less developed peoples* 

The Central Historical Concept is that of accelerating change. 
World cultures are changing with increasing momentum. The next 
genera,tion to be charged with self-government must be practised 
in the attitude of expectancy of change. 

Youth must grasp the supreme role of industrialism and the central 
revolutionising concepts which produced the dominating European*. 
American civilisation following 1500 A.D. 

(1) Machine Technology based upon. 

(a) Scientific method. 

(b) Invention of engines. 

(c) Harnessing of engines to machines. 

(2) Corporate Control 

(a) Concentration of capital in a few hands. 

(b) Standardised mass production. 

(c) Specialization of labor. 

( 3 ) Laissez-faire. 

(a) Individual freedom to compete for gain. 

(b) Personal freedom - ©f movement - 

(c) Freedom to exploit natural resources and men 





! 'C : 


$ 






- 54 - 


E. Transformations in Culture - revealed by typical concepts 

(1) From self-sufficient agrarian community to interdependent 
industrial society. 

(2) Loss of worker f s control over job, product, income to 
promoters and financiers. 

(3) Grovrth of production plants in competition. 

(4) Rise of dangerous economic nationalism, tariffs, race for 
raw materials, markets, armaments, war* 

(5) Change from static, sparse population of 1800 to dynamic 
one of accelerating growth. 

(6) Experimentation with political democracy and its clash with 
concept of '^laissez-faire 88 . Lag of realistic education - 

(7) Characteristic American attitude « confidence and belief 
in ladder of opportunity. 

(8) Rise of world-wide system of swift communication. Formation 
of public opinion by propaganda. Special groups secure con^ 
trol of press and other communication agencies. 

These concepts are examples of those which condense the bewilder¬ 
ing maze of meanings in modern culture. These theme-concepts have been taken 

as the organizing thread of the new program in the social sciences. 

2 

But, says Rugg, meaning and feeling work together. Meaning and 
emotion together determine what we think and feel. Ruling attitudes determine 
education quit© as much as do ideas. Studies of philosophy and sociology were 

1. Rugg H. Building a Science of Society for the Schools , pp 18-20 

2. Rugg H. Ibid, pp* 20—21 





1 


f 


f 


0,1 \ 


.Mi lit’. 


t . « 







- 55 


essential to the production of a new curriculum* The new* complex® incompre¬ 
hensible world of the machine age® brought into questioning the old loyalties* 
Confidence rooted in the stability of the old system gave way to fears and ex¬ 
perimentation born of instability. Rugg and his associates found it necessary 
therefore to create a working theory of life based upon both the experimental 
way of knowing and the attitude of appreciative awareness* This involved a 
series of attitudes and loyalties* 

Three loyalties of personal growth areI 

(1) The integrity of ©n@ 9 s own self - the honest job* 

(2) The concept of live and let live - genuine tolerance* 

( 3 ) The determination to be happy - the true criterion of success* 

Four important loyalties to the groups 

(1) Belief in necessity of communion with others® 

(2) necessity for frank compromise to maintain happy relations 
with others* 

( 3 ) The scientific attitude of mind as a means of improving social 
relations. 

(4) The obligation to contribute to the carrying on of the political 
and social life of the community* 

Also to change the constitutional and legislative structure when 
modes of living change* 

Bugg found that sound reconstruction of the school curriculum must 
embrace both the social program for the nation and also a program of personal 
living for the individuals* 

Only on one basis can a human and democratic society be formed? 
that of following the facts to their inescapable conclusion® whether that 


i 




’ ' . ; . 







- 56 - 


conclusion leads to drastic reconstruction or not* 

Rugg and his co-workers found they faced difficult tasks of re¬ 
construction in the field of organization.^ Their goal was an all-inclu¬ 
sive description of modern life* They could find no such description in 
the conventional curriculum. The school had, they said, an obligation to 
study society. In order to do this the school needed a genuine description 
of society. After a dozen years spent in compiling a description of society, 
the investigators concluded that the subject-matter boundaries must be obli¬ 
terated. Neither the frontier thinkers nor the theme-concepts recognized the 
usual compartments of human knowledge. The loyalties and attitudes did not 
arise in contemplating artificial area of subject matter. They were forced to 
discard the logical schemes of the specialists. Each treatment dealt with a 
narrow sector of culture. Hence interpretations of civilization were restric¬ 
ted by subject-matter boundaries. The students could not gather understand¬ 
ing of the modern world from such an arrangement of materials. In the social 
science, Rugg and his associates organized the program on understanding units 

p 

of work rather than in conventional subjects." 

The builders of the new program discovered that more than meaning¬ 
ful integration of concepts was necessary. The learners comprehend a general¬ 
ization only as they understand its details. Many details of dramatization 
are essential to impress the mind. This fact is very important to education 
because the encyclopedic method often kills any opportunity for understanding. 
The method of the dramatic episode means far more than mere vivid reading 
materials. It demands replacement of reading « reciting - questioning with 


1. Rugg H. Building a Science of Society for the Schools, pp. 23-24 

2. Rogg H. Ibid, pp* 25-2o. 






♦ 
























' 




■ * 






, 










57 - 


many-sided activities * 1 

Since the individuals understanding of the world grows hit by bit, 
the new education is a cumulative process* Bach new experience modifies our 
attitudes* The curriculum-maker selects activities which will contribute new 
meanings to the underlying concex>ts of social life* And he will design the 
curriculum to include the planned recurrence of basic concepts* There must 
be a designed recurrence of concepts in varied settings since learners grope 

p 

their way haltingly and in piecemeal fashion toward permanent understanding* 
Rugg and his associates faced the question of tolerance frankly* 
They recognized that it could not be taught by forcing the students to learn 
ready-made generalizations* They recognized that ability to generalize grows 
from practise in generalizing. Practice in questioning, they recognized, as 
the basis of sound criticism* A direct frontal attack on crucial, current, 
and controversial problems was recognized by the committee as essential to 
growth in tolerant understanding.3 

A new public mind is to be created. A new social mind must be 
created says RuggJ 4, M 01d stereotypes must b© broken up and new n climates of 
opinion 11 formed in the neighborhoods of America* But that is the task of 
the building of a science of society for the schools. And the first step is 
the preparation of an honest and intelligible description of our changing 
social order*”5 


1* Rugg H* 
2* Rugg H* 
3* Rugg H. 
4. Rugg H. 
5* Rugg H* 


Building a Science of Society for the Schools * pp 26-27* 

Ibid* pp 28-29 

Ibid. p. 30 

Ibid, p* 32 

Ibid, p. 32 





CHAPTER VI 


HUGO’ AND THE OLD SCHOOL 


Harold Kugg does not completely condemn the old school and he is 
ready to give credit where credit is due. Although he finds himself among 
the revolutionaries, he agrees that numerous other educational groups have 
contributed toward the advance of education*^ 

However, h© notes that from 1390 to 1923, there was only piece¬ 
meal reorganisation of the school system.^ During that period the school 
system was dominated by college entrance examinations and by school adminis¬ 
trators, The former standardised a set memoriter course and the latter empha¬ 
sized management in the school system. 

During the three decades in question, some reorganization of the 
school system occurred, but the reactionaries were able to insist on a rigid 
college entrance examination. High school courses and teaching methods con¬ 
formed to this standard. The memorization of rote material was encouraged as 
a method of study, A stereotyped curriculum limited the work of the students 
to a very narrow, and often, impractical field of work. Administrators of 
this system were in favor of the status quo. History became the memorization 
of chronological events with little real pupil understanding. Geography was. 
recognized as a subject in which place names and physical features were to be 
memorized, 

A second group of educationalists, says Hogg, did some valuable 
work -* namely, the students of the scientific study of education,3 They em¬ 
phasized the techniques of analysis, measurement, tabulation, and experiment 


1* Eugg H, & Shumaker A, The Child-Centred School , Chapter III. 

2, Bugg H» & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 20 

3* Sugg H a & Shumaker A. Ibid. pp. 27-29 























59 


In methods of learning. They tested teaching procedures for results and devi¬ 
sed intelligence tests. These efforts were attended "by only slight changes in 
materials presented and there was no attempt to challenge the trad idiom! sub¬ 
ject matter. Nevertheless* the followers of the scientific approach did bring 
a more objective attitude to the teachers as a whole. 

To Rugg, the total results were appalling. 

a Behind each classroom door lurked a deceptive Pandora 8 s box of 
fears* restraints, and long weary hours of suppression. Think of children sitt¬ 
ing with arms folded* eyes front* putting up a hand for a begrudged permission 
to move* chanting lessons in unison* forty or fifty eyes glued to an identical 
paragraph while a halting reader at the front of the room limps painfully 
through sentences already too familiar to be interesting. There, memorize . 
recite , pay attention , are the keynotes. Not, H What do you think?” but M What 
does the book say*” directs the educative process. Guided by rote and routine* 
the child*s mind is submitted to the grindstone of an educational descipline 
which forever dwarfs his capacity to think for himself, which dulls his inter¬ 
est in gleaming* pulsing life® 13 ^ 

The lag in the school system was even more appalling from the view¬ 
point of national welfares 

33 The re is no more tragic atrophy of national creative capacity than 

that which paralleled the erection of our great industrial civilization* },c 

The great new technology was creating a whole new industrial civili¬ 
zation. It should have been the work of the school to understand and guide the 
revolutionary changes taking place in the social* economic, and political 


1* Pugg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School , p. 4 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 14 












~ 6q - 

structure* Instead, the materials of instruction were prepared by university 
professors who knew little of child psychology. The emphasis was upon the 
past. There was a great gap between the needs of the child and society and 
the materials of instruction.^ 


1* Bigg H* & Shumaker A. The Child-Cent red School. p» 32 







; 


■ 





f 





t ' 






« 




CHAPTER ?IX 


RUOG- AND THE NEW SCHOOL 

Rugg prefers the psychology, philosophy, and method of the active 
school.^ He does not accept the whole program and he does not accept all the 
practices of the activity program uncritically* Nevertheless, he advocates 
most of the tenets of the new school* 

In the old school the criteria of success were discipline, logic, 
power of sustained intellectual thought, retention of classified knowledge, 
and scholarship. Rugg prefers the criterion of the new school which places 
the emphasis on child growth hy development of child potentialities* Educa¬ 
tion is dynamic, not static, psychologically rather than logically guided. 
Child activities replace lessons. Ready-mad© subject matter is replaced hy 
drawing on the life experiences of the child. With John Dewey, Rugg would 
organize the school curriculum around the social instinct, the instinct for 
making, the expressive tendency, and the impulse toward inquiry, - all of 
which are deep-rooted in children* 

The new school insists that the reconstruction of experience is 
the only sound foundation for education. 

"Experience - the keynote of the new educationI« "The reconstruc¬ 
tion of experience", says John Dewey, intellectual rationalist of democracy's 
new school, "I would have a child say not, "I know", hut "I have experienced* . 

"For education in the Century of the Child aims at nothing less 
than the production of individuality through the integration of experience* 

The whole child is to he educated. Hence, the materials of education are to 
he as hroad and interrelated as life itself. 


1. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School * Chapter 5* 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A® Ibid* p. 5* 

- 6l - 







r 




e 


r 


r 



r 


< 



x 


,;'i; 


U’ 


c ■ 


( 




62 


Two great goals of school, the new school, ares 

(1) Drawing out child®s inner capacities for self-expression constit¬ 
utes only on© of the two great goals of the new school, 

(2) The goal of tolerant understanding, 

M In the light of the current impasse in citizenship, is there an 
intellectual aim of education of more crucial importance?” asks Sugg.^” 

Sugg acclaims what he calls the new articles of faith. First, 
there is to he more freedom - physical freedom as the basis of the active 
course in which child initiative will replace teacher initiative, 2 3 4 

M As individuals and as social groups pupils grow, and they grow in 
the capacity to govern themselves, to organize machinery for handling their 
collective affairs, as well as in individual capacity for creative self-ex¬ 
pression, So it is that the true theory of democracy is being put into prac¬ 
tice in these new schools, • , • • ,This centering of responsibility and ini¬ 
tiative in the pupil brings into the forefront the child 1 ® own needs. His 

tt t 

immediate interests are to furnish the starting point of education, J 

The development, Sugg asserts, of freedom and pupil initiative 
will be the aim of the active school,^ Education is to be based on child ex¬ 
perience not only physically but intellectually and emotionally as well. The 
deep-seated human tendency to movement, impulse, activity, will become the 
basis of learning. Subjects are being abandoned for centres of work and child 
interest is the basis of centres of work. These units, as nearly as possible, 
approximate the interests of children in real life situations. The new courses 

1, Sugg H, & Shumaker A, Child-Centred School , p, S 

2. Sugg H, & Shumaker A, Ibid* pp. 5^*5^ 

3, Sugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid, p. 57 

4. Sugg H. & Shumaker A, Ibid. p. 5% 






1 

















- 63 - 

represent a broad view of race experience rather than ^definitions and long 
lists of factual enumerations!?.^* 

In the conventional school, growth was recognized as power to con¬ 
form and to submit to school discipline. In the new school, the creative 
spirit from within is encouraged. The student, as creator, is given a wide 
latitude. 

The old school was dominated by the arbitrary authority of the 
teacher. The new school hopes to provide an environment where each child 
can retain his personal identity while working with others. Within limits, 
the new school will encourage meaningful conversation as a vehicle of social 
understanding and personal development. 

2 

Rugg favors the new grouping of subject matter in the new school. 
There is more flexibility. In some of the new schools, courses of study are 
lacking. Rugg criticizes this departure from conventional procedure.^ How¬ 
ever, he favors more flexibility in periods and material than is permitted, 
in the traditional school. The grading and grouping of students is flexible 
and there are few failures. 

The conventional school organized the curriculum around spelling, 
arithmetic, and grammar. The new schools make such courses as social studies 
the foundation of the course of studies. The new school does not follow an 
inflexible system. The child*s own activities help to create the program. 

Rugg is one of the foremost advocates of the activity program. How¬ 
ever, he demands a planned activity program*^ Of the procedures and results 
of a well-organized activity program, Bugg sayss 


1, Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ghild-Oentred School , pp 60-62 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid, p* 6l 

3* Rugg H. & Shumaker A, Ibid. pp. 116-120 

4. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 120 




I 


- 64 - 

u The new school organizes itself around the child*® intention to 
learn; the old school organized itself around the teacher*© intention to 
teach him. The latter my produce learning hut the former is sure to. The 
child*s intention to learn brings an inner integration, a concentration of 
his whole being upon the problem at hand. 

,8 The emphasis in the unit of work, therefore, is upon the child 
as a complete human being, upon the development of general habits and attit¬ 
udes, as well as the acquisition of knowledge and the development of skill. 

88 In the school subject, the emphasis is upon the learning of a 
systematically organized body of specific skills and knowledges. ...... 

81 The new school is concerned with the whole child. It does not 
ask him to lay aside his social, his emotional, his physical selves, and to 
isolate his mental self while he is learning arithmetic, grammar, or geogra¬ 
phy as the old school has done in the past. 88 - 1 

Rugg notes, however, that the extremists in the progressive educa¬ 
tional movement are making errors which dilute the possible quality of educa¬ 
tion. 2 3 

Soine advocates of the activity program demand that the maximum of 
,4 lifelikeness H for the learner must be a fundamental guide in the selection 
of materials and in the act of education. Rugg insists that maximum growth 
for the learner is a more important principled Hew meanings must be added 
to life. 

Some advocates of the activity program insist that the interests 
of the children provide the sole guide to the choice of school work. But 


1* Rugg H, & Shumaker A. The Child-Pent red School , p. 102 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. Chapters VIX-X 

3. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. pp. 104-105 








1 



^ r r*V> M 


f 




~ 65 - 


Rugg askss Are the undirected, spontaneous interests of the child to he the 
basis of the curriculum?^" H© insists that the child is not a capable selector 
and that he needs teacher direction. Children, he says, cannot be expected 

2 

to turn of their own free will to essential portions of educational material. 

Some activity schools refuse to plan the curriculum in advance. 

Rugg insists that curriculum building is a technical necessity," By failing 
to recognize this, these schools have developed short-sighted and lop-sided 
programs. 

The most radical of the activity program enthusiasts scorn the ed¬ 
ucational techniques of analysis and design, declares Rugg.^ There are, he 
insists, two factors to be kept in mind for the educative process - the child, 
and adult civilization.^ Both must be provided for in sound education and 
this presumes a designed curriculum based on the finest possible analysis and 
discovery of the fundamental needs of both, 

w The old regime had been essentially dominated by the slogan of 
”knowledge for knowledge*® sake 1 *, the new one well-nigh reversed it and sub¬ 
scribed to ‘'activity for activity's sake",”^ 

This emphasis, says Rugg, on activity, has led astray the propon¬ 
ents of growth.? In many schools, physical activity is considered the meas¬ 
ure of educations,! learning. The new schools are here in error. They need, 
nays Rugg, a greater respect for ideas, for meanings, for intellect, for the 
power to think and they need systematic provision for the development of 

g 

these qualities. These school® leave to chance, the evolution of ideas and 


1. Rugg H. & Shumaker A, 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A, 

3. Rugg H. & Shumaker A, 

4. Rugg H. & Shumaker A, 
5» Rugg E. & Shumaker A. 

6. Rugg H. & Shumaker A, 

7. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. 

5. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. 


The Child-Centred School , p 109 

Ibid, p, 108 

Ibid. p. IIS 

Ibid, p. 113 

Ibid, p 116. 

Ibid. p. 125 
Ibid. p. 124 
Ibid. p. 124-128 





f ,f ';itf 





66 


generalizations. Knowledge of the fundamental concepts of civilization cannot 
he left to chance. The curriculum-maker must evaluate, select, and arrange 
the activities and materials so as to provide for 1,3 sequential practice in refl¬ 
ective thinking. 1 * * 4 5 6 ’ 5 

M In the long run, the intelligent person is the informed person. . . 

p 

one cannot reason in a vacuum.” 

And yet, says Pugg, many of the leaders of the new schools have neg¬ 
lected an important psychological tool by casting drill out of their thinking.3 
It is essential that the students gain ability to think and speak clearly, to 
interpret language, to understand and use the fundamental concepts in their 
language and thinking* Drill and practice are vital to permanent growth in 
the field d£ ideas. 

M Now skill in thinking comes only through practice in thinking. 
Practice in thinking demands a sequence of esjperiences in which pupils constan¬ 
tly confront questions and solve difficult problems. Practice in thinking is 
practice in drawing generalizations from concrete data, in choosing between 
alternatives, in withholding judgments, in discovering hidden relationships, 

4 

in finding the connections between effects and their unknown causes.” 

The studies of learning, says Pugg, make clear the absolute need 
for repetition in learning.^ The principle of planned recurrence is a funda¬ 
mental principle of curriculum construction. 

” Curriculum-maker® must provide for two kinds of recurrences First, 
the planned recurrence of the great controlling concepts and generalizations 
that are basic to tolerant understanding. Second, the verbatim repetition of 
the skills. ..... 

1. Pugg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School , p. 128 

2* Pugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. pp. 131—13? 

3* Pugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 133 

4. Pugg H. & Shumaker A* Ibid. p. 128 

5. Pugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 136 

6. Rugg E. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 






{ 







CHAPTER VIII 


THE PSYCHOLOGY BEHIHD THE CURRICULUM (KUGG) 1 

The “Divine discontent” 2 of the artist is essential in constructing 
a curriculum. The artist improvises his work to begin with and then turns 
loose a dogged self-criticism® He travels hack and forth between his vision 
and his objective statement re-analyzing, struggling to discover new relation¬ 
ships* with a temper of rigorous self-discipline* He is determined to think 
to the bottom of his problem® The artist asks, “Have I perceived the signifi¬ 
cant relationships between the parts of the subject. Am I putting them toge¬ 
ther so that they constitute a true unity! Is each one indispensable! Do 
they all serve the function of the total thing!”3 The struggle of artists is 
to find this organic form® The whole heart of the creative process is the in¬ 
sistence on design® Basie to design is that the parts form a function of the 
whole® There must be unity of the related parts® 

In education, we strive for the organic pattern® We have, for a 
generation, engaged in improvisation® W© are only on our way toward a desig¬ 
ned organic plan of education® In education, it seems difficult to translate 
the theories of adequate education, and significant educational concepts into 
active curricula® 

The conventional' curriculum lacks design and leaves the school or¬ 
ganization too remote from the real life problems and from the interests of 
young people® So many subjects are studied, the day is so thoroughly compart¬ 
mentalized. that there is little opportunity for problem-solving situations® 

The emphasis is on book specialization ® It is almost impossible for a student 

1® Eugg E® & Caswell E* ‘^Developing the Design of the Curriculum”, Chapter XV, 

Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John 

Dewey Society . See footnote p. 

2® Eugg H. & Caswell H® Ibid7^7T5s 

3® Eugg H* & Caswell H® Ibid, pp 408-409 














« 6s 


to secure a general education in a subject-dominated school*^ 

The curriculum must be a succession of educative experiences. It 
must not be based on a specific prescription of subject-matter. Neither is 
random improvisation acceptable. 

A continuous process of curriculum planning is essential to promote 
a dynamic process® We must avoid the suggestion of finality which accompanies 
a ’’planned curriculum” There must be flexibility in the curriculum but a 
flexibility within a framework of long-time planning, with a recognition that 
planning is only tentative. The planning would be done by a group of teachers 
rather than by one teacher. 

A curriculum must consider the fundamental changes which occur be¬ 
tween childhood and adulthood. These changes are biological, emotional, and 
intellectual. On the biological side, it is well known that as the child 
grows physically, activity lessens and concentration and intellectual acti¬ 
vity increase. The curriculum must provide adjustment for these changing 
biological conditions. 

A curriculum must treat with significance the knowledge of chang¬ 
ing interests. Changing interests bring changing purposes and these purposes 
are the drives to action* As purposes strengthen the individual will engage 
in routine work over extended periods of time. 

The curriculum constructor should recognize the right of the stu¬ 
dents to be happy. Every child should have an opportunity to build a round¬ 
ed program of living. The school may contribute to undesirable designs of 
living unless it recognizes this fact. The school program should not so 


1. Sugg H. & Caswell H. ’’Developing the Design of the Curriculum” Chapter XV, 

Democracy and the Curriculum. Yearbook III, John 

Dewey Society* p. kn, 

. Ibid. p. 415* 


2. Eugg H. & Caswell H, 









- 69 - 


■burden the student with "bookwork that he has no time for participation in 
actual situations or to develop individual interests#" 

The curriculum must organise democracy within itself if it is to 
be a constructive social force# Democracy is costly of time and democracy 
in the schools must be given a significant amount of time# Student commi¬ 
ttees, conferences# elections, are matters of major importance® The stud¬ 
ents must guide this school democracy# Control by students of school acti¬ 
vities might well extend to those activities which extend beyond the school# 
Students, of course, will take increasing responsibility for sharing the in¬ 
structional program as well# The school should be an ideal democratic commu¬ 
nity and the curriculum should emphasize necessary activities# 

The curriculum must provide a basic social program#^ it is the re¬ 
sponsibility of the school to develop an understanding of our social life#It 
should cultivate a desire to participate in the solution of social problems# 
The work of the school must be closely related to the living of the people. 
The need should become th© center of interest and race experience should be 
employed to solve the problem under consideration. Every pupil must be given 
an opportunity to practise the solution of social problems# In a democracy, 
this is basic. The least capable student should have opportunity for co-op¬ 
erative group action# The bright students should be challenged to produce 
their best# The goal is to develop understanding and insight into social 
problems in the degree that the student is capable# The school must provide 
all with a reasonable understanding of these problems and a recognition of 
the need for group .action# Problems of passing interest ipust not crowd out 


1. Sugg H# & Caswell.H ’’Developing the Design of the Curriculum’ 1 2 , Chapter XV. 

Democ racy and the Curriculum# Yearbook III, John 
Sewey Society . . p» 418 

2. Rugg H. & Caswell H. Ibid. p. 420 










- 70 - 


consideration of permanent problems* 

It is not enough for the curriculum to emphasize the techniques of 
problem solving* Wholesale experience in problem-solving situations is ess¬ 
ential* People who know techniques and lack experience may be a menace in 
certain fields* 15 Thus success now in meeting a particular situation depends 
upon success in related experiences in the past. The failure of education to 
contribute to the solution of many important problems arises from the fact 
that at no point in the educational program have students been guided in expe¬ 
riences upon which they can build adequate solutions for problems currently 
faced.^ 

The curriculum must plan a broad experience for the student. Know¬ 
ledge of areas of living should be introduced to the student in relation to 
his own problems in connection therewith. 

The curriculum must provide creative and recreational opportunities. 
The responsibility of the school to furnish such experience is made necessary 
by the expansion of leisure hours which technological progress has made and is 
making. The school must guide the children into recreational activities which 
are not antagonistic to social welfare. 

p 

The curriculum* declares Pugg* must provide for work interests* 

There is a tradition on this continent that work is dignified. With the pas¬ 
sage of time and the increased education of our people* there should be lit¬ 
tle room for the non-productiv© exploiters of society® Work must be regard¬ 
ed as a means of enriching the spirits of men as well as a means of product¬ 
ion. 

The curriculum of the old school has allowed a distinction to grow 

1. Pugg E. & Caswell H. ^Developing the Design of the Curriculum^ Chapter XV, 

Democracy and the Curriculum. Yearbook III* John 

Dewey Society, p. 424 






- 71 - 

up ‘between the academic and the non-academic courses. Too often the non-ac¬ 
ademic courses have been looked upon as fit only for inferior students. The 
new curriculum ought to recognize that preparation for work is more important 
than preparation for a specific occupation, Vocational education should not 
he considered apart from general education. All phases of the curriculum 
should include a wide breadth of activities and teachers should offer guidance 
toward participation in order that students may he assisted to a discovery of 
permanent lines of work. As work interests become clarified the curriculum 
should offer more definite study of these possibilities. Opportunity for pro¬ 
fessional training should be withheld until the student has first received a 
general education. 

Sugg insists that the curriculum must recognize the need to provide 
for the development of drill and techniques although ^approval (must be) giv¬ 
en to every effort to free our schools from the deadly routine of drill on 
trivial matters. . • . 

However* fundamental abilities and techniques must be thoroughly 
learned. Brill on the essentials should not be considered an independent as¬ 
pect of the curriculum yet it may be necessary to postpone the teaching of 
such abilities which cannot be mastered on the spot. Special emphasis should 
not be allowed to divert attention from the main flow of events in the midst 
of a unit of work. 

8 *WiXX proficiency in this ability help these children to do better 
the things which they will be doing during the course of their day-by-day 
living?* 5 ^ The primary psychology of the organization of the curricrilum is 

1. Sugg H, & Caswell H. Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Bewey 

Society. Chapter XV. p. 4^0 

2. Rogg H. & Caswell H. Ibid. p. 431 











72 


that those abilities and techniques receiving special emphasis should he 
those used by the pupils to meet meaningful and purposeful situations. 

Since the needs of pupils vary greatly in regard to the need for special 
techniques and abilities requiring special emphasis f provision must be 
made for individual instruction. 

The curriculum cannot be made apart from the classroom instract¬ 
ors, Modification of the design of a curriculum can be mad© only through 
classroom teachers® All curriculum changes must be made so as to contribute 
to teacher understanding. This does not mean that to one teacher alone 
should be entrusted the task of building a curriculum,^ The building of a 
curriculum is essentially a group activity. A written curriculum need not 
become an externally imposed outline. It can become an effective program of 
activity. On the other hand 9 the abolition of group curricula usually re¬ 
sults not in great flexibility but in teachers proceeding individually along 
the lines of the old course which they have become accustomed to follow. 

Rugg insists 1 2 that the immense task of formulating a psychologically 
and philosophically sound curriculum requires a tremendous amount of careful 
planning and selection® 

Bugg criticizes? the proponents of the active school who will not 
permit the use of a well-planned curriculum® He describes their alternative 

results; 

IS A mosaic of relatively isolated units” 9 

w Lop-sid@d programs” t 

!, Unintegrated n 9 


1. Hogg H® & Caswell H. Democracy and the Curriculum® Yearbook III, John 

Dewey Society® Chapter X? ® p® 453 

2. Rugg H® & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School , p® 118 
3® Bigg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 113 








:o,;? v.c 


■q 


' 





w In the grip of the local and the immediate 1 * 3 ** 

11 Failure to recognize curriculum making as an engineering job” * 

Some advocates of the activity program, Bugg urges have placed too 
much emphasis on the existing fact of childhood* They have forgotten the 
end point « adult society* They insist that the curriculum grow out of spon¬ 
taneous interests of the children, 

Bugg insists**" that curriculum making is a more serious matter* 

Those who make curricula must understand the aims of education m tolerant un¬ 
derstanding of the civilization of which we are a part and the maximum devel¬ 
opment of the capacities of self-expression, 

**This job of curriculum construction is* in part at least* techno¬ 
logical in character* It demands the intuitive flashes of the artist* cer¬ 
tainly* to create the generalized attitudes that shall dictate the ton© of 
the environment which is to ©unround the child* But it also demands knowl¬ 
edge and skill in the use of the tools of educational science* and untiring 
effort in their application to bring about a sequential and continuous arr¬ 
angement of curriculum materials that shall constitute the program of our . 

2 

schools* 1 * 

A whole list of planned outcome© must be organized in advance* 

says fiugg*^ 

**What is to be planned in advance* First* an outline of the dyna¬ 
mic outcomes of education, the attitudes* appreciations* important concepts 
and meanings* and the generalizations which intelligent minds use in dealing 
with contemporary life} and* second* a sequence of optional activities and 

1, Bugg H* & Shumaker A* The Child-Centred School p* 117 

2* Bugg H, & Shumaker A* Ibid* p* 118 

3. Bugg H. & Shumaker A, Ibid, pp* 119-121 







74 


proposed units of subject matter which, by trial, have "been found to have 
great promise of producing the desired outcomes* 

“We said that the outline should contain a list of the intellect¬ 
ual and emotional traits to he developed* These should he phrased as the 
great guiding concepts and meanings, the chief generalizations and themes, 
that control intelligent thinking about modern life* These are the things 
which should he known by the teacher in advance, not the specific facts, 
skills, and minute experiences which the children are to deal with in build¬ 
ing up their understanding*” 

The urgency of planning the curriculum is stated thus by Ruggs 
“School period is brief, and adult life is complex, intricate, 
widely ramifying, »••»••*•• 

“We do not propose to determine in advance the details of the 
specific units of work* We do propose, however, to have a large array of 
units, analyzed in advance for their ideational possibilities, their con* 
cept-developing power. 


1* Sugg H* & Shumaker A. 


The Child-Centred School * p* 126 






r 




v 




t 


t i 


< 







CHAPTER IX 


THE MATERIAL OF THE CURRICULUM 


The curriculum to Rugg is an ©,wkwar& word and he does not use it 
in the sense of a stereotyped pattern to he imposed on the school system* 

In the new education, the word curriculum takes on the meaning of an enter¬ 
prise in living* It "becomes a stream of ^dynamic activities 11 Just as 
the school is a social enterprise in living - in guided living* 

H To become a program in guided living, education must be designed; 
certainly it must not be left to the casual circumstances of whim or chance* 
The educator will design the life and program of the school with the utmost 
care to give assurance that the day-by-day living will approach the poten¬ 
tiality for living that he feels in the young people* In this sense, both 

the goal and the program of education are ’^designed 18 , - developed from an 

o 

ever-continuing appraisal of anticipated kinds of growth, 1 *’" 

It is, he says, the prime duty of educators to design the life 
and program of the school directly from the n life of the children and the 
adults”3 in the educational community. This is a formidable task since nine- 
tenths^ of the students 1 time is spent beyond the school and under the guid¬ 
ance of stereotyping influences* The culture of a group embraces the mater¬ 
ial civilization, the social institutions, and the psychology of a people* 

In constructing a curriculum embracing the culture of a people, the true per¬ 
spective of the problems of youth must not be submerged by the desire to em¬ 
phasize the goings of the adult world# 

The curriculum-maker must have a profound understanding of the 

1* Rugg H, Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III* John Dewey Society * 

Chapter 1, p* 3* 

2* Rugg H* Ibid. p. 4 

3* Rugg H* Ibid. p. 5 

4* Rugg H* Ibid, p* 5 

- 75 - 






i 


< 




r 






76 


culture of his own people and he must understand the parent European culture 
that fathered his own way of life* The curriculum-builder must be a keen 
student of sociology, economics, government, art, psychology, and pedagogy* 

The educator must have a thorough knowledge of the history of ideas and 
understand that every advance in ways of living has come about through new 
ideas, new inventions, new ways of living. The best curriculum-builder will 
be an educator who is equipped with an under standing of the foundational 
ideas of our culture* 

To base a curriculum on the group culture is not enough* ¥© are 
dealing with people and the curriculum maker must recognize the facts of in¬ 
dividual personality as well as those of social institutions* He must be not 
only sociologist, statesman, philosopher, educational technician but also psy¬ 
chologist and physiologist* 

The curriculum-maker, says Rugg, must recognize three social trends 
1 

in modern society. Eirst, the productivity of machine-technology promises 
almost manless fabrication of goods* Second, the lagging course of social in¬ 
vention reveals itself in the uncertainty of our people regarding social con¬ 
trol and social ownership of property. And the third is the lagging advance 
of popular consent by people who have no means of understanding our devasta¬ 
ting social problem. 

” It is our hypothesis that our present complex interdependent sy- 

tern of industry, business, agriculture, and government can continue to be 

operated under the democratic method only when these three trends keep pace 
o 

with one another.” 

It is an obligation on the cixrriculum-maker to understand that 


1. Rugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III* John Dewey Society 

Chapter 2, p. 1J 

2. Rugg H. Ibid. p. 17. 











r 


( 


i4: 




n 


t 




r,-. 




t 





-li¬ 


the vast gaps between these three factors are responsible for the social 
problems of today. Forty or fifty years ago, the trend toward these pro¬ 
blems was forecast by thinkers on the frontier of thought. Somehow we 
must secure mass understanding of the root of our social ills. 

The curriculum-maker, Rugg demands, must know his culture and. 
he must admit its blemishes.^ For the year 1939* a clear recognition of 
American culture as a depressed society was necessary. That society must 
be recognized as failing to distribute purchasing power, as failing to 
develop vast creative human resources, as failing to have within itself the 
capacity to recuperate. There must be frank recognition of the great gap 
existing between capacity to produce and the actual niggardly standard of 
living. The curriculum planner must recognize that fundamental social arr¬ 
angements and the problems of the social order are different from those of 
the preceding decades. 

The educationist building a program must recognize that America 
does not represent the "best of all possible worlds". "But that she does 
have such vast potential resources that she could produce in the next gen¬ 
eration, a golden age of abundance, democratic behavior, and integrity of 
expression. The ingredients of such a magnificent human culture are at 

p 

hand. That idea must be made known to the American people". 

It is the task of the educator to educate so as to bring forth 
on the continent "the civilization of abundance, democratic behavior, and 
integrity of expression and of beauty which is now potentially available."3 
It is the job of the educator to help bring up a new generation to under- 


1. Rugg H. Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Dewey Society, p. 19 

2. Rugg H. Ibid. p. 21 

3. Rugg H. Ibid. p. 27 




if 

: '; o . 


••• ''. ' ^ '• ^ t - M.; -j casiu 




a 


■'Co. e.* 4 .- 



":o 



1 


1 ' «: 











- 78 - 


stand and to participate in the solution of the social problem# This so¬ 
cial problem presents the materials for a whole new program of education. 

The new education insists that young Americans must know the his¬ 
tory of the movements which brought about the problems of their own society. 
Careful historical study is necessary to learn what factors underly these 
problems - especially the psychological ideas of our own people and of their 
European forbears. 


RUGrGr AKD THE ARTS 

”The real aim of education is the all-round growth of the child. 
His entire being is to be developed, all his powers and their integration 
in advancing experience. The body is to be educated as well as the mind; 
the rhythmic capacities as well as the abstract intelligence. Individual¬ 
ity, the true outcome sought in education, is the harmonious integration of 
all these powers. Every increment of human experience is a delicate integr¬ 
ation of a great range of widely varying tr&its.. • 

"■The school strives to guarantee the successful preparation of the 
child to live with the society around him. On the other hand, it must pro¬ 
vide opportunities for drawing out to the maximum the creative capacities 
within him. 35 ^ 

The school curriculum must build a scale of creative activities. 
These will consist of skills, ideational material, and the arts. In the 
social, physical, and natural sciences, intellect, ideas, meanings, and 
generalizations occupy the key position* The arts are different. The dis¬ 
tinction is that of rhythm, feeling plays an important directive and inter¬ 
pretative role. 


1« Sugg H. & Shumaker A, 


The Child-Centred School , p* lk2 













'■t'Vj 






- 79 ~ 

11 Personality is an orchestration of rhythms* . .an integration of 
rhythmic action of several hundred bodily organs* • .We are assured that 
every activity* every occupational act or mode of living has its own rhythmic 
pattern.”^ 

Rhythm is the basis of individuality. Education should produce the 

attitude of assurance and feelings of personal significance. It must provide 

for the spontaneous and also the consciously controlled expression of impulses. 

"It is the integration of experience and not knowledge alone* which is coming 

2 

to b© recognised as the essential* w 

Proponents of the experential school are demanding the education 
of the mind and the body. Bhythm develops both the physical grace and the 
emotional stability which provide co-ordination of mind and body. The integr- 
ated life « expansion of individuality » the realization of personality - is 
possible when bodily* mental and emotional control is achieved. The new 
school should offer rhythmic training as an alternative to 88 competitive games 
with over-developed stars and passive audiences. 88 3 

,8 A well-integrated program will provide for the incorporation of 

( / 

rhythmic activities with music* dramatics* art* and the dance as well as with 

4 

the pageants and festivals scattered through the school year. 58 

The new education must provide music for everyone, declares Rugg.^ 

It was so in primitive society. In modern society, music is for the few. The 
child comes into society with genex*al modes of response. Music, to him* means 
all rhythmic self-expression - the dance, bodily activity* music from instru¬ 
ments, singing, drama* Music, with the other arts, has suffered in our mech- 

1* Rngg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Centred School , pp. 154-157 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibidr""pV i'fe'fe' 

3* Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 181 

4. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 181 

5. Rugg H. & Shumaker A* Ibid. p. 185. 






- go - 


anical civilization. It shows a lack of creative experience, the emphasis 
is on the mechanical, and upon imitation. Under creative guidance, music 
can become a new centre of integration for the school. 

Similarly, declares Rugg,^ genuine art has been crushed in the 
conventional school program. The traditionalist looks upon art as subject- 
matteruto-be-taught. This cannot be done. The creative artist has a vis¬ 
ion* He is a seer. He strives to catch a unitary glimpse of life. The 
conventional school seems to lack this understanding. Consequently, much 
time is spent in formal reproduction which crushes individuality and dis¬ 
courages originality. Standardization is essential in science but in art, 
it is fatal. Good teaching in art must invite room for the artist 8 ® indi¬ 
vidual feeling. 

p 

Every child, Rugg says, is a potential artist. He must be giv¬ 
en an opportunity for creative self-expression. Every child has the power 
to create. The school must provide the environment to stimulate creative 
self-expression. 

The old education, according to Rugg, was increasingly an educa- 

7 

tion of written words. 

^Those who organized the American public school system were un¬ 
der the spell of the education-a©-discipline regime. The child, a bundle 
of ignorance, was to be submitted to a system of imposed disciplines. He 
was to acquire certain skills determined in advance, certain items of sub¬ 
ject matter arbitrarily selected. He was to be drilled in the retention 
of arrays of isolated facts. The designers of this scheme were concerned 

1. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. The Child-Gentred School , p. 206 

2. Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid. pp. 22J-22S 

3* Rugg H, & Shumaker A. Ibid. p. 244. 







f 


■ 3 


L 





81 


with bringing to the young the heritage cf the race* The core of that heri¬ 
tage was the language arts and number systemfh^ 

The old system emphasized writing* grammar, spelling, punctuation, 
arithmetic, penmanship* Memorizing - copying « reproducing - imitating - 
provided the basis for a fault-finding approach to education. Artificial 
language games, filling in blanks, formal compositions were the tools used* 
The new school can produce creative writing which is the child®s own self- 
expression. The creative impulse demands tactful encouragement* It requi¬ 
res an environment rich in stimulating and dynamic child-like enterprises* 
Freedom of movement, of speech, of thought, are necessary to free oral ex¬ 
pression, 

“We find in the new school a large amount of free oral expression. 
From the earliest grades, children talk incessantly; in fact the visitor is 
sometimes dismayed at their unceasing chatter. Freedom of oral speech has 
distinct advantages, however* It leads in these schools to the development 
of ease, facility, charm, and power in written expression* One has only to 
overhear these children in discussion to realize their superiority in this 
respect over the average child of the fonnal school* Lucidity of expression, 
wide range of vocabulary, the ability to think to a point, to phrase an idea 
unhesitatingly in the face of opposition - these are not qualities which 
can be developed in an atmosphere of silence and restraint* These are not 
outcomes of direct methods of instruction so much as indirect results of 
“taking off the li&“* 

“In an atmosphere requiring conformity and submission, experience 


1* Rugg H, & Shumaker A 


The Child-Centred School , p* 24^ 




-S2- 

is limited to set patterns. Original thinking is discouraged! self-confid¬ 
ence is sacrificed to the need for following directions. The individual 
comes to depend upon outside authority! his belief in himself is undermined. 
He loses his inclination to display initiative, 

H For play is the child f s spontaneous self in action, , , • •There 
is a very close resemblance between the play spirit and creativeness, 

M The traditional schools, in limiting the range of literary endea¬ 
vour to that of assigned tasks, have taken out of writing the essential ele¬ 
ment which makes it interesting, stimulating, energy-releasing - namely, the 
fun of doing it, 1 2 ® 1 

Freedom her©, Pugg warns, does not mean anarchy#^ Disciplined ini¬ 
tiative, controlled freedom, an environment skillfully set up day by day, and 
the naturalness of the child are desired conditions to self-expression. There 
must be also hard work, searching self-criticism, tireless effort and contin¬ 
ual re-direction. 

Drama represents an integration of all the processes of self-expres¬ 
sion, The old school seised upon the drama as a stimulant to interest. Crea¬ 
tive self-expression was almost ignored. In the new school the students may 
write their own plays. Participation, initiative, draining-out of creative 
ingenuity and the power of effectual expression are developed by actual exp¬ 
ert ence. 

An urge to create, a flash of insight, mastery of techniques, the 
integrated creative process - these are the steps in the creative process, - 
Insight never appears fullgrown. Intellect plays a selective role. The 


1, Pugg H* & Shumaker A, The Child-Centred School , pp, 257-258 

2, Pugg H, & Shumaker A, 7bid7"pY S'fis ' ”* 






T 



- 

• . 



will is important as the driving force to work. 

The artist must acquire control of the toolss “The old school "be¬ 
gan with technique and ended with technique* The new school, aiming at crea¬ 
tive growth, introduces technique when it is needed* 

The introduction of a new program must not he used as an excuse for 

2 

low standards of achievement. Rugg insists on high standards* It is intense 
effort that educates. Mediocrity is the height of those who set low standards. 
Discontent, toil, criticism, persistence, critical evaluation are essential. 
Children as mere listeners stagnate? on the other hand, schools which do not 
insist on the highest possible realization are merely producing ^dabblers and 
surface scrapers of life* 91 - 1 2 3 


1, Rugg H, & Shumaker A, The Child-Centred Scho ol, p, 282, 

2, Rugg H, & Shumaker A, Ibid, pp, 282-283 

3, Rugg H. & Shumaker A. Ibid, pp, 284-285 













f 



( 




r 




i; 





CHAPTER X 


FUNDAMENTAL PSYCHOLOGICAL PRINCIPLE 

IN THE SOCIAL STUDIES 1 


Teaching consists in making it possible for young people to learn 
effectively* A mental atmosphere and a physical environment in which learn¬ 
ing goes on must he provided* Every agency must he used to stimulate the 
active participation of the pupil* The fundamental psychological question 
for the teacher isI how do pupils learn? Good teaching in the social stu¬ 
dies should make use of at least ten fundamental psychological principles i 

The First Principles The pupil learns only hy active assimilation, 
A pupil learns only hy assimilating the experiences which he en¬ 
counters* The slogans of the new school are “learning hy doing 11 ^ and “ac¬ 
tivities” * Guided growth in ability to reason is essential* The central 
concepts of the new education are experimentation, independent investigat¬ 
ion, critical discussion and creative self-expression* “The pupil learns 
only as he assimilates new meanings, new facts, and new principles into his 
previous experiences*“3 The memorization of encyclopaedic classifications 
which left a “cluttered up hodgepodge of isolated facts 51 must give way to 
the growth of understanding and tolerance which emerge as the result of prac¬ 
tice in thinking, reasoning, and generalizing* The arrangement of materials 
must he in thought-provoking form# The course must he organized around pro¬ 
blems* The pupil must he confronted with alternatives. He must he practi¬ 
sed in making decisions based on fact. He must think critically about so¬ 
cial problems* He must develop attitudes. 


1, Rugg H, & Mendenhall J. Teacher*s Guide for Changing Civilizations in the 

Modern World * Chapter 1* 

2* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. ibid, p, 4 
3* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J* Ibid. p. 4 











T 

■ 












. 


t ■ 


l - 




% 


' ! . 







The Second Principle s The situations of the school must he real 


and dramatic. 

The work of the social studies must he in the field of first-hand 
experiences. The pupil must deal with the concrete environment surrounding 
him. Vivid word and pictorial descriptions will help the child gain an app¬ 
reciation of remote regions. 

The Third Principle ? Learning proceeds through the gradual accumu¬ 
lation of experience# 

Learning is an inductive and cumulative process. Our concepts are 
built by experience and then modified by new experiences* Our stream of ex¬ 
periences shapes our understanding* The inductive method claims that young 
people will grow in the power of generalisation as they accumulate a wider 
background of meaning* The course in social studies must* therefore* con¬ 
sist of a graduated series of experiences* 

The Fourth Principle s Every avenue of learning should be employed. 

The course in the social studies must provide the child with a 
wealth of illustration* Vivid material, dramatic episodes, moving pictures, 
a wealth of pictorial material, open forums, individual research, artistic 
.work and graphic illustration will be used to facilitate assimilation* 

The Fifth Principle s Maximum growth in understanding* 

The activities of the course must be carefully planned so that the 
pupil will encounter frequently the major concepts and themes. Planned re¬ 
currence of the main concepts in varied settings will provide opportunity 
for growth of reflective thinking and critical judgment* 

The Sixth Principle: Systematic and economical practice on the 

skills* 

There are some facts which are so important and which will be used 











; : ■ '. 


■- v' U v;j l " 4, ' 



t 


t 


X 


r 




' 





86 


so often that they must he learned by systematic repetition devices® 

The Seventh Principle ; Learnings develop simultaneously® 

Learnings are may®.sided and complicated integrated matters® Even 
the smallest unit engages the student in a wide variety ©f learnings® 

The Eighth Principle s .The intensive study of a few things* 

There is such a tremendous mass of material available for study 
that some selection of material has to he made® A selection should he made 
on the basis of scientific studies of learning and by authorities in history* 
geography* government* economics, etc® Understanding grows more effectively 
through an intensive study of a few matters than through the superficial 
study of many® 15 There are millions of meanings and thousands of generaliza¬ 
tions® 1 ^ However* the grasping of a few hundred of these is sufficient for 
an understanding ©f modern life® The teacher should deal with those concepts 
which are most important and illustrate them with a wealth of interpretative 
material® 

The Ninth'Principle i Attention centred upon one thing at a time® 
Social studies should be organized in a series of definite units 
of work. In dealing with abstract matters* the students should concentrate 
attention on just on© important aspect at one time® 

. The Tenth Principle > Courses should be organised around understan¬ 
ding units. The question to be asked iss what facts* generalizations* and 
historical materials do young people need to know to understand the topic 
under consideration? Whatever industrial, economic, historical* geographic* 
commercial information is needed is included for consideration in an under¬ 
standing unit® 

In order to provide the concrete material by means of which these 







practices will be put into practice* Hugg has supplied? 

( 1 ) The Heading Book which contains an organized body of information* 

(2) The Workbook contains a comprehensive list of pupil activities* 

( 3 ) The Teacher J s Guide lists the psychological principles upon which 
teaching in the social studies must be based* 

The Hugg course in the social studies abounds with activities*^ 
Pupil experimentation, individual research, and creative self-expression are 
the central ideas of the new education* The social studies laboratory has re¬ 
placed the memorization of textbooks* In a sense the classroom will be the 
whole community* 

In the social studies laboratory the direction of class work should 
be in the hands of the pupils* Growth in co-operation, initiative, origina¬ 
lity, and responsibility are desirable outcomes of the social studies course® 
The teacher must see that these traits are practised in the group* The stu¬ 
dents should be mad© to feel responsibility for organizing pupil management 
of the class* The pupils might elect their class officers - Glass committees 
might be responsible for planning a day*s work and carrying it out* Pupils 
may act as chairmen of discussion periods, plan class excursions, care for 
the bulletin board, manage the school library, produce plays, etc. Open^ 
mindedness can be developed in open forum discussions in which students dis¬ 
cuss current controversial topics. Students can exchange questions and an¬ 
swers. Glass appraisal of the conduct of periods may lead to improvement 
for subsequent periods* An informal atmosphere of the laboratory should pre¬ 
vail and all students should take part in class activities according to indi¬ 
vidual interests and abilities. 


1, Hugg H. & Mendenhall J. The Teacher y s Guide for Changing Givilizations 

in the Modern World * Chapter III 









t 











f 



- 88 - 

The course should follow the real needs of pupils* Pupil initia¬ 
tive and originality should be encouraged* Students must be shown the nec¬ 
essity for wide reading interests* Individual research in the library is 


essential 



CHAPTER XI 


A DETAILED METHOD OE TEACHING THE SOCIAL STUDIES 


Harold Sugg has translated his psychology of teaching the social 
studies into a complete program of suggested teacher direction and pupil 
activity® 

The course is composed of fundamental themes, characteristic of 
economic life today® None of these should he omitted® Each unit of work 
in the Reading Book is designed to illustrate at least one basic theme* One 
unit on industrialization might illustrate,^ for example? 

(1) Influence of geography on ways of living® 

(2) Man’s increasing control over nature* 

( 3 ) The rise of industrialism® 

(4) The elicitation of natural resources® 

( 5 ) The building of a trading empire. 

( 6 ) The change from self-sufficiency to interdependence® 

(7) The trend toward specialization and standardisation® 

(S) The rise of the standard of living in industrial countries* 

(9) The development of mass production* 

(10) The concentration of people in cities* 

In illustrating fundamental themes historical and contemporary 
material is used* History is used to explain current life. Students will 
see today 1 s movements in clear historic light* 

Learning consists of learning meanings* Through reading, excurs¬ 
ions, and open^forum discussions pupils will add to their store of meanings. 
The Reading Book presents a wealth of dramatic episodes, narratives, bar 

1* Rugg H® & Mendenhall J* The Teacher’s Gui de for Changing Civilizations 

in the Modern World * p* 15 

- 89 - 








T 



>; 






-¥'■*' v 






90 - 


graphs# and time lines. By these means# and through the emphasis on these 
means by the teachers, a maximum growth of meanings is assured. 

With such a wealth of meanings developing, both teachers and pup- 
ils will need catch phrases or concepts.^ Each concept is a summarizing 
term containing a wealth of meaning with which we do our thinking. For ex¬ 
ample, the term 19 standard of living" contains literally hundreds of specific 
meanings. The development of meaning consists in building a rich experience 
in which delicate shades of understanding are recognized. The organization 
of concepts is fundamental to the proper teaching of this course. The in¬ 
tellectual frame-work of the course consists of concepts and to have a clear 
understanding of each problem the teacher must have a clear picture of the 
ten or twenty main concepts in any one unit* 

The understanding of the modes of living and world problems can 
never be secured on the basis of memorizing isolated facts. Understanding 
the relationship between facts is of the utmost importance. These relation¬ 
ships between concepts are known as generalizations. Generalizations sum up 
the characteristics of the various aspects of life. The student must ded¬ 
uce many of these for himself. Mastery of the material of the course is in¬ 
dicated when a pupil can illustrate themes, concepts, and generalizations. 
All the intellectual activities of the students should be directed to an un¬ 
derstanding of these. 

PUPIL ACTIVITIES 

The new course in the social studies must be a whole stream of 
pupil activities. Ageing is an active, assimilative process. The central 


1. Sugg H. & Mendenhall J 


Teacher r s Guide for Changing Civilization in 

the Modern World , pp# 18-19 












j; 







I 





ideas are pupil experimentation, individual research, and creative self-ex¬ 
pression* The idea of the social studies classroom as a laboratory must re¬ 
place the idea of a classroom in which words are memorized. In the widest 
conception the laboratory includes the whole CQBimunity. 

Participation in a wide variety of activities should develop in 
the pupil growth in co-operation, initiative, originality, and responsibi¬ 
lity. Maximum growth is possible only when the pupils assume an active 
share in the program. Eesponsibility for carrying on the work should be 
placed on the pupils® For example 

(1) The pupils should work out an organization of the class, elect 
its officers, appoint its committees® From these activities 
they will learn co-operation and self-management® Direction of 
work should come froBi the pupils* But where intelligent re¬ 
direction is essential to prevent wastage of time the teacher 
should supply it* 

(2) Each day*s work might be in charge of a separate committee of 
students. 

( 3 ) Students should act as chairmen of class-discussions and open- 
forums. The teacher may participate as a member of the class. 

(4) Student committees may have full responsibility for class 
excursions, care of the bulletin board, management of the 
library, production of plays, etc* 

(5) Students might introduce the current controversial topics which 
form the basis of discussion in the open-forum* Eelationship 


1* Hogg H. & Mendenhall J. Teacher r s Guide for Changing Civilizations 

in the Modern World -® pp. 21-22 










■ t 






/ 



between knowledge contained in the Reading Books and vital 
problems of today will be recognized and open-mindedness will 
be developed* 

(6) Students should be encouraged to ask one another Questions. 

This will stimulate pupil activity. 

(7) Self-critical examination by the pupils of the effectiveness 
of their own discussion periods is valuable* 

(8) Each student should be encouraged to follow his particular 
interest. 

The classroom should carry on with the informal atmosphere of the 
laboratory.^* The pupils will alternate class discussions, exchange of ideas 
in open-forum, group activities with individual work projects* Spontaneous 
activities are desirable* Pupil initiative should be encouraged* A flex¬ 
ible program capable of meeting needs as they arise is essential. 

Maximum growth in understanding will be aided when the teacher 
plans his course outline and suggested activities* Riigg recommends his work¬ 
book as offering a variety of individual and group activities.^ The work¬ 
book plans for the “planned recurrence 5 * of such activities as black board 
exercises, the use of the bulletin board, excursions, exhibits, dramatiza¬ 
tion, debates, open-forums, committee projects, tests, map exercises, car¬ 
toons graphs, reference books, scrapbooks, reports, etc. 

Careful planning of a program of work is essential in the social 
studies. Chaos will result from lack of a p^an. The workbook provides a 
stimulating list of things to do. The teacher and the class may make choices. 


1* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Teacher r s Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World * p. 23 
2. Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Ibid, pp 2y2J 











93 


It is not expected that every exercise will be attempted* 

The Reading Book* the Workbook, and the Teacher's Guide are not pre¬ 
scribed by Rugg for slavish imitation.^ They are comprehensive outlines of 
activities, many of which are entirely optional. The course in the social 
studies should spring out of the needs of the pupils. The pupils should not 
be presented with a ready made course. They should feel that the social stu¬ 
dies courses are their courses* Pupils should be encouraged to recognize the 
importance of studying the factors which have produced the modern world. The 
Reading Book is to be regarded as only one voluminous outline around which 
they will assemble much new material. The Reading Book contains summaries of 
concepts, generalizations and themes. The pupil should be encouraged to supp¬ 
lement this material with a wide course in related reading. 

In Changing Countries and Changing Peoples the course is organized 

p 

around twenty-nine problems* Each problem is introduced by two or three 
central questions which the student is encouraged to answer for himself. Ba¬ 
sic information will be found in the Reading Book, The pupil should be led 
to skim the chapter to discover the broad themes, chief concepts and generali¬ 
zations. The student®s reading will be guided by the two or three central 
questions aforementioned. When the pupil has made a thorough mastery of the 
information the tests in the Workbook may be used in a variety of ways. The 
tests have been designed to bring out the chief concepts and generalizations 
necessary to an understanding of the problem. As well as testing the mast¬ 
ery of content the tests focus attention upon facts and principles. They 


1. Rugg H, & Mendenhall J. 

2, Rugg E. & Mendenhall J. 


Teacher's Guide for Changing Civilization in 

the Modern World , p. 2J 
Ibid. pp. 28-29 







I 


r 


# 





, : - 





« 

: 

'£ 

' 


... i 





' 



- 






i 


j ‘vji 




I ; if iw 


t" 


; ■ $ 




f. 'V 







, 


. 





- 94 - 


are constructed in order to allow the student tc spend most of his time think¬ 
ing rather than writing* The tests should he used to stimulate class discuss¬ 
ions, in which pupils defend and reject various points of view. These tests 
should he scored regularly in order to stimulate thoroughness of learning, 
further achievement, and to develop confidence, and a sense of personal res¬ 
ponsibility* Tests may he scored hy either students or teacher hut in either 
event the students should he given an opportunity to defend or clarify perso¬ 
nal points of view. Occasionally the teacher should announce high, low, and 
middle scores in order that students may compare their own class ranking. 

This should not he done so often as to discourage the slow pupils* 

In their study of history the students should secure a grasp of a 
sequential development of events. There is a definite need for knowledge of 
the chief historical movements and trends. The Workbook suggests the use of 
time lines to help the pupil secure a grasp of historical development. Time 
lines may he used to locate important events or they may he used to compare 
individual events within a period. Chronological development should he 
shown often hy the teacher and hy the pupils on rapidly drawn blackboard 
time lines. It is important to have the student form the habit of entering 
chronological events on a master time line. These lines orient the student 
in respect to time. 

It is important for an understanding of world problems that the 
student secure a definite mastery of essential location facts. The Heading 
Book contains maps related to the topic under consideration. Corresponding 
exercises in the Workbook provide the pupil with map exercises. The pupil*s 
attention should he concentrated upon a few map locations. The teacher will 
provide adequate map work from the constant use of globes, wall maps, and. 




















: Cui. o 


* t 


. 

■ '. ' 


- 95 - 


special maps available* 

No activity in the social studies is more important than the open 
forum, says Rugg. * 2 3, The Workbook suggests an open-forum for every basic pro¬ 
blem in the course# The open-forum offers the pupil practice in thinking on 
his feet. Through practice in thinking with people he will develop tolerant 
understanding. Attitudes of open-mindedness, suspended judgment, and will¬ 
ingness to listen develop from the frequent interplay of minds. Cool dis¬ 
cussions, as the means of solving problems, will be recognized as basic. 

The student will come to understand many points of view and he will come, in 

open-forma discussions, to the realization that no one person is always 

2 

right, that no person is infallible. Sugg claims that his Workbooks, by 
the leading nature of their headings, spotlight key-principles of open-forum 
discussion. Tolerance is portrayed to the student as demanding open-minded¬ 
ness, and critical-mia&edness. Tolerance is outlined as an attitude of mind 
that is receptive to the ideas of others but only after these ideas have 
been scrutinized ruthlessly. Open-forum discussions may lead to additional 
reading by a number of the pupils. 

While Bugg*s Reading Books treat many subjects comprehensively, he 
insists that a great amount of additional reading should be attempted.^ There 
is need to build an extensive classroom library. One of the chief purposes 
of the work in the social studies is to develop a permanent interest in read¬ 
ing. This gathering of information is almost indispensable to the work of 
the social studies. It will be gathered by committees which will then make 
the information available to the class as a whole* 

1* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Teacher 1 a Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World , pp. 32-33 

2. Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Ibid, p, 33 

3 . Rugg H, & Mendenhall J. Ibid* pp* 33~*3^ 






> . tT 




- 96 - 

The "book, Changing Countries and Changing Peoples, should he cov¬ 
ered in approximately 90 lessons during the second semester of Grade seven*^ 

FACTS IN SOCIAL STUDIES hy RUGG 

Rugg r s explanation in his Teacher*s Guides of the use of facts in 
social studies provides one of the features of his work in the field of the 
social studies* 

The old school, he avers, too often forced a parrot-like memorisa¬ 
tion of large numbers of unrelated facts.- The students soon forgot the pro¬ 
saic lists. In the new school we must deal with facts in a new way* 

In social studies the students should develop an integrated point 
of view. Material from many fields of study must he used simultaneously* 

In a typical problem, geographic, economic, political, and sociological facts 
will he used* And each of these types will he further subdivided into curr¬ 
ent and historical classifications* 

There are two kinds of facts - specific and general. The pupil 
needs to know both kinds since he learns the general facts from the specific 
facts* 

There are also subjective and objective facts. Sach kind plays an 
important role in learning. Subjective facts consist of pictures, cartoons, 
points of view and secure student interest. Objective facts convey exact 
data* Students should learn to demand effective evidence. 

It is not possible to retain all the facts presented in a problem* 
Certain facts of location, certain concepts, certain generalizations are 


1* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Teacher*s Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World. p» 35 

2* Rugg H* & Mendenhall J. Ibid. Chapter IV. 





1 


' ' £ 





~ 97 - 

more important than others. Students should concentrate on the facts which 
the well-informed citizen should know, A number of relatively inconsequen¬ 
tial facts might be cited to prove a point and then forgotten. Specific 
facts should be learned permanently when they are basic. Dates which denote 
the beginning of an era would be learned permanently. Facts to be retained 
permanently should be learned in their relationships rather than in isolat¬ 
ion. 

Attempts have been made to apply scientific methods to research 
in the field of the social studies. Social problems are difficult to solve 
because the situations are complex * sources of information are unreliable* 
the knowledge of the observer may be inadequate and his attitude may not he 
one of open-mindedness. Some facts in social studies are only true relativ¬ 
ely since we can only approximate the truth in some cases. In social studies 
opinion must be tentative since facts are changing. Some facts are difficult 
to ascertain and stories are often based on incomplete evidence. Facts are 
obscured often by the partiality of the reporter. 

It is important that students understand these difficulties. They 
should be ready t© examine questions from many points of view. They should 
be made to look upon the possible existence of prejudice and bias in their 
own thinking. They should be stimulated in the direction of impartial 
thinking. 


IUTBODUOIgG THE TEHM f 5 WO W 1 

Each teacher will discover those activities which will interest 

1* Rugg H, & Mendenhall J, Teacher’s Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

The Modern World , Chapter 7. 




























: i ^ 


, 




his particular class. The course in the social studies should he introdu¬ 
ced by placing a problem before the pupils. For example* "Some Problems 
which the American People Face as World Citizens” may be discussed. The 
Workbook presents a test on this topic. This test is not a test of infor¬ 
mation. The purpose is to interest the students in the work they will do 
throughout the term. It will demonstrate important problems* remind them 
of varying views on economic, political, and social matters and also demon¬ 
strate the difficulty of understanding different civilizations. 

The class discussion following the test is the most important 
part of the introduction. The teacher should caution the students that 
many aspects of the test are controversial. Students should soon learn 
to understand that careful study of facts should replace emotional prejud¬ 
ice as a foundation for opinions held. The introductory discussion should 
show them the need for deliberate discussion and critical investigation. 

They should be reminded that prejudice is widespread in the magazines and 
newspapers from which they get information. 

The Workbook asks the student three questions which he should 
constantly ask himself!^ 

(1) What are my own prejudices? 

(2) What is the truth? 

( 3 ) What is my authority for my viewpoint? 

In almost every problem in the Workbook, the student is reminded 
of the need for facts! 

M Why do you think so ?’ 1 

"Facts not fiction.” 


1* Pugg H. & Mendenhall J. The Teacher*s Guide for Changing Civilization 

in the Modern World , p. 50 












’) < v "! *. r). r 5 • >\ ' \ . i ; \'AU 












, 










99 


H Have you considered fairly all sides of the questionf M 

"What are the real reasons for your point of view!” 

"Have you respected the points of view of others?" 

The Reading Book itself attempts impartial presentation of the 
development of each country and its conditions. The constant purpose is 
to have students Build attitudes Based upon understanding. A chief goal 
of the course is the avoidance of unthinking and impassioned partisanship. 
Clare must Be taken to have the pupils examine their own points of view. 
They will learn to look upon opinions as tentative. They will replace 
fiction with fact. 

The teacher should try to create sympathetic appreciation of 
each of the earth r s civilizations. Pupils, like their elders, tend to 
overestimate the importance of their own civilization. The pupil should 
Be made aware that most other people love their respective civilizations 
in spite of their differences from our own. Pupils should Be made to un¬ 
derstand that most civilizations have made important contriButions to 
world v/elfare. 

As the teacher surveys the Reading Book he will notice that st¬ 
ress is laid upon the ways in which people live. This is a departure from 
the usual practices in history, geography, and civics. Throughout the 
course emphasis is placed upon conditions under which people are living, 
their ways of thinking and feeling. The study should Be focussed upon the 
age-long struggle for existence of the common man. The teacher should not 

oBscure this study Behind insistence on memorization of specific facts re 
rulers and location of cities. 





■ • : 

■ j 


' ' ' 

r , 

l v ' - ! l ■ • ’: • 




n ■ 







- i : 









■ 



r 







- 100 - 


Rugg supplies^* & series of interesting questions which the teacher 
may keep "before the pupil in the study of each civilization, 

(1) Is this country an agricultural or an industrial country? To 
what extent has the Industrial Revolution changed its civiliz¬ 
ation? 

(2) How does the standard of living of this country compare with 
that of the United States and other countries? 

( 3 ) How far are the people self-sufficient? How dependent are 
they? 

(4) What are the chief differences and the chief similarities be¬ 
tween the industrial and agricultural countries studied? 

(5) What are the distinctive features of this civilization and 
its people? 

( 6 ) What is there about the way of living of this people which 
I would like to see in my own country? 

These questions will help the student to see merits in other civi¬ 
lizations* They will help develop an attitude of open-mindedness and help 
him to evaluate modes of living* Every day the teacher should attempt to 
combat prejudice and unthinking intolerance. 

SUGGESTIONS FOR TMOHIHG PROBLM ONE 

The conventional course in geography undertakes a brief study of 
each of the seventy or more countries of the earth* The pupil f s attention 
is scattered* He faces a maze of regions and facts. In the Rugg Reading 

1# Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. • Teacher T s Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World * p# 57 






- 

- ; v' -i ■ ! 

x 

0 • 

- . : ' 


C) 







' 

■ 

: 





■ 

■r - ■ ■ 













- 101 - 


books, for example, in Changing Countries and Changing Peoples, attention is 
concentrated upon important representative civilizations# The aim is to 
break the course into easily comprehensible units. It is a problem to find 
materials that will enrich the lives of the students and give them an under¬ 
standing of the world in which they live. Slides, films, stereographs, and 
maps will give the students graphic understanding of other parts of the world* 
These materials will be found especially valuable in securing motivation, and 
for review purposes. 

I3MD3BBSTAHDIN& THE IMPORTANT CONCEPTS 

In regard to Unit of Work II, Rngg demonstrates^ in the Teacher*s 
Guide, how important concepts should be treated. His demonstration is cited 
as a sample of one possible method, 

(1) The Narrow- World of All Peonle - The teacher should emphasize that 
the people were living in isolated and independent communities 
where the nations of Germany, Prance, England, Russia, etc., exist 
today* 

(2) The Low Standard of Living of most People - Sraph&sis here should 
be on the poverty of the peasants, laboriousness of work, inade¬ 
quacy of tools, and smallness of the farms* Contrast this with 
the luxury of the lords* Stress the sharp division into classes* 

The students should not be expected to learn all the details of 
ways of living. They might illustrate the way of life by using 
the concepts above mentioned. 

( 3 ) The Self-sufficient Community Life - Make clear to the pupil that 

1* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Teacher^ Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World, pp. 6^1-Sg 








. 



X 


t 


i' ' 


X 

r 






- 102 - 


each Community was largely self-sufficient. There was, however, 
increasing specialization within each community. 

(4) Specialization of Labor - Even in 1100 there was some speciali¬ 
zation among regions. The Ear East produced silks and spices* 

Europe produced wool, hides, and glassware. 

(5) The Bole of Exploration in Enlarging the Small World*- The Crusades, 
the travels of monks and traders in the Hear East and in Asia 
"brought contact and trade between Europe and Asia. Stress the men 
of science with their invention of clocks, compasses, telescopes 
which made long-distance navigation safer. The invention of the 
printing press aided the spread of knowledge throughout the known 
world. 

(6) The Central Importance of Trade - The concept of trade recurs very 
often. Trade played a part in the self-sufficiency of the manor. 

The desire for trade led explorers into unknown seas. Trade led 
the merchants of Europe to undertake hazardous overland journeys. 
These points should "be stressed. 

(7) The Prevalence of Handicrafts - A list of the crafts from the 
Reading Book will "be used to demonstrate the widespread special¬ 
ization of labor. The names of these crafts should not be memor¬ 
ized, The students should be made to understand the laborious¬ 
ness of work without engines and machines, 

(8) The Parallel Growth of Crafts, Trade, and Towns - In the middle 
ages there were a few large cities such as London and Paris. 

There were medium-sized towns also. These cities and towns were 
centres of trade just as similar non-modern centres exist today 







' « ■ 


i.C: 









o v.v';vj; 





- 103 


in China and in India. They developed as handicrafts and trade 
developed. 


TKB FIRST SUMMARY 1 

The students must grow in the ability to organize material. The 
pupil needs practice in summarizing units of the course. This is a diffi¬ 
cult task for seventh grade pupils. They will need guidance. The teacher 
should comment on key points and organize the class suggestions in a syste¬ 
matic outline showing the relationships among the concepts discussed. The 
students may write and produce a story of a day in the life of the Middle 
Ages. 

2 

Rugg insists that teaching principles are important. During the 
discussion of the means of emphasizing the key points in problem II he 
marizes important teaching principles? 

(1) The pupil should receive systematic practice in the interpretation 
of episodes# The units contain many episodes# But the pupils 
are liable to enjoy the episodes and thereby miss the main princi¬ 
ples# The students must have opportunity to practise interpretation 
of episodic material. Blackboard lists might be prepared to show 
the relationship between episodes and concepts. Episodes are in¬ 
cluded to provide dramatic background for understanding. Perman¬ 
ent retention of details of episodes is unnecessary. 

(2) Suggestions for using the historical material# 

The historical background material should be read rapidly. It 
should be discussed for interpretation of our present problems. 

1# Rugg H. & Mendenhall J» Teacher f s Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World, p. fcs 
2. Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. l!bid. pp. 69—70 







' 




' ' ' 




J 



- 104 - 


The reader should he thoroughly aware of the startling contrast 
between pre - and post - industrial revolution conditions* 

Dramatic episodes are used to provide a vivid impression of 
modes of living in different epochs* 

(3) The treatment of factual details. 

Many details are included in the social studies course. Many of 
these details will he discussed, critically® The details are 
important in supplying the basis for concepts and generalizations® 
Most of these specific facts are not permanently retained after 
use® 

(4) The systematic use of graphic material* 

The Workbook has been planned to provide systematic, practice in 
the use of time lines, photographs, maps, informal location of 
places, interpretation of cartoons, pictographs, line graphs, 
bar graphs* 

(5) The use of reviews* 

In each review the manner in which the chief factors contributed 
to the standard of living of the people should be stressed. The 
teacher should be certain that the pupils see the relationships 
between the factors. 

(6) Supplementary reading should be arranged for rapid workers. 

Pupils should read magazine and book articles in connection with 


every unit 


- 

; 






, 

f 


* 






■ 


■! ’’ ' 








- 105 - 


A LIST OF TEACH IMG KEMINSSaS 1 

1* Keep in mind the psychological basis of the course, 

2# Conclude every unit with an outline summary of important 
points, with a review relating it to previous units, and 
with a preview relating it to future units. 

3* Encourage activities that develop pupil initiative and 
originality. 

4. Utilize the principle of historical and contemporary 
contrasts* 

5. Encourage systematic class discussion of key ideas illu¬ 
strated by the graphic method. 

6. Use the blackboard for developing outlines, summaries, 
diagrams and pupil responses. 

7. Employ large wall maps when they will contribute meanings. 

g. Use large outline maps to fix important locations in the 

minds of the pupils. 

9. In almost every problem refer to the large blackboard time 
line in course of construction. 

10. Have the pupils learn, preferably in relationship, only 
a few important facts. 

11. Have pupils draw up in their own language the chief gen¬ 
eralizations in a problem. 

12* G-ive pupils occasional opportunity in making of outlines. 


1* Rugg H. & Mendenhall J. Teachers Guide for Changing Civilizations in 

the Modern World, pp. 177-173 












( ,t 




/ J V 




- 


■ .. 7 , 1 '" 






* 




* 


. 

1 ■ .i. . ' 





- io6 - 


13* In open-forum discussions encourage habits of open-minded¬ 
ness and of critical-mindedness. 

l4* To provide clarity use a large variety and number of 
illustrations* 

15* A combination of history and geography will often illumin¬ 
ate a contemporary condition* 

16. Encourage pupils to read interesting and critical newspapers, 
magazines, and books, 

17 * Relate the social studies to the life of the community by 
making many excursions* 


We present the foregoing as a sample of the means suggested 
by Harold Rugg and his associate, to develop understanding in the social 


studies 




* - ' ' ' 

« 







* 








1 


- 


.... 




; 


















CHAPTER XXI 


WHAT DO PUPILS GET OUT OP THE RUGG- COURSE? 

By B. R. Buckingham 
In w The Rugg Course in the Classroom” 

w It is unfortunately true that new methods must often win their 
way to acceptance "by means that are really inappropriate* The real answer 
to the question: What do pupils get out of the Rugg course is to he found 
in their ability to understand problems, and their emotional attitude to¬ 
ward problems. Yet in many quarters the Rugg course has been judged by 
quite other standards; it has been put to test in the only thing which 
some of the other courses pride themselves upon. It has been tested by 
the knowledge which pupils possess of specific facts in geography and 
history. In the Rugg course a knowledge of such facts is a by-product. 

We do not mean that such facts are not learned; far less, that they are 
unimportant. We mean that they are not learned in greatest measure by 
seeking them directly. Place the child in the position where he must use 
facts for the accomplishment of some purpose that he considers worthy. 
Then the facts will be acquired in greater number and with greater per¬ 
manency than will be the case when the child is required to learn them 
as such. 

f, For this reason the Rugg course, although it does not place 
the acquisition of facts at the center of its effort, nevertheless comes 
off well, when facts alone are under consideration. The evidence for 
this is impressive. Hot a few people who have introduced the course - 
some of them with misgivings as to the results so far as history, geo- 

1 . Buckingham B. R. The Rugg Course in the Classroom, pp. 69-72 


- 107 - 










' * ' 

■ •< ■ 


5 : :.. 

- ■ - - - : 


. 

< 

• ' 

* 

. ... . , 

■ 

. 

■ " ■■■ : I.wcn:, : v:(: 

* 

■ ' » ' ■' }A< 


■ ■ 

* 

' 

* 

• ■ F ‘ ' ■:" v 

■ 

' 


W '•’■i- . - ■ ' .* ! . r' . ' 

< 

, '■ ; >: i'..v,= rr:,/;:: ■ , 


J.$*zz Ti:>& ’ r v,’. ! :c tl:3 V *x€ tr.:& o 

"i/.,; 1 1 i j-: b*} r\;^z v'<), 

< 1 J, • * ' 

. 

,' r , r ' 

* ? ■ 

v ■ ‘ ' •' ' ' . ! ' \ 

4 

' 

. 


log - 


graphy, and civics were concerned - have taken the trouble to apply 
standardized tests in these subjects to the children who had "been study¬ 
ing the Rugg course® .Any lingering doubts which they may have had have 
"been dissipated by the scores which the children have made on these tests. 

"In the following paragraphs we shall refer very "briefly to the 
results of some of these tests. In most instances the number of pupils 
involved was not large. But the consistency of the scores, coming as they 
do from widely scattered districts and reflecting various conditions, have 
the same convincing effect as a systematic inquiry carried ov.t on the "basis 
of thousands of cases. 

AOHIEVEMENO) III GEOGRAPHY, HISTORY, AND CIVICS 
The Sacramento Study. This study was conducted in a highly com¬ 
petent manner "by James IP. Bursch, Director of Research and Student Person¬ 
nel. About 150 students in the low ninth grade were given the Kepner test 
of "background in social studies. Some of the pupils had had the Rugg course 
in the seventh and eighth grades; others had had the materials in the reg¬ 
ular state course of study. The two groups were equal in learning ability. 
The Rugg pupils surpassed the state-course pupils 56 to 53 (medians to the 
nearest whole number). Director Bursch, after investigating the variability 
of the scores, says; "We can say with reasonable certainty that there are 
79 chances in 100 that the difference in favor of the students having used 
the Rugg material is greater than 0 8 " 

The Wood River (Ill.) Study. Superintendent G. A. Smith gave 
five well-known standardized tests to about 60 pupils in three sections who 
had completed the first four volumes and workbooks of the Rugg course* The 
superiority of the Rugg children to the published standards was remarkable. 









. 

. 

r 

44 



. 




, 





. 



* 



- ' . ■ 

. 

* 



i 

- 










■ 

“ - 



■ 







- 109 


TABLE III 

achievement of pupils at wood river after studying- the first 


FOUR VOLUMES OF THE HUGO COURSE 


Test 


Standard 


Class Scores of Three 
Rugg Sections 


Junior American History, 

Form A 3^ 

Public School Achievement, 

Battery B, History 36 

Benny-Nelson American His¬ 
tory, Form A 6l 

Burton Civics, Form A 3$ 

Brown-Moody Civics, Form A 9^ 


66, 54, 6l 
38, 39, 43 

134, 128, 13? 
51, 52, 46 
107, 104, 100 


In this connection Superintendent Smith has this to says "It is 
interesting to note that the median score of the pupils of this city in each 

of the five tests administered was considerably higher than the standard 

. v 

median score, although these tests were made to fit material of the more 
traditional nature# So far as one is able to judge, the pupils who took 
the test were comparable in every ether way to those from whom the standard 
results had been derived. The fact that the scores of these pupils are so 
high may be traced directly to the Rugg social-science books which have been 
used for seventh and eighth-grade work." 

Other Studies. One of the most careful experiments was made at 
Ventura, California. The progress in geography over a semester was measured 
for 175 pupils who studied Rugg*s first volume as compared with the progress 
of a group of equally capable pupils who studied a regular geography course. 
Progress was measured by using two forms of a well-known standardized test. 
The pupils who studied Rugg made more than twice as much improvement during 
the semester as the pupils who took a regular geography course. 

In certain school systems city-wide testing is a regular policy. 
In these cities, the effect of the adoption of any new plan is closely 











< { 












' ■ ■ ■ 








r 




: ' c: < 

■ 

- 

. 

•. 

- 




- 110 - 


v/atched. For example, at Clinton, Iowa (about 25,000 inhabitants), where 
the Rugg course Y/as introduced in the seventh and eighth grades as soon as 
it v/as published, the results over a period of three years in history and 
geography, according to a popular standard test, were found to be at or 
above the test norms in every one of the twelve possible cases(two grades, 
two subjects, three years)• At Webster Groves, Missouri, as at Clinton, 
Iowa, a policy of continuous standardized testing is in operation. At the 
last report 6SJ children who were studying Rugg in the eighth and ninth 
grades were in general at or above the test norms in history and geography. 

Leaving statistics out of account, we note in particular the 
following statementss 

M The children using the Rugg books in the seventh and eighth 

I' < 1 v 

grades scored very high in history and geography. 11 - Superintendent Samuel 
H. White, Windsor South District, Chester, Vermont. 

After two successive years of standardized testing of eighth- 
grade pupils using Rugg, n in both instances, the results have been most 
gratifying, proving that the students attain the required knowledge and, 
in many cases, much more. . . - Marguerite Sadler, social-science tea¬ 

cher, Garfield School, Olympia, Washington. 

H We have found that children will pass the Rev; York State Regents 
Examinations after using these books.” - Marguerite Stockberger, State 
Teachers College, Buffalo, Wev; York. 

”The geography scores for grade seven were l4 points above the 
standard norms- Acting Superintendent Barnard J. Davis, Hillsdale, 
Michigan. 

After giving a much-used battery of standardized tests, u we were 


; 






- Ill - 


surprised and delighted to find that the pupils in our junior high school 
were above the median in civil government, history, and geography,’’-Super- • 
intendent Irvin B. Collins, Roundup, Montana. 

End-of-year testing in geography u showed the average for the Bugg 
class as 97* The norm would he about 89» H “ Mabel A. Williams, geography 
teacher, Barnstable Junior High School, Hyannis, Massachusetts. 

After testing at the beginning, middle, and end of the year, M The 
results, as I recall them, were approximately this: in geography the average 
for the class was 12 points above the norm for that grade and month; in 
history it was approximately 10 points above the norm; in civics the class 
was only 5 points above, B - W. S. Hern, formerly superintendent of schools, 
Colville, Washington, 

H Every test we have been able to give, indicates that our pupils 
(using the Bugg course) know just as much history and just as much geography 
as they would if they were taking them in separate courses. 11 - Superintendent 
A. G. Yawberg, Berea, Ohio. 

In knowledge of geography, history, and civics, children taught by 
the Bugg Method, equal or surpass‘children taught these subjects directly. 
This is as certain as most facts in experimental education. It has been 
proved by both formal and informal testing in so many places that it may be 
accepted with confidence. It is unnecessary for us to dwell further upon 
the outcomes of the Bugg course. While they are not to be sought primarily 
in facts learned, nevertheless facts are learned, and learned well. There 
is no mystery about this to those who understand the psychology of learning. 
The facts are known because they are acquired in connections and because 
they are used purposefully. The larger outcomes of the course are no less 


















/'■s 





' 

* 



- 112 - 


certainly attained* They do not lend themselves to statistical statement. 
They are, however, found in better thinking and finer attitudes. One city 
superintendent in writing to another in regard to the Eugg course, tells 
his friend the following incidents 11 A certain distinguished educator visited 
an eighth-grade section in our Junior High School last year v/here they were 
carrying on the Bugg program. After spending an hour in the room, he re¬ 
turned to my office and said, 5 Those pupils were discussing intelligently 
and enthusiastically the social problems under consideration, with an abil¬ 
ity surpassing that of my college sophomores I* 11 


1 




CHAPTER XIII 


A CRITICISM OF RUGG»S WORK 


HJGG.iS GIGANTIC LTOERTAKIHG 


In collaboration with his associates, Harold Rugg Hast 

(1) Developed a philosophy of education. 

(2) Explained a psychology of education# 

( 3 ) Constructed a complete course in the social studies from the 
elementary grades to the high school level# 

(4) In addition, he has written a number of hooks on teaching 
methods and on modern society. 

Harold Rugg has worked at a tremendous task. It is probably fair 
to say that he, more than any other person, has been active in the promotion 
of real democracy through the establishment of a new curriculum in the social 
studies based on a relatively sound selection of the principles of the new 
education# 

Rugg has provided a full definition of democracy#^* First of all, 
democracy must be based on consent and real consent is based upon intelli¬ 
gent understanding# This intelligent understanding is to be won^not by 
memorising the word story of the past, but rather by growing in understand¬ 
ing of civilisation by participating in group activities# Understanding is 
based upon growth* Habits of activity gained, will form the foundation for 
participation in democracy# To Rugg, democracy means an active, intelli¬ 
gent, participation of all the minds in the community, each contributing 
up to its capacity and governing the community under the leadership of the 
best minds in it#^ Real democracy includes economic democracy along with 

1* Rugg H* Democracy and the Curriculum, Yearbook III, John Dewey Society# 
Foreword X - XI ' " "" ~~~ ' * 

2# Rugg H. The Great Technology# pp. 199-203 

_„ _ . _ ... _ 











1 






. . , 



< . 



- 114 - 


the political* Real democracy harnesses technology to produce and distribute 
abundance* Such a goal does give real meaning to democracy. 

Pew educators have undertaken to build a complete social studies 
course on the theme of active, informed democracy. Rugg has organized in¬ 
formation basic to successful democratic participation. He has outlined a 
teaching method which will help to build democratic understanding and demo¬ 
cratic participation. He has underlined these efforts by carrying his cam¬ 
paign for real democracy beyond the schools and into society. Few men have 
been so active on behalf of basic democracy. 

Today, two philosophies of education are actively promoted. The 
advocates of the aristocratic tradition would divorce education from practi¬ 
ced living and the core of the curriculum would be the classics. St. John’s 
College at Annapolis, and the University of Chicago are advocates of this 
view. 

Dr. Robert M. Hutchins, President of the University of Chicago, 


sayss 

H If one college and one university - and only one - are willing 
to take a position contrary to the prevailing American ideology and suffer 
the consequences, then conceivably over a long period of time, the character 
of our civilization may change. 19 ^ 

The followers of Dewey would secure the Liberal education through 
a study of the problems of contemporary civilisation. Books, they say, provide 
only one medium of learning®^ Education must train for citizenship. 

It is well for the forces of democracy that the proponents of edu¬ 
cation for democracy, are led by a person of Dr. Harold Rugg’s ability and 
activity. 


1. Fines B. Democratic Education, pp. 1-5 

2. Rugg H. The Great Technology* pp. 245-247 





« 


. 
















* ' 










* 










, 

' 




' 










, 






. 


' - • ' ' •' . ’■ 








- 


. c 








* 









■ 
















* 












- 115 - 


RUGG* S ANALYSIS OF SOCIETY 

Rugg* s political and economic opinions which we have examined, 
were written during the world depression of the hungry thirties* It is 
probably fair to state that the political and economic opinions he expressed 
comprise a selection of the ctirrent panacaeas of the period* Rugg boldly 
placed the blame for poverty on those who control the machine of production 
and distribution* He roundly condemned uncontrolled capitalism and made 
a dramatic plea for the introduction of the scientific method to the fields 
of economics and politics* He denies socialism*** but demands a far-reaching 
control of economic forces* His searching analysis and utter condemnation 
of depression capitalism, coupled with his recommendations for the methods 
of science in social reconstruction, indicate a trend toward the acceptance 
of as much public ownership and public control as proves necessary to pro¬ 
vide abundance®^ Rugg*s summary of the weaknesses of capitalism and the 
course of reconstruction may prove valuable in the future* 

Closely linked with Rugg*s analysis of society in his insistenc©3 
that controversial topics be discussed in school in order to bring a sense 
of reality to the discussion in the social studies* Most forward looking 
educationalists will agree that if the product of the schools is to build a 
solution to our recurring economic and social problems then an understanding 
of real problems is necessary to provide capacities for the solution of future 
problems* And insofar as the school avoids the problems of the real world 
today, it is failing to fit our maturing students to solve the social prob¬ 
lems which they will face as adults* 

1* Ragg H* The Great Technology * p* 1S6. 

2. Rugg K. T?5at~Men May Understand* Foreword XIV - XV 

3* Rugg H. Ibid. pp. 245-246 







} 




i 1 ■; 








C 





- ii6 - 


BUGG ORGANIZES THE SOCIAL STUDIES 

AROUND PROBLEMS 

Rugg has organized his social studies course around problems« 

Win. A. Brownell, Professor of Sduc. Psychology, at Duke University, warns 
that "a supposed problem situation cannot be assumed to constitute a true 
problem situation to all learners 1 11 There should be caution for Bugg and 
his associates in this statement. It is probable that many of their con-* 
cepts and generalizations will not constitute problems for the students. 
There is real danger that Bugg’ s Beading Books will be regarded as "just 
more textbooks" touched up with new techniques® 

On the other hand, both Bugg and Brownell regard problem-solving 
ability, as a growth rather than an abstract technique. Both agree that 
meanings and understandings essential to problem-solving cannot be given 
to children - they must develop throxigh practice. Both agree that solutions 
to problems should be generalized. Dr. Bugg and Professor Brownell agree 
that a problem-solving attitude, an inquiring mind is desirable and is pos¬ 
sible of development. In the organisation of his course in the social stu¬ 
dies, Bugg has attempted to meet Professor Brownell’s demand that relation¬ 
ships should be graded within the understanding of the child, and that 
problem-solving should be attempted in a variety of exercises. Both agree 
that problems must be solved through understanding rather than by change. 

PUGG’S VIEW OP ACTIVE ASSIMILATION 
Harold Bugg understands that learning is a difficult act. In 
order to make learning effective, he has suggested a variety of activities 

1. Brownell W. "Problem Solving” Chapter XII, Psychology of Learning, 

The.Forty-First Yearbook, Pt. II. of the National Society 

for the Study of Education, u. 418 









IS 


I 





X ( 


- 117 - 


essential as a method in understanding. Hugg*s views herein are endorsed 
by many members of the National Society for the Study of Education. Psy¬ 
chologists writing for this society, in the Forty-first Yearbook, agree 
that situations must be real and dramatic and that many avenues of learning 
must be employed since learning is a difficult task and proceeds by gradual 
accumulation. 

Ernest Horn, Professor of Education at the State University of 
Iowa, has this to say regarding understandings 

"The making of constructs, as the term implies, is an active pro¬ 
cess. Verbal statements, oral or printed, do not give the student ideas 
ready made and "under seal"; they merely stimulate him to construct ideas 
for himself. ... In school, most of the language that the student reads 
or hears deals with new meanings, ne\* concepts, and new problems. ..... 
The attainment of a new idea is, from the student*s point of vie\*, a creative 
effort requiring vigorous and efficient mental effort."-** 

Professor Horn emphasizes the complexities of learning in the field 
of the social studies. The remoteness of the problems in this particular 
field, makes learning difficult. "The utilization of language in the dual role 
of substitution for concrete situations and for overt responses, is far too 
predominant in present day instruction in comparison with the utilization of 
the language functioning in concrete stimulus situations and in overt respon¬ 
ses."^ 

Professor Horn says that there should be extensive and skilful 
utilisation of concrete sources of experience such as field trips, objects, 
visual aids, and authentic constructive activities. He agrees with Hugg 
that every avenue of learning must be employed.^ 

1. Horn E. "Language & Meaning", Chapter XI, Psychology of Learning. 

The Forty-first Yearbook T Pt. II, of the National Society 

for the Study of Education, pp. 332-3^3 

2. Horn E. Ibid. p. 3&0 









T 







' 






I 





:■> p ■\ 













- ■./ • ■ . 







- llg - 


Professor Horn agrees with Rugg that the intensive study of a few 
things is essentials "There must he a substantial reduction in the number 
and in the difficulty of the constructs which students are required to make." 1 

Professor Horn agrees that Rugg*s emphasis on tests which are a 
part of the process of instruction in preference to end-tests is psychologi¬ 
cally sound* 2 He, too, insists on providing opportunity for pupil inferences 
in order that use may be made of the ideas which the student has.3 These may 
be corrected and elaborated by other students and by the teacher* 

Rljq&*S TREATMENT OP EMOTIONAL ATTITUDES 
Rugg*s theory that learning is emotional as well as intellectual 
in character and that the curriculum maker must provide for learning of at¬ 
titudes as well as information is recognized by other competent authorities 
as psychologically sound* 

Hr# John E. Anderson of the University of Minnesota has this to 
say in endorsement of practices suggested by Rugg*s basic principles# 

°In this presentation, the essential similarities of the phenomena 
of emotion and those of learning are pointed out# Both are aspects of the 
same process of adjustment to environmental situations which the organism 
is continuously called upon to make. In the concrete situation there is 
only a child who at the same moment, is learning and showing emotion# • . » 
Through learning, the child moves through a succession of context to inte¬ 
grated and well-organized behavior and acquires mastery over his environ¬ 
ment and control over his emotions# ••••••••• 

"Both in the organization of its curriculum and its practices with¬ 
in the four walls of the schoolroom, the educational institution should 

1. Horn E. "Language & Meaning", Chapter XI, Psychology of Learning, 

The Forty-first Yearbook, Pt# II, of the National Society 

for' theStudy of Education* p* 407 

2. Horn E. Ibid# p. 407 

TTnvn V.. TT-vl rl . .. hm ------- 










« 

x 7 



. 


' 


) 










V 





































!.*, o 










- 119 - 


take account, not only of the direct contributions it makes to the child in 
providing for the acquisition of skills and knowledge, hut also of the in¬ 
direct contributions it makes in guiding the development of attitudes,points 
of view, goals and ideals#“1 

This realisation of the fundamental nature of emotions as related 
to learning led Rugg and his associates to provide special opportunity for 
practice and growth in intelligent emotional attitudes* 

RUGG j S CURRICULUM IDEAS 

Professor G» T. Buswell, Professor of Educational Psychology, 
University of Chicago, agrees with Rugg when the latter claims that a curri¬ 
culum must be organized without becoming completely rigid and formal#^ They 
agree also in the view that, since curricula must attempt to stimulate desir¬ 
able responses, educators and society must reach some agreement on goals of 
education* Buswell and Rugg agree in condemning both the set verbalisms of 
the traditional school and the exclusion of intellectual efforts by some 
•“active” schools. Both agree that “life-likeness” of the school cannot hold 
too important a position in curriculum construction# Buswell agrees with 
Rugg that the curriculum must be organized to contain significant racial ex¬ 
perience and that it is the function of educators, psychologists, sociol¬ 
ogists, and others, to determine what is significant# Professor Buswell 
endorses also the organization of teaching units bases on concepts and gen¬ 
eralizations to meet the ever-increasing student maturity# Professor Bus- 
well warns that mere repetition alone does not establish learning. Buswell 
agrees with Rugg that concepts and generalisations must be developed from 
facts in order to prevent pure memoriter learning. 

1# Anderson J# “The 2elation of Emotional Behavior to Learning”, Chapter IX, 

Psychology of Learning, The Forty-first Yearbook, Pt* II, of 

the Rational Society for the Study of Education# p. 351 
2# Buswell G.T# “Organization & Sequence of the Curriculum”, Chapter XIII, 

Psychology of Learning, The Eorty-first Yearbook of the 

National Society for the Studv of Education-. 





















' 


* 

* 


, .. 

■ 










- 120 - 


RUGG MD FLAMED RSCURHMOE 

Rugg has organized his courses in the social studies to provide 
for the planned recurrence of key concepts* 

Professor J» B. Stroud of the University of Iowa, points out 
that ’’practice is a necessary condition to learning hut not a sufficient 
condition. • » • Just as it is a half-truth to say that practice makes 
perfect, so is it a half-truth to say that learning is not accomplished * 
hy practice. • , • hut we do not learn hy sheer repetition. • , mere 
repetition, repetition in itself, does little or nothing to increase the 
probability of learning”,^ 

Professor Stroud declares that there is no easy road to learning, 
much that is learned is soon forgotten. The proponents of frequent repe¬ 
tition in the social studies might heed the foregoing. The validity of 
repetition as a means of learning, may he recognized hut it is possible 
to have too much repetition. Let us suppose that the student learns in¬ 
tensively about Columbus in Grade ?, again in Grade VI, once more in Grade 
VII, and even, perhaps, in Grade VIII, In such a case, the repetition 
might prove detrimental* Loss of interest and the deadening of motivation 
certainly follow such a procedure. The main child interest in Columbus is 
probably consumed in his first intensive study of the explorer. Subsequent 
studies of Columbus may bring forth the attitude, ”we*ve had this before”. 
Another attitude absorbed by both student and teacher is this* ”We are 
going to have this again and again therefore superficial treatment this 
time is adequate”, 

1, Stroud J. B, ’’The Role of Practice in Learning”, Chapter X, 

Psychology of Learning, The Porty-first Yearbook. Pt, II* 

of the National Society for the Study of Education, p, 35^ 














- 121 - 


However, Rugg*s planned recurrence should he interpreted to mean, 
in the main, a repetition of concepts, generalizations and principles, rather 
than facts. This is less objectionable. As Professor Stroud points out, the 
development of meanings and generalizations is very often achieved by exten¬ 
sive study*^ Many-sidedness of approach rather than repetition of a single 
approach is preferable, he says. Extensive class discussion and extensive 
reading are vital to understanding. Rugg*s practice of planned repetition 
is close to this psychologically correct pattern. 

THE DIFFICULTY' OP THE COURSE 

Rugg may have expected too much of both the interests and the 
abilities of the students who are to use his books. 

As an example, let us examine Rugg 1 s recommendation that "Changing 
Civilizations in the Modern World" is suitable for the second half of the 
Grade seven program. 

Grade seven students may not find the material of such books as 
"Changing Civilizations in the Modern World" of great interest. If the 
material of the new course is to meet child interests, then much of the 
Rugg course must be considered as being outside the interests of the grade 
for which particular Reading Books have been assigned* 

In the social studies understanding is vital* Much of the 
material in "Changing Civilizations in the Modern World" may be found to 
be beyond the comprehension of the students for whom it is offered. Most 
of the Rugg books, designed for Junior High School use, can be most eff¬ 
iciently used at the Grade nine level and not before® 

1* Stroud J* B» "The Role of Practice in Learning", Chapter X, 

Psychology of Learning, The Forty-first Yearbook, Pt. II, 

of the National Society for the Study of Education* -p* 372 











I 



! 







- 122 - 


Rugg*s concepts, generalizations, and themes may he regarded in 
many quarters as an organizing device or skeleton for the facts contained 
in his Reading Books, Used as H just another text 0 , these hooks may prove 
even less valuable than many other texts. In Alberta, we are so using the 
Rugg books. Actually, we are dipping into the Rugg books for the facts they 
contain. The author never intended them to be used in this fashion. Under 
such conditions, Rugg*s organization of concepts, generalizations, and 
themes is practically ignored* 

RUGG*g imUEUCE OH THE ALBERTA COURSE 

Rugg 1 s reading books have been used widely in Alberta schools as 
reference books. They were recommended by the Department of Education in 
the reorganized course of studies which was introduced in 1935* However, 
they were recommended as reference books and the guide texts of McDougall 
and Paterson, produced later, became the official outlines of the course. 

The Rugg reading books were widely used but for the facts they contained 
rather than as an outline of the Alberta course* Therefore, Rugg*s themes, 
concepts, and generalizations have not provided the framework for the social 
studies in this province and they have not received serious recognition as 
a necessary framework for the social studies course* They have been used, 
however, to provide valuable information of a unified nature, on selected 
topics. 

Rugg*s Guides for Teachers received extensive use at the time of 
the introduction of the Alberta course in the social studies. Alberta 
teachers are indebted to Rugg for his description of teaching procedures 
in the social studies. The Teacher 8 s Guides were used as the basis of 
instruction in methods by many Department of Education instructors. Many 



' 

* • 

' ' ' - r. ! 

1 

> 

* 

* I 

' 








' 

t,; 







- 123 - 


teachers, who avoided the Rugg Reading Books, purchased the Guides which 
were, in fact, a composition of methods, procedures, and devices in the 
teaching of the social sttidies. 

Rugg*s Workbooks were not widely used in this province# It was 
not to be expected that the Workbooks would be purchased in large numbers 
unless the Reading Books, upon which they were based, had become the of¬ 
ficial text in the social studies* 

Rugg*s main influence on the Alberta course, in the social 
studies, has been in the field of method rather than subject matter* 

CONCLUSION 

Rugg has outlined a philosophy, a psychology, and a practice of 
teaching* Basically, his practice of teaching the social studies insists 
that a directed activity program must provide the basic classroom method* 
The students are not to be set free completely from traditional learning 
of facts* The selection of facts, the method of learning facts, and the 
reason for learning facts, comprise the differentiating feature* The 
method revolves around the understanding of facts to be learned rather 
than around the rote memorisation of teacher-selected material* Pacts 
are the foundation for concepts, generalisations, themes* Rugg has not 
only outlined the essential teaching principles, but he has illustrated 
abundantly the exact techniques by means of which these principles may be 
practised. His long enumeration of methods is purely suggestive and there¬ 
fore some care is taken to avoid the encrusting of a new traditionalism in 
the social studies* There is little doubt that careful selection and use 






I 



i 











- 124 - 


of his suggested methods and materials will result in essential growth of 
character and knowledge. Rugg has provided a theory of education around 
the social studies course hut he has done much more* Using the theory as 
foundation, he has built a complete course. Rew educationists have 
attempted so much and fewer still have achieved so much. And still fewer 
have fought the good fight and approached the end of it with such brilliant 
hope i 

,J Xf the wealth of modern creative thought could be assembled and 
organised, man would command sufficient wisdom to guide the youth of the 
world. The School of Tomorrow could be brought to life today. Enough is 
known of man, his knowing and his behavior, to organise its teaching. 

Enough expressive experience has been lived to guarantee a high order of 
esthetics. Enough is kno\fn of the first principles of conduct to solve 
the problems of freedom and control. The four foundations of education - 
a Socialogy, a Psychology, an Esthetics, and an Ethics — lie scattered 
in many places, the makings of a great education. The educators of America 
must now organise these in great state papers and focus them directly on 
the problems of 


1* Rugg H 


Foundations for American Education (1947)* p® 80J 




4 












, 

' ' 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Anderson J. 

"The Relation of ©notional Behavior to 
Learning", Chapter IX, Psychology of 

Learning, The Forty-First Yearbook of 
the National Society for the Study of 
Education; Bloomington, Public School 
Publishing Company. (l§42) 

2, Brownell W. 

"Problem Solving", Chapter XII, Psychology 
of Learning, The Forty-First Yearbook of 
the National Society for the Study of 
Education; Bloomington, Public School Pub¬ 
lishing Company. (1942) 

3* Brub&cher J. (Chairman) 

Philosophies of Education, Forty-First 

Yearbook of the National Society for the 

Study of Education; Bloomington, The 

University of Chicago. (1942) 

4. Buckingham B. R. 

The Rugg Course in the Classroom; Boston, 

Ginn & Company. (194(3) 

5. Buswell 

"Organization and Sequence of the Curriculum", 
Chapter XIII, Psychology of Learning, The 
Forty-First Yearbook of the National Society 
for the Study of Education; Bloomington, 

Public School Publishing Company. (1942) 

6, Counts G, S. 

"The Promise of American Democracy", Chapter 
VII, Democracy and the Curriculum, The 

Third Yearbook of the John Dewey Society; 

, New York, Work Book Company. (1947) 

7. Dewey, John. 

Democracy and Education, New York, 

MacMillans (1917) 

8* Fine, Benjamin* 

Democratic Education; New York, Thomas 

Y. Crowell Company. (1945) 

9* Horn 1* 

"Language and Meaning", Chapter XI, 

Psychology of Learning, The Forty-First 
Yearbook of the National Society for the 

Study of Education; Bloomington, Public 

School Publishing Company. (1942) 

10. Kilpatrick W. H. 

"Philosophy of Education from the Experimen¬ 
talist Outlook", Chapter II, Philosophies 
of Education, Forty-First Yearbook of the 
National Society for the Study of Education; 
Bloomington, The University of Chicago.(1942) 


i 



11 


McConnell (Chairman) 


12. Sugg E. 


Psychology of Learning, The Forty-First 
Yearbook of the National Society for the 
Study of Education, Bloomington; Public 
School Publishing Company. (1942) 

The American Way of Progress, Boston, 
Ginn & Company. (1938) 


13» Rugg H. 


Building a Science of Society for the 
Schools; New York, Ginn & Company. (1934) 


14. Pugg H. 


Changing Countries and Changing Peoples; 
Boston, Ginn & Company. (1938) 


15. 

Sugg H. 


Changing Governments and Changing Cultures; 
Boston, Ginn & Company. (1937) 

l6. 

Sugg H. 


Foundations for American Education; New 

York, Work Book Company. (1947) 

17. 

Sugg H. 


The Great Technology; New York, The John 

Day Company. (1933) 

18* 

Sugg H. 


Social Science Course for Elementary 

Schools; Boston, Ginn & Company (1938) 

19. 

Sugg H. 


That Men May Understand; New York, 

Doubleday, Doran & Company. (1941) 

20. 

Sugg H. 

(Chairman) 

Democracy and the Curriculum, The Third 
Yearbook of the John Dewey Society; New 

York, D. Appleton-Century Company Ltd. 

21. 

Sugg H, 

& Caswell H* 

Democracy and the Curriculum, The Third 
Yearbook of the John Dewey Society; New 

York, Work Book Company. (1947) 

# 

C\l 

C\3 

Sugg H. 

& Krueger. 

Man at Work; His Industries; Boston, 

Ginn & Company. (1937) 

23. 

Sugg H. 

& Krueger. 

Man at Works His Arts and Crafts; Boston, 

Ginn & Company. (1937) 

24. 

Sugg H. 

& Mendenhall J. 

Teacher 1 ® Guide for Changing Civilizations 
in the Modern World; Boston, Ginn & 

Company. (1935) 

25. 

Sugg H. 

& Shumaker A. 

The Child-Centred School; New York, 

World Book Company. (1928) 

26. 

Stroud. 


"The Role of Practice in Learning" Chapter X, 


Psychology of Learning, The Forty-First 
Yearbook of the National Society for the 
Study of Education; Bloomington, Public 
School Publishing Company. (1942) 


ii 


X 


x 























