CONTENTS: 


For Reference 


4 maps 
1 figure 


TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


THE STRATIGRAPHY 

OF THE 

LLOYDM1NSTER AND ADJACENT AREAS 

WITH SPECIAL EMPHASIS ON 

THE LITHOLOGY OF THE LOWER CRETACEOUS 

— 1947 — 




mm 


J.N. WILLSON 
























@X OBBIS 

mwmsiriMis 

mbbmiisis 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/stratigraphyofllOOwill 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
School of Graduate Studies 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 
have read, and recommend to the Committee on Graduate 
Studies for acceptance a dissertation on f, Tne Strati¬ 
graphy of the Lloydminster and Adjacent Areas, with 
special emphasis on the Lithology of the Lovi/er Cre¬ 
taceous”, submitted by John Norman Willson, B.Sc., 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Science. 

























.. D 









■ 








' 
















































THE STRATIGRAPHY OF THE LLOYDMINSTER AND ADJACENT AREAS 
With Special Emphasis on 
THE LITHOLOGY OF THE LOWER CRETACEOUS. 


by 


John Norman Willson, BvSc., 
Department of Geology, 
University of Alberta* 


A Thesis 

Submitted to the University of Alberta 
in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree 
of 

MASTER of SCIENCE 


Edmonton, Alberta 


April, 1947 








TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

Chapter I - Introduction 1 

General Statement 1 

Acknowledgments 2 

Location and Accessibility 3 

Base Maps 4 

Physiography 4 

Summary and Conclusions 8 

Chapter II - Stratigraphy 12 

Previous Work 12 

Description of Formations 17 

Pre-Devonian 17 

Devonian 18 

1® Middle Devonian 19 

2. Upper Devonian 19 

A. Waterways formation 20 

B. Jefferson dolomite 22 

C. Three Forks Formation 84 

(1) potlatch Anhydrite member 84 

(2) Green shale (Grassy Lake member)86 

D. Exshaw Shale 88 

Mississippian 89 

Pre-Lower Cretaceous 29 

Cretaceous SO 

1. Lower Cretaceous SO 

(See also Chap. 3) 

■2. Upper Cretaceous 34 

A. Colorado formation 34 

B. Lea Park formation 48 

C. Belly River Series 47 

Chapter III - The Lower Cretaceous 49 

Introduction 49 

Method of Study 51 

Lithology 52 

Discussion of the type section of the 

Mannville formation 58 

(1) McMurray member 60 

(2) Cummings, Islay and Tovell members 61 

(3) Wainwright member 63 

(4; 0 f Sullivan member 64 

Correlation of the Members of the Mannville 65 

formation (as depicted in Fig. 3) 

(1) McMurray member 66 

(2) Cummings member 69 

(3) Islay member 71 













(4) Tovell member 

(5) Wainwright member 

(6) O’Sullivan member 


72 

72 

75 


Chapter IV - Structural Geology 

Structure on top of the Paleozoic 

(Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area) 
Thickness of the Mannville formation 

(Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area) 
Structure on top of the Mannville formation 
(Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area) 
Structure on top of the Mannville formation 
(Lloydminster area) 

Chapter V - Economic Geology 

(Lloygminster Oil and Gas Field) 
History of Development 
Producing horizons 
Contact sand 
Wainwright sand 
General Petroleum sand 
Lloydminster sand 
Production 

Cumulative field production 
Market 

Quality of the oil 
Structural significance 
Production area 

Production of individual we11s 

Appendix- - Detailed Core logs of Mannville fm. 
Community Services #7 
Northwest Mannville #1 
Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee #1 
WainY/right Development #1 


Bibliography 


77 

80 

81 

82 


94 

94 

96 

97 
99 
99 

100 

100 

100 

101 

102 

103 


105 

125 

1.45 

150 

159 


Maps 

Map 1 Subsurface Elevations - top of paleozoic-rear pocket 
(Lloyd, - Verm, - Wn. area) 

Map 2 Isopach Map of Mannville formation -rear pocket 

(Lloyd, - Verm. - Wn; area) 

Map 5 Structure-Contour Map-top of Mannville -rear pocket 
(Lloyd. - Verm. - Wn. area) 

Map 4 Structure-Contour Map-top of Mannville -rear pocket 
Lloydminster area) 













































■ 





































Figures 


Fig. 1 - Location Map following page 3 

Fig. 2 - Electrolog Correlation fI n 46 

(Mannville to Lloydminster) 

Fig. 3 - Electrolog and Lithologic Correlation -rear pocket 
(Detailed-Mannville formation) 

Fig. 4 - Facies changes across central following page 48 
Alta, and Sask.(After Nauss.,1945) 


Tab3.es 

Table of Formations following page 16 

Production graph " ” 104 




















' 
































. 



























CHAPTER 1, 


INTRODUCTION , 

GENERAL STATEMENT . 

During the summer of 1946 the writer was em¬ 
ployed by the Exploration Department of the British - 
American Oil Company Limited. Two weeks of this season 
were spent in the Lloydminster field, one trip being 
made in July, the other in September. The writer as¬ 
sisted Mr. Ian Cook, of the same Company, in an investi¬ 
gation that was directed primarily towards a study of 
the economic possibilities of this field. The companies 
actively engaged in this area liberally supplied the in¬ 
formation that was requested and allowed examination of 
drilling samples and cores. 

Arthur W. Mauss, in 1945, published the re¬ 
sults of his detailed examination of the Cretaceous 
section in the Vermilion area, Alberta. His paper, 
which was published in Vol. 29 of the A.A.P.G, bulletin. 
Is part of a Ph.D. thesis presented to the Department 
of Geology, Stanford University, California. His work 
is noteworthy in that it is the first published compre¬ 
hensive study of the Lower Cretaceous strata in this 













- 2 - 

jeneral area. With this work as a guide, the writer 
herein attempts to correlate the stratigraphical 
section of the Lloydminster area with the sections 
of the Vermilion and Wainwright areas. Particular 
attention has been paid to the Lower Cretaceous sec¬ 
tion of these areas; core samples of the Lower .Cre¬ 
taceous- from representative wells in these districts 
have been examined in detail. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This thesis was made possible by the kind 
permission of Mr. A. N. Mackenzie, Manager of Explora¬ 
tion and Production for the British-American Oil Com¬ 
pany Limited, Calgary, who permitted the writer the 
use of pertinent information held by the Company, and 
also extended to him the facilities of the drafting 
department. Sincere appreciation is due Mr. Ian Cook 
of the same Company, who provided invaluable informa¬ 
tion and assistance and directed much of the writer T s 
thinking on the Paleozoic stratigraphy of the area. 

Mr. D. G. Penner of the Alberta Petroleum and Natural 
Gas Conservation Board kindly loaned well samples which 
were examined in the laboratories of the Department of 
Geology, University of Alberta. Professor F.H.Edmunds 
of the University of Saskatchewan is sincerely thanked 





















■ 


.' o: ..«w* 




■ 






. 











. 

. ' ** 

. 























t ‘ . J 






\ t 

. t 








3 


for making available his geological information of 
the Lloydminster area and permitting examination of 
well samples taken from this field and stored in the 
Department of Geology, University of Saskatchewan. 

The writer appreciates the advice and con¬ 
structive criticisms advanced by the members of the 
Department of Geology at the University of Alberta. 

Dr. J. A. Allan kindly permitted the writer to work 
on this problem and frequently gave valuable advice,* 

To Dr. H. L. Rutherford, who directed this thesis, 
much is owed for his continued encouragement and 
counsel. Dr. p. S. Warren is thanked for his stimu¬ 
lating discussions of the stratigraphy involved. - 

LOCATION AND ACCESSIBILITY . 

The area dealt with in this thesis concerns 
the Wainwright and Vermilion districts, Alberta, and 
the Lloydminster district of Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

It covers townships 48 to 52 in Range 26, W.3 to Range 
8 , W.4. Figure 1 is a location map of the area. The 
towns of Vermilion and Lloydminster are situated on 
the Canadian National Railways line £rom Edmonton to 
Battieford and a branch line of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway from Edmonton passes through Lloydminster. 

The all-weather Edmonton-Saskatoon highway passes through 












. 




' 













' 






i 










.. 








. 



































EAST—CENTRAL ALBERTA 


SHOWING LOCATION OF AREA 

16 0 16 Miles 

Scale - i HU 


Fig I — to accompany THESIS by J.N WILLSON April 1947 

























































































































































































































































- 4 


these towns. The town of Wainwright is situated on 
the main line of the Canadian National Railway and is 
also connected with Edmonton by an all-weather highway 


BASE MAPS . 

An outline map of the Lloydminster-Vermilion 


Wainwright area was traced from portions of the follow 
ing geological maps published by the Geological Survey 
of Canada, scale 1 inch to 4 miles: 


(Map 674 A) 
(Map 508 A) 
(Map 673 A) 


Innisfree, Alberta 


Hard!sty, Alberta 
Kitscoty, Alberta 


Ribstone Creek, Alberta (Map 501 A) 

Fort Pitt Sheet, Sask. (Map 490 A) 
(West half) 

Battleford Sheet, Sask. (Map 398 A) 
(West half) 

In addition, a map of the Lloydminster 


area, (scale 1 inch to one mile) was drafted for the 
purpose of showing more detailed structure. 


PHYSIOGRAPHY . 

The following is a brief discussion of 


several of the distinct surface features that chara¬ 
cterize the Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area. 






. 




J ,c 

■ 

, V . 











































- 5 - 


The topography to the east of Lioydminster 
is of the gentle undulating type. The territory 
between the North Saskatchewan and Battle Rivers is 
dotted with small sloughs (the majority of which lack 
outlets); hence little erosion has taken place and 
outcrops of bedrock are non-existent. A hummocky 
surface characteristic of glacial moraine (probably 
recessional) is a common feature. The Blackfoot 
Hills, fifteen miles south-west of Lioydminster, rise 
three hundred or more feet above the surrounding coun¬ 
try. These are described by Hume and Hage (1941) as 
erosional remnants covered by a thin mantle of drift. 

Terminal moraine is not characteristic of this 

area. To the west is the Viking moraine which Warren 

may t>e 

(1957) considers^Iilinoian in age. Bretz (1943) re¬ 
cognizes this terminal moraine, but disagrees with the 
age assigned by Warren. He suggests an Early Wisconsin 
age for the Viking and his map shows the western mar¬ 
gin of the Altamont moraine (late Wisconsin) in con¬ 
tact with the Viking in the region approximately 
twenty-five miles east and north of the town of Viking. 












6 


This is in contrast to Rutherford (1941) who maps the 
Altamont moraine immediately east of the town of Lloyd- 
minster and shows it trending north-west through Frog 
Lake and coalescing with the Viking moraine to the north 
of the 54th parallel, Rutherford states that there is 
some uncertainty as to the relationship of the Viking 
and Altamont moraines, and the Viking moraine may re¬ 
present an earlier stage in the ice advance that formed 
the Altamont. He points out also that the Altamont is 
the correlative of the Goteau moraine which Johnston 
and Wiekenden (1931) mapped in southern Saskatchewan and 
southern Alberta. Antevs (1945) does not differentiate 
the Viking from the Altamont. He uses the term Altamont, 
giving this moraine a Late Wisconsin age and describes 
it as extending from the north-west corner of North 
Dakota through Two Hills, sixty-five miles east of Ed¬ 
monton. The writer is not familiar with glacial geology 

n 

and, therefore, is not in a postjdon to criticize that 
which has been postulated; he is merely endeavoring to 
show that there is considerable divergence of opinion 
among the geologists who have published cn the glacial 
features of the eastern part of Alberta. 






. 

' 























. -id 






















. 




- 
























- 7 - 

Another prominent topographical feature is the 
series of parallel ridges, ten to fifteen miles wide 
along the south-west side of the North Saskatchewan 
River, north of the town of Vermilion. Some of these 
ridges are considered morainal but the majority have 
the appearance and shape of erosional remnants. This 
kind of topography, therefore, is a series of old valleys 
of the North Saskatchewan River which are separated by 
erosional remnants and morainal ridges. 

Two main rivers, the North Saskatchewan and 
Battle, lie respectively to the north ana south of the 
area and flow in a south-easterly direction. They occupy 
large and deep valleys, and are responsible for a valley- 
scarred type of topography. Hume and Hage (1341) con¬ 
sider that these valleys are, for the most part, pre¬ 
glacial and cite the following example. In the Battle 
River Valley at the north end of Dried Meat Lake in 
Sec. S3, twp. 45, range 20 , W 4th Mar, Saskatchewan 
gravels , which are pre-glacial, were exposed and in¬ 
dicate that the river valley was at least partly ex¬ 
cavated preceding the deposition of the gravels. 

These ridges, and the present valleys of the 
North Saskatchewan and Battle Rivers, tend to be paral- 









- 8 - 


lei to the regional strike of the Cretaceous strata; 
i.e. Northwest-Southeast. The Battle River, however, 
more clearly demonstrates the relation between geology 
and topography. From the town of Hardisty to the great 
bend in the Battle River, the general direction of the 
valley is to the Northeast. Several bows along this 
stretch reflect the structural features of the under¬ 
lying Cretaceous rocks (Hume, 1933). The direction of 
flow from the great bend in twp 47, range 5, is to 
the south-east until it approaches the inter-provincial 
boundary where it gradually turns east and, after cross¬ 
ing the boundary, flows north-east. This change of 
trend reflects, to some degree, an analogous curve in 
the structure-contour lines on top of the Lea Park 
formation as depicted by Hume and Hage (1941). 

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS . 

The Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area, 
as shown in Fig. 1, is underlain by beds of Paleozoic 
and Mesozoic age, while unconsolidated Keewatin glacial 
deposits, which attain a thickness of up to 200 feet, 
mantle practically all of the surface. Only in the 
deep valleys of the larger rivers does bedrock outcrop. 
The stratigraphical sequence has been determined largely 
from well borings. 















t . 

^ .. c 53 ) 


. 










. 

. 

J 


■ 









'J 


• . . 

o.n 







. 



L 

. 










■ 













. 


: J . 





. 







. 


1 v 

: 

. 




■ 

♦ ' • ' ■ -■ • * • J ' I - • 














: >. 


. 






















9 


The oldest beds penetrated by drilling are 
Cambrian in age, and presumably Upper Cambrian; in 
V.C.O. #15, 487 feet of these beds were drilled with 
the Precambrian not reached. Overlying the Cambrian 
are 710 feet of strata containing 414 feet of massive 
salt. The only statement, that can be made with any 
degree of certainty regarding their age is that they 
are post Cambrian and pre Upper Devonian The over- 
lying beds of Paleozoic age are Upper Devonian, the 
surface of which has been eroded. The Waterways forma¬ 
tion is the lowest member of the Upper Devonian and is 
955 feet thick at V.C.O. #15. In the eastern and nor¬ 
thern part of the area Cretaceous rocks rest on the ero¬ 
ded surface of the Waterways. In the remainder of the area 

on the 

the Paleozoic erosive surface is Jefferson dolomite wiSch 

A 

overlies the Waterways. Unconformably overlying the Paleo¬ 
zoic is the Mannville formation of Lower Cretaceous age; 
it thickens from 870 feet at Wainwright to 585 feet at 
Lloydminster. Six members of this formation may be 
recognized at Lloydminster; in ascending order they 
are the MeMUrfay (quartz sand), the Cummings (glauconi¬ 
tic 1 salt and pepper 1 sandstone and marine shale), the 
Islay (quartz sand), the Toveli ( ! salt and pepper 1 sand¬ 
stone), the Wainwright (quartz sand) and the 0 ! Sullivan 

































vf 


' 






. 






. . . ■ 














. 

' 




























- 10 


( T salt and pepper 1 sandstone). To the west the Islay 
member is absent; therefore, the Cummings and Tovell 
cannot be differentiated and are herein referred to as 
the Buffalo Coulee member. It is considered that the 
source of the quartz sands was the Canadian Shield 
and the source of the ’salt and pepper’ sandstone was 
presumably to the west. Chert and argillite constitute 
the dark colored grains of the ’salt and pepper’ type. 
Tre Colorado formation of Upper Cretaceous age overlies 
trie Mannville formation. This marine shale thickens 
from 660 feet in the eastern part of the area to 770 
feet on the western edge. The overlying Lea Park for¬ 
mation of marine shale thickens from 750 feet on the 
west to 850 feet on the east and it is considered that 
the sandstone mapped as Ribstone Creek to the east of 
Lloydminster is actually a sandstone member within the 
upper part ofthe Lea Park formation. Overlying the 
Lea Park formation is a series of interfingering marine 
shales and non-marine sandstones. The shales thicken 
to the east, the sandstones to the west. This group is 
known as the Belly River series and considered to be 
Pierre in age. Glacial drift overlies the Belly River 
series„ 

The structures in the Cretaceous beds have a- 





. 











' 




. 


• ... t* 








V ■. 1 .... : • .; -I . . , .. iio . 


.i i .. Cl l 






' . . r -.a ..... 








. . : 






















. 



































11 - 


relatively small closure. It is considered that dif¬ 
ferential compaction has been the major factor in¬ 
volved though folding may have played a part. 

The Wainwright member of the Mannville for¬ 
mation is the only important oil producing horizon 
in the’Wainwright, Vermilion and Lloyaminster fields. 

The oil is 14° A.P.I. and all producing wells are 
pumped. Water percentage increases with time and 
no effective shut-off of the water has been made. The 
best development of the Wainwright member is in the 
Lloydminster area and it is significant to note that 
recent wells in this field promise to exceed the pro¬ 
duction records of wells in the Wainwright and Vermilion 
fields. 













- 12 - 


CHAPTER 2 . 
STRATIGRAPHY, 


PREVIOUS WORK . 

The first geological map including Central 
Alberta was the result of the survey conducted by 
Dr. J. H e ctor of the Palliser expedition. He descended 
the North Saskatchewan River from Edmonton to Fort Pitt 
in March, 1858. He recognized the lignite-bearing beds 
in the vicinity of Edmonton and placed them in the 
T lowest of the cretaceous system* (palliser, 1863,p 827.) 
The map accompanying this report showed little geology 
but it marked an important contribution in the geographi¬ 
cal mapping of western Canada. 

The term ’Edmonton 1 was first used by Selwyn 
(1873-74) in referring to the strata containing coal seams 
in the general vicinity Edmonton. 

J. B. Tyrrell (1887) was the first to publish 
an extensive geological map of the greater part of cen¬ 
tral Alberta. His traverses included the Battle River 
and its tributaries, the North Saskatchewan and the 
country lying between these rivers. He introduced the 
term ! Edmontcn Series* and was the first to use Bawson*s 
term 1 Belly River* in this area. One would be inclined 
to expect many inaccuracies on such an early map but the 











13 


fact that only one major error exists is in itself a 
tribute to his work. H e maps a broad anticline, the 
axis of which runs through the Wainwright area, and 
trends northwest-southeast. This was a result of his 
assumption that the Lea Park formation was younger than 
the Belly Biver Series. Subsequent work has proved 
that the s'andstone of the Belly River group (in this 
general, area) wedge out to the east with the result 
that the marine tongues of the Belly River group thicken 
eastward and eventually become one lithologic unit which 
we know as the Lea Park formation. It should be pointed 
out that, although Tyrrell considered the Lea Park youn¬ 
ger, instead of being in fact the equivalent of the Belly 
River, he was correct in ass igning a Pierre age to the 
marine shales of the Lea Park. Noteworthy of attention 
is the appendix of Tyrrell ? s report by J. T. Whiteaves, 
which conta ins a rather complete paleontological des¬ 
cription of the fauna. 

The next work of importance was that by 
J. A. Allan (1918). As a result of his survey along the 
North Saskatchewan River from Efimonton to North Battle- 
ford, the correct stratigraphical sequence was worked 
out. It was pointed out that no prominent anticlinal 
fold existed in central Alberta. Surface indications, 
however, pointed to a very broad anticlinal structure. 









- 14 - 


He states that fr 0n the North Saskatchewan, between the 
5th and 4th mericians, the structure is homoclinal. 

The angle of dip is greatest towards the west and de¬ 
creases towards the east. For a considerable distance 
along the river, in the vicinity of Lea Park, the 
strata are lying nearly horizontal. Between the 4th 
meridian and Battleford there is a slight dip in an eas¬ 
terly direction, corresponding approximately to the slope 
of the plains level, which is from 2 to 7 feet to the 

n 

mile. Drilling records prove this to be the true pic¬ 
ture. Edmunds (1940) gives the elevation of the top of 
the Lower Cretaceous as 18 feet above sea level at Viking 
420 feet at Lloydminster and 350 feet at North Battleford 
In view of the fact that these are sub-surface elevations 
it can be concluded that the regional surface structure 
Is reflected at depth at least to the top of the Lower 
Cretaceous. 

During the same year, S. E. Slipper (1918) 
worked south of the river, from Viking east to the 
inter-provincial boundary. Both Allan and Slipper 
subdivided the B;:eLly River series; five definite litho¬ 
logic units were recognized and, while each proposed 
different names to the members of this series, they can 
be readily correlated with each other with the exception 
of the upper two fresh water formations. In addition to 



'I 










- 15 - 


this, Allan gave the name Lea Park formation to the 
marine shales underlying the Belly River Series. 

G. S. Hume (1924) in mapping the Wainwright 
area retains Slipper T s nomenclature but points out 
that the upper two members of the Belly River series 
(Pale and Variegated) should be treated as a unit, due 
to the difficulty in differentiating between them. 

During 1935 and 1936 the Geological Survey 
of Canada carriedout detailed mapping of this area 
(longitude 108°—114*, latitude 52°—54°) , This map¬ 
ping vms under the direction of G. S. Hume and was car¬ 
ried out by R. L # Rutherford, P. S. Warren, C. H. Crick 
may and C. 0. Hage. The formational units as used by 
Hume in 1924 were retained. 

Many minor reports on this area have been 
issued since 1924; these have been mainly the work of 
G. S. Hume. 

A comprehensive report on the geology of east 
central Alberta was issued by Hume and Hage in 1941. 

In this report the stratigraphic sequence and nomen¬ 
clature are essentially the same as that presented by 
Slipper in 1918. 

A. W. Nauss (1945) has recently published the 
result of his stratigraphical study of the Cretaceous 






- 16 


in the Vermilion area, H e subdivided the Lower Cre¬ 
taceous into six members and gives them names of local 
geographical significance. The type locality of each 
of these members is in the N 0 rthwest Mannville #1 well 
in l.s.d. 1, Sec. 18, twp.5Q, rge 8, W4th. To this 
Lower Cretaceous section he gives the name Mannville for¬ 
mation. He applies the term Lloydminster shale to the 
dark marine shale lying between the Lower Cretaceous and 
the Lea Park. He recognizes the division of the Belly 

River series as proposed by Allan and Slipper, and fur- 

/ 

ther subdivides the Birch Lake and Ribstonr/Creek sand¬ 
stones . 

In the Vermilion area these two formations 

each contain a tongue of marine shale; they are considered 

sufficiently important by Nauss to warrant naming, the 

! Vanesti tongue T separating the Ribstone Creek into an 

upper and a lower sands tone member and the *Mulga 

Lake 

tongue T similarly dividing the Birch sandstone. He 
suggests that the Mulga tongue may be the correlative 
of the Shandro shale on the North Saskatchewan River 
(Allan:* 1918). If such a correlation should be con¬ 
firmed, the name * Shandro ! should replace the term 
f Mulga.* 




. : . • 




















. 


























. 





















. 

i v 






. 


















TABLE OF FORMATIONS 

LLOYDMINSTER —VERMILION — WAINWRIGHT AREA 


ERA 

PERIOD 

EPOCH 

FORMATION 

MEMBERS 

LITHOLOGY 

THICKNESS 





Pakan 

Fresh water shale 
B sandstone 

A series of inter¬ 
fingering shales a 





Oldman 

Fresh water shale 

8 sandstone 

sondstones. Shales 
thicken ;o the East, 





Upper Birch Lake 

Fresh water 
sandstone 

sandstones to the 
West. 




Belly River 

Mulga tongue 

Marine shale 





Series 

Lower Birch Lake 

Fresh water 
sandstone 






Grizzly Bear tongue 

Marine shale 

Maximum thichness 
in the East port of 
the area is approx. 
350‘ - 



m 

3 

O 


Upper Ribstone Creek 

Fresh woter 
sandstone 



o 

o 


Vanesti tongue 

Marine shale 



€> 

o 


Lower Ribstone Creek 

Fresh water 
sandstone 





Lea Park 


Marine shale 

750‘- 850' 

o 

3 

© 

• 

a. 

a. 

3 


1st.Speckled shale 

Marine calcareous 
shale 


o 

N 

o 

m 


Colorado 

2nd.Speckled shale 

Marine colcareous 
shale 

660’— 770' 

m 

• 

o 


Fm. 

Fish Scale sand 

Abundant fish 
scales 






"Viking sandstone" 

Chert pebbles 






O'Sullivan 

Shale S salt a 
pepper ’ sondstone 

130—160 



m 

3 

O 


Wain wr i ght 

Quartz sondstone 

0 — 60' 



• 

a 

o 

Mannville 

Tovell 

Shale a salt a 
pepper sandstone 

75'—125' 



© 

O 

Fm. 

Islay 

Quartz sandstone 

0 — 60' 



• 

* 


Cummings 

Marine shale a 
sandstone 

0 - 90' 



o 


McMurray 

Quartz sandstone 

0 —ISO' 











Eroeional Unconformity 






Exshaw Shale 


Bituminous shale 

Eroded 



Upper 

Three Forks fm. 

Green Shale member 

Green shale,lime - 
stone a dolomite 

Eroded 


Devonian 

Devonian 

Potlatch anhydrite 

Anhydrite a 
dolomite 

Eroded 



Jefferson dol. 


Dol omit e 

In part eroded 




Waterways fm. 


L imestone 

955 1 * 

o 

o 



Erosional Unconformity 

P 


N 

o 

Siluro - 
Ordovic. 




Anhydrite a red 
shale 

46 ' * 

o 

CL 

P 

unnamed 


Salt series 

414 ' 






Dolomite 

250" 



P 



Red a green 
shale 



Combrian 

Upper 

unnamed 


Glauconitic ss. 

« 

487 '1 



Cambrian 



Dolmit i c 
limestone 



* Thickness determined from core log of V.C.O.I5 




































































- 17 


DESCRIPTION OF FORMATIONS , 

Pre-Devonian , 

Two wells have penetrated a considerable 
thickness of Paleozoic strata in this area. Vermilion 
Consolidated Oils #15 commenced drilling in October, 1944 
and was completed at a depth of 4652 feet in June, 1945. 
It is located in l.s.d. 2, sec. 12, twp. 49, rge 6, W4th. 

The top of the Cambrian is placed at 4145 by 
the Conservation B 0 ard (1945). Massive salt occurs from 
3481 1 to 3896 f . The Lower Cretaceous/Devonian contact 
is given as 2032’* 

Montrea 1-Alberta #1 (l.s.d,.2, sec. 15, twp 45, 
rge 7, W4th) was carried to a depth of 4653* in 1942, 

The Lower Cretaceous-Paleozoic content is given as 
2321*; salt layers are present below 4102 ! * 

The age of the beds below the Upper Devonian 
limestone is questionable, paleontological evidence being 
scarce. 

The top of the Cambrian is considered to be at 
the contact of a dolomite series with an underlying 
glauconite sandstone (i.e. at 4150* in V.C.O. #15). 

Maroon and green claystone is associated with the sand¬ 
stone. 710* of beds, which are of doubtful age, overlie 

the Cambrian at Vermilion, 414t 0 f massive salt occurring 

















- 18 - 

in the upper part. A discussion of the possible age 
of this series would involve long range correlations; 
this the writer wishes to avoid. At this time it will 
suffice to say that their age is still, a matter of con¬ 
jecture and will remain so until definite evidence is 
produced. 

Three other wells in the area have penetrated 
a considerable depth of Paleozoic beds. Imperial Rib- 
stone #1 (sec. 5, twp. 45, rge 1) drilled 1484 feet Into 
the Paleozoic. Fossils from this well were identified 
by E. M. Kindle as Upper Devonian in age (Hume and Hage, 
1941). As no marked lithologic break was encountered to 
the bottom of the well, it is assumed that the Paleozoic 
section is entirely Devonian and probably Upper Devonian. 

In Imperial Ribstone Oils #2 (sec. 25, 
twp. 46, rge 1) and in Anglo Home Buffalo Coulee #1 
(sec. 25, tep. 4% rg'e 1) 960 feet and 1115 feet respect¬ 
ively, of Paleozoic strata were drilled. It is con¬ 
sidered that both wells were abandoned with the bottom 
of the Devonian not reached. 

Devonian . 

Beds of Lower Devonian age are not knowrn to 


occur in Western Canada. 

















■ 


j , '- : 


. > 




•j 


. 




■ 

- • * 


. 7 • 

. 














- 19 


1. MIDDLE DEVONIAN 

Middle Devonian limestones and dolomites out¬ 
crop in Western Manitoba (Kindle, 1918). A well was 
drilled at Dauphin, Manitoba, and according to Wickenden 
(1933) 700 feet of Middle Devonian beds occurred. The 
contact between the Devonian and the underlying Silurian 
was placed at the most marked change in lithology, which 
was between the horizons bearing Devonian fossils and 
what is probably Silurian gypsum and anhydrite beds. No 
fossils were found in the samples from the so-called Si¬ 
lurian. Atrypa reticularis var. A is a characteristic 
index fossil of Middle Devonian beds in Manitoba. 

In a well drilled at Unity, Sask., beds con¬ 
taining a species of Atrypa are present, and a middle 
Devonian age is inferred from this species (P.S.Warren, 
pers. state.) 

Beds of this age undoubtedly thin westward, 
but some expression of their presence in the Vermilion- 
Wainwright area might be expected. To date, no such 
evidence has come to light. 

2. UPPER DEVONIAN 

Beds of Upper Devonian age are very widespread 


under the plains region, and our information regarding 
their character ana ectent is much more complete than that 
of the pre-Upper[Devonian strata. 



















































■ • *V 








s. • 






20 


Wells drilled in the southern plains of Alberta 


have shown the Upper Devonian as being amenable to a three¬ 
fold division and show marked similarities to the Montana 
section. The terminology as used by the Alberta Con¬ 
servation Board is as follows: 

Exshaw Shale * 


Upper Devonian 


Three Forks Fmn. 


< 


Green Shale member. 
Potlatch Anhydrite Member. 


Jefferson frnn. 

The equivalent of the Jefferson formation of 
Montana can be separated into two divisions in Alberta 
on the basis of lithology. 

. Jefferson dolomite 
Jefferson Group\ 

Waterways formation. 

Admittedly this is bad terminology, but it is 
that which is employed by some field geologists at the 
present time. It is suggested by Ian Cook (unpublished 
manuscript) that the upper member be termed the Burdett 
formation. The writer, however, wishes to use the term 
Jefferson dolomite, as the equivalent of the upper do¬ 
lomite zone of the Jefferson in Montana, if for no other 
reason than that it is in common usage among field geolo¬ 
gists in Alberta. 

A. The Waterways Forma.tion. 

This formation was named by P. S. Warren (1933) 




o 

; 



!| 

. 




Included in Three Forks formation by P.S.Warren (1937,b) 













1 ■ ' : -v 1 > >' 














i 































: , 

• 




. ; 





• •. <• f 

' H*’? . , 





' A •' :■ j-4 




. 






I 






■ 






. , V,; 










i 











- 21 


and assigned an Upper Devonian age on the basis of the 

Portage type fauna collected by J. A. Allan from exposed 

east 

strata up the Clearwater River^from Waterways , Alberta 

and from the core of the Industrial Minerals #1 well 

at Waterways. Among the diagnostic fossils of the 

Waterways formation are: 

Spirifer tullia var. Y/hiteaves 
Cyrtina billingsi Meek 
Pugnax pugnus Martin var. 

Lithology 

The Waterways formation consists mainly of 
massive limestone, fine-grained to dense, buff-colored, 
commonly argillaceous. Carbonaceous flecks are a promi¬ 
nent feature. Grey-green, calcareous shale facies, with¬ 
in the limestone, are present in the Waterways district, 
where the formation is 400 feet thick. At this locality 
Lower Cretaceous beds rest uncomformably on the eroded 
surface of the Waterways formation. 

Formation boundaries : 

Red and green shales, and interbedded anhydrite 
and dolomite underlie the massive limestone of the Water¬ 
ways. The base of this formation is therefore considered 
to be at this lithologic change. A pre-Upper Devonian age 
is assumed for the underlying strata.? although fossil 
evidence is lacking. 









. 

'J - * 

. 


. 


, J..:. 



> 

v • ^ ■ 

- ' J 



- 


■ 

. .. .. 


_ 

. 






. ■i/.'v, . | 




j 

' 

. 


•• f 

. J . .. .:■ ; ■ 








■'.. -. ; '•••• 

i.. „•> "* 




0 - .. itv • 


... .. Ur-K' . 


4 


. 


■ 




A • 










22 


The upper limit of the Waterways formation is 
placed at the contact of the limestone with the over- 
lying Jefferson dolomite (Ian Cook, unpublished manus¬ 
cript) . 

Thickness : 

Approximately 1,000 feet of Waterways limestone 
was encountered at V.C.O. #15. Information regarding the 
thickness of this formation in the Montreal-Alberta well 
has not been obtained by the writer. To the south of 
the area, the Waterways formation becomes thinner and 
somewhat anhyaritic in its lithological character. In 
the Princess district its thickness is approximately 6Q0 f . 
Correlation : 

Warren (1942) shows that the Waterways forma¬ 
tion is correlative faunally to h-re- luug g part of the 

6e</s i>cth Cibcre o/rtf' Se/on/ 

Jefferson formation of Montana and with A the Blackface 
Mountain shale of the eastern ranges of the Rocky Moun¬ 
tains . 

B. Jefferson Dolomite. 

A. C. Peale (1898) applied the name Jefferson 
formation to 7y0 - 1,000 feet of massive, black limestone 
with bands of laminated magnesium limestone. The type 
section is at Three Forks, Montana. As previously stated, 
the term Jefferson dolomite is herein applied to the beds 
lying above the f|kterways formation and below the Potlatch 
anhydrite member of the Three Forks formutiion. 











n 


























23 


Lithology ; 

The Jefferson consists mainly of massive 
dolomite, finely crystalline to sugary, greyish-buff, 
with vuggy porosity not uncommon. When struck, the rock 
emits a fetid odor. Zones of rotten dolomite are known 
to occur in the formation, and these give a high degree 
of porosity. The producing horizon of the Princess field 
is such a zone, 60 feetff’om the top of the Jefferson 
dolomite. 

Formation boundaries : 

The first occurrence of massive dolomite below 
the Potlatch anhydrite member marks the top of the Jeffer¬ 
son, the base being placed at the top of the underlying 
limestone of the Waterways formation. 

Thickness : 

In the Princess area, the formation attains a 
thickness of approximately 500 feet. Erosion has not af¬ 
fected the thickness of the Jefferson dolomite at Princess 
asthe Mississippian strata, which are present in this area, 
reflect the eroded Paleozoic surface. Nowhere in the 
Wainwright-Vermilion-Lloydminster area can a true thickness 
of this formation be obtained as much of it has been re¬ 
moved by erosion. It is absent in the eastern and northern 
part of this area (See Map 1). 










24 - 


Correlation : 

Stratigraphically the Jefferson is probably 
equivalent, at least in part, to the Upper Minnewanka 
formation in the Banff area, Alberta, and therefore is 
probably correlative to part of the Palliser formation 
of the Moose Mountain area, Alberta. The former was de¬ 
scribed by H.W.Shimer (1926) from the exposed section 
in Lake Minnewanka, the latter having been named by 
H.H.Beach (1943) its exposed section in the Moose Mountain-* 
Bow River region. Both of these formations carry the 
index fossil‘Spirifer whitneyi.’ 

C. Three Forks Formation. 

(1) Potlatch Anhydrite member: 

E. S. Perry (1928) first recognized and named 
this member from its occurrence inweLl samples of the 
Kevin-Sunburst area in northern Montana. H e correlated 

i 

this member with the Jefferson dolomite of the Three 
Forks area, Montana, and included 960 feet of beds from 
the top of the black shale (Exshaw) down to the top of 
a limestone series of then doubtful age, but which is now 
considered to be the Waterways formation. 

P.D.Moore (1931) iBstricted the term "Potlatch 
anhydrite® to a predominantly anhyuritic series underlying 
the black shale (Exshaw^) and overlying a dolomite series, 
and he pointed out that it was corfelative to the Three 











25 


Forks formation. He correlated the dolomite series with 
the Jefferson dolomite of the Three Forks area. 

Present day usage further restricts this term 
to anhydrite beds alone, the Green Shale member being dif- 
fere ntiated from the anhydrite beds. 

G.W.Berry (1945) draws attention to the fact that 
the Three Forks formation contains abundant "Spirifer whit- 
neyi n at Three forks, Montana, and hence the formation is 
Upper Devonian in age. 

Litnology ; 

Massive, white anhydrite is the main feature of 
this member. Partings and intimate intergrowths of finely 
crystalline, greyish-buff dolomite and green claystones are 
common and impart a banded appearance to the cores. 
Formation boundaries : 

The P 0 tlatch member is confined to the anhydrite 
zone of the Upper Devonian. The uppermost occurrence of 
anhydrite is taken as the top of the member and the base of 
the massive anhydrite is regarded as the contact with the 
underlying Jefferson dolomite. It should be pointed out 
that the massive Jefferson dolomites may contain some 
anhydrite interfingerings in the upper part. 

Th ickness of the member ; 

While the Potlatch member was first recognized 
in Montana, it has now been revealed that its basin of 
















- 26 


deposition was mainly in Alberta. There is somewhat less 
than 200 feet of anhydrite in the type section in Montana , 
the thickness increasing to the north. In the Princess 
area, the Potlatch member is S75 feet thick. A well 
drilled near Castor, 100 miles to the north of Princess , 
penetrated over 400 feet of anhydrite. Piecent indications 
are that a considerable thickness of anhydrite was encoun¬ 
tered in the Hobfema area, though figures are not as yet 
available. A notable fact is that, as the anhydrite sec¬ 
tion thickens, the unaerlying Jefferson dolomite becomes 
thinner (Sloss ana Laird, 1946). Therefore, as Sloss and 
Laird have demonstrated, the Potlatch anhydrite is in part 
Three Forks age and in part Jefferson age. 

(2) Green Shale member. 

The Three Forks formation as originally described 
by Peale (1896) included 175-200 feet of "orange shale and j 
magnesium limestone." To the north of the type section at 
Three Forks, Montana, a facies change takes place with 
the result that anhydrite (Potlatch) becomes the equivalent 
of the lower Three Forks formation. Ian Cook,(unpublished 
manuscript), has suggested the term "Grassy Lake" for the 
upper member of the Three Forks formation. 

Lithology ; 

In the Princess area, this member is principally 
a claystone, fissile, pale green, and slightly limy. 



























- 27 


Limestone and dolomite intergrowths occur. At Castor 
this zone is mainly limestone with some green claystone. 
There is then a facies change from predominantly green 
claystone to limestone as we go north. Where the green 
claystone is well developed, it separates an upper lime¬ 
stone member and a lower sandy dolomitic member. It is 
the upper limestone member which increases in thickness 
to the west as the green claystone becomes thinner. The 
basal sandy dolomite member is very widespread and has 
provided a valuable horizon marker in well drilling opera¬ 
tions. In view of the changing lithology of this zone, the 
term "Green Shale ,f member should be dropped, the term 
"Grassy Lake" member being more desirable. 

Boundaries of the member : 

The Grassy Lake member is readily diffeieitiated 
from the overlying Exshaw formation, the top of the member 
being placed at the base of the fissile black shale so char-; 
achteristic of the Exshaw. The base of the Gfassy Lake is 
placed at the first occurrence of anhydrite. 

Thickness of the member : 

At Princess this member is 40 feet thick, at 
Castor it is 75 feet. 1-^ would seeip that an increase in 
the thickness of the Grassy Lake is accompanied by an in¬ 
creased thickening of the underlying anhydrite section. 


















- 28 - 


D. Exshaw Shale, 

P. S. Warren (1937) named this formation and 
assigned to it an Upper Devonian age on the basis of the 
ammonite TT Tornoceras TI which is found £ the top of the 
shale. The remarkable feature of the Exshaw is that for 
such a thin formation it is so widespread. Due to the 
distinct contrast in the lithology of the formations both 
above and below, it provides an excellent and valuable 
stratigraphic marker for.well-logging purposes. 

Lithology : 


The Exshaw is typically a black, fissile, .. bitu¬ 
minous claystone, often containing abundant plant spores. 

It retains this character throughout, its areal distribution. 
‘Tornoceras* is frequently found at the top in many of the 
wells that have cored this part of the section (Ian Cook- 
personal statement). 

Boundaries of the formation : 

B 0 th contacts are abrupt ; the base of the over¬ 


lying Mississipian strata consists mainly of dark, argil¬ 
laceous limestone > anci the top of the underlying Grassy 
Lake member is usually a buff, crystalline limestone, 
grading downward into green claystone. 

Thickness : 

The type section of the Exshaw on Jura Creek 

(near the town of Exshaw on the Calgary-Banff highway) 
exposes a complete section which measures 30 feet. 
































. 









.., r . . 








- 29 


Under the plains it has a fairly consistent thickness 
of approximately 10 feet. 

In the area pertaining to this thesis, the 
Exshaw shale and Three Forks formations have been eroded: 
the Paleozoic formation encountered immediately below the 
Mannvllle (Lower Cretaceous) is Jefferson dolomite in 
the south and west, and the Water-ways formation in the 
north and east. The writer has therefore discussed forma- 

■ 

tions that are not pertinent to the area, but has done so 
xn an attempt to bring out the relationship of the Upper 
Devonian section in this ares to that which is encountered 
farther south. 

. 

' 

Mississippian 

Strata of Mississippian age are absent in the 


area. They arepresent to the south; and it is probable that 
they were deposited north of their present boundary but 
erosion has subsequently removed all trace of their existenod 
The eastern limit of the Mississippian strata 
is commonly referred to as the ! Madison escarpment. n From 


1 


Twp. 32, Rge 4, the escarpment trends approximately 
north-west through Castor (Twp. 37, Rge. 13). To the 
north-east ofla line connecting these localities, Missis¬ 
sippian rocks are absent, the Upper Devonian unuerlying 
Lower Cretaceous strata. 

Pre-Lower Cretaceous . 

With the exception of the Jurassic Ellis formation 















. 1 . 




'■ /' ; ? ■ 










J J . 1 


... - ‘ 

... V . 5 . ^ 


■. 











-V J ' • * 






- 















50 . - 


which extends as far north as Taber, Alberta, rocks of 
Pennsylvanian, Permian, Trlassie and Jurassic age are 
absent under the plains of Alberta. H e nce a protracted 
period of erosion ensued prior to the deposition of the 
Lower Cretaceous strata. The products of this erosion 
are usually encountered in well drilling and are marked 
by several significant features. 

. Where Mississippian rocks underlie the Lower 
Cretaceous, a distinctive zone is invariably encountered. 
This is commonly referred to by geologists as the ?! chert 
detrital” zone. Lithologically it is composed of poorly- 
sorted quartz grains, dark to grey-colored chert, grey, 
green and brownish-colored claystone, fragmental, weathered 
limestone and pyrite nodules; the matrix is commonly sile- 
ceous. A cored section presents a brecciated appearance. 

Chert nodules are common in the Mississippian 
(Randle) limestone, both in the mountains and under the 
plains, and due to their higher resistance to disintegra¬ 
tion under erosional conditions, they have become concen¬ 
trated at the erosion surface, the limestone having been 
leached out. Some angular fragments of highly weathered 
limestone are, however, often present. 

Where the cementing material is non-siliceous, 
pale green to cream-colored claystone is present. This 
very finely divided clay is thought by the writer to repre¬ 
sent an e.rosional product of argillaceous material that has 


























I 




. .. J 


>•- 

' 

' ./ _ L 1 . , - I 

.«, _• > i ■. ,) J . -. ■ • ■-> . I 











... 









- 31 - 


been left behind as the limestone wmt into solution, and 
has consequently permeated the porous, angular, detrital 
< 2 hert and acted as a cementing agent. It is a mudstone 

type of deposit and lacks the bedded appearance of a shale. 

■ 

Vuggy porosity is not uncommon in this zone, and 
dead, bleeding oil is frequently present in the core. How¬ 
ever, no commercial production has ever been obtained from 
this zone. 

, The thickness of this "chert detrital" Jsone is 
variable, but is commonly in the neighborhood of 50 feet. 

Where the Lower Cretaceous rests directly on 

the Devonian, this erosional zone is characteristically 

‘ 

different. The main feature is the absence of chert with 
the residual detritus. Where the underlying Paleozoic is 
Jefferson dolomite, the zone is predominently decomposed, 
powdery dolomite with interfingering greenish claystone; 
quartz grains are associated with white, silty patches of 
highly altered feldspathic material. The contact of this 
zone with the undecomposed dolomite is never very sharp. 

The vuggy, sugary dolomites of the Jefferson lend themselves 

. 

to comparatively deep residual&osion, and the green clay- 
stone represents a filling-in of the erosionally-induced 
voids in the dolomite. The occurrence of patchy, white, 

kaolinitic material with associated quartz grains further 

' 

attests to the partial removal of the dolomite. That this 
zone can attain a considerable thickness is well exemplified 































32 


in the core samples of Anglo-Home-Buffalo Coulee #1 
(Twp. 47, Rge. 7, W4). This well reached a total depth 
of 3385 feet, but the writer had access to samples only to 
a depth of 2452 feet. The top of the detrital zone was 
placed at 2270 feet, and at 2452 feet the top of the mas¬ 
sive, undecomposed dolomite had still to be recorded^as 
patchy kaolinitic material with quartz grains was still 
present. The dolomite, as might be expected, becomes less 
decomposed with depth and the result is a gradational con¬ 
tact with the undecomposed dolomite. 

Where the Lower Cretaceous rests on the Water¬ 
ways formation of the Upper Devonian, a sharp contact is 
present. This has been observed by the writer in Community 
Services #7 (Twp. 50, Rge. 27, W3), and in Northwest Mann- 
ville #1 (Twp. 50, Rge 8, W4). The writer believes that 
the hard, massive, finely crystalline to dense limestones 
of the Waterways have been less amenable to decomposition 
than the vuggy dolomites of the Jeffers on. Hence a thick 
zone of decomposed material is absent. 

Nauss (1945) describes five feet of greenish-grey, 

; 

calcareous shale in Northwest Mannville #1, resting on lime* 

- 

stone, and assigns a Jams sic age to the horizon. No 
reasons are advanced for this age correlation. The writer 
examined samples from this interval and is of the opinion 

that the zone is essentially calcareous, with argillaceous 
material in minor amounts. Its lithology suggests that it 















I ■ 








.• • ' •’ • . :. ■ 1 , r_J f .i 

1 ' • 

. 





/ 













. 


. 


- . 3 .. t 




• .I 


, i . 




. 







■ J i 






> S3 


; ,. . .! L . / . • .. L..O . .1 


; . j ^ . l v uv 












. 

. ' ; . ... ... V 






, - i v 




. /.. ,, . -i'iJ . • ..-3 ... 


.. 






• _ .. \ ; ,w J .< j . 

... ?i i s'J . j ;... 

■ .... > ...■ .. ■ 

' . -,i . ... 




















60 


is essentially a decomposition product of the Waterways 
limestone. Therefore, its age relationship is doubtful, 
and can only be assigned to the post-Upper-Devonian and 
pre-Lower Cretaceous interval* 

Cretaceous 

1. Lower Cretaceous * 

The Lower Cretaceous is discussed in detail in 
Chapter (3). 

No outcrops of Lower Cretaceous occur in the 
area, and information of these strata is derived from well 
samples only. The producing horizons at Wainwright, Ver¬ 
milion and Lloydminster occur within the Lower Cretaceous, 
hence its economic importance. 

.Prior to 1945 this formation was referred to as 
the T, Lower Cretaceous,” but has been named the Mannville 
formation by Nauss (1945). The writer proposes to retain 
the use of this term. 

Lithology : 

The Mannville formation consists of a series of 
sand and sandstone, siltstone, and silty claystones, with 
carbonaceous material very common. One marine facies 
(Nauss 1945) is recognizable in the lower part of the for¬ 
mation. 

Boundaries of the formation : 


The lowest occurrence of quartz sand or sandstone 




































. . •- . '.r s 














. .. 


■ 




} ‘I •: . 






L -« • •' 'l 


. j • y , r 










- ■' 


i r : 








. / .-"V. > ■ xi J 

' 

• • *.• ' J ' • - ' > - ’ I' - ^ 


• . 

•. , J J .... j- jo JIU 


■ v- : 


.'Si 1 
















34 - 


(in some cases a siltstone) is considered to be the base 
of the Mannville formation. The green claystone lying im¬ 
mediately below is believed to be the residual product of 
erosion. 

The contact of the Mannville formation with the 

overlying Colorado shale is aharp. The uppermost sandstone 

. 

member directly underlies the typical dark grey marine shale 
of the Colorado formation. The most distinctive feature of 
this sandstone is a zone at the top.,not more than a few in¬ 
ches thick, which contains rounded, well polished chert 
pebbles up to 1/4” in diameter. This zone is invariably 
present, and provides an excellent horizon marker. There 
are some who believe this sandstone to be basal Colorado, 
laid down by an incoming sea; others prefer to include it 
in the Lower Cretaceous section proper. For practical 
purposes the latter choice is preferable. It would be extre¬ 
mely difficult to draw a sharp line of demarkation between 
the Mannville and the Colorado if this chert pebble horizon 
is not taken as such. 

Thickness of the formation : 

The thickness of the Mannville in this area varies 
from 248 feet to feet. The significance of this is dis¬ 
cussed on page 80 . 

2. Up o e r Cretaceous 
A. Colorado formation ; 

Well records provide our information ol this marihe. 















1 









-35 


formation in this district as outcrops do not occur. Much 
has been written of this formation and a wide variety of 
names has been proposed. The term Benton has been used 
extensively in the past. Hume (1930) pointed out that 
the so-called Benton of the foothills of Alberta included 
strata that was younger in age than the Fort Benton of 
the Missouri River section. He therefore proposed the 
name l? Alberta formation 11 , and defined it to include 
strata of Montana age as well as the underlying shale 
of Colorado age. No evidence has been given that the 
uppermost part of the Colorado in east-central Alberta 
is of Montana age. Warren (1935) describes "Baculites 
ovatus" from the upper part of the Lee Park formation 
and correlates this with the upper part of the Alberta 
shale in the foothills. The Lea Park formation is 
Pierre in age and on this basis the term "Alberta forma¬ 
tion" is not applicable, in east-central Alberta, to the 
marine shale underlying the Lea Park and overlying the 
Mannville formation. Nauss (1945) substituted the term 
"Lloydminster formation" for "Alberta formation" as he 
recognized that the term "Alberta formation" was being 
used in the plains not in its original sense. 

The writer prefers the term "Colorado formation" 
for these beds. If, as Warren suggests, the Lea Park 
formation is Montana in age, then it is probable that the 
Lea Park is the equivalent of the "Fort Pierre group" as 















- 










n 






J 1 






... . . 


1 . . .. v . 

.. i.. • 


v.}jT 














. 






... 

. 

V • i U i ... 

l \i . J- , , .. • 


. 









- 36 


defined by Meek and Hayden in 1882 (wilmarth, 1938) and 
represents the northern extension of the Pierre sea. 

If this is the case, the use of the terra * Colorado for¬ 
mation* is justifiable and can be considered correlative 
to the Colorado group (i.e..Benton and Niobrara) as re¬ 
stricted by C.A. White in 1878. (Wilmarth, 1938). 

■ 

It should be further pointed out that the 
terra "Colorado" as applied to the plains, enjoys Yride, 
but indefinite, usage among geologists to-day. 

Lithology: 

The Colorado formation in the area, is essen¬ 
tially a dark grey, fissile, marine shale, with two 
prominent zones characterized by white, calcareous specks, i 
Sandstone members are unrecognized in drilling samples 
in the Lloydminster area. "Inoceramus"' prisms and fish 
scales are common. 

Formational Zones and boundaries . 

The Viking sandstone which is present to the 
west of the area and occupies a stratigraphic position 
140 feet above the base of the Colorado, is expressed in 
only one well in the western edge of this district. This 
is in Northwest Mannviile #1 (TWp. 50, Rge. 8, W.4). Chert 
pebbles occur at a depth of 1695 feet (A.C.B. log) but 
the sandstone is not present. This is 135 feet above the 

base of the Colorado, and in keeping w r ith the interval 
in the Viking area. This horizon is reflected by a "kick" 

















. 

• . . . 














. 

' 


. 






* -;i v' 0 . 
















. 




' 

, 


























- 57 


in the electrolog (see Fig. §) but cannot be recognized 
in wells to the east. 

Another feature of significance is a horizon 
approximately 10 feet thick, silty in nature, and carry¬ 
ing abundant fish scales. It is remarkably constant both 
in thickness and stratigraphic position. It occurs ap¬ 
proximately 314 feet above the base of the Colorado, and 
its presence is expressed in the electrologs (see Fig.2). 
One is tempted to correlate this member with the Mowry 
member of the Graneros shale in Wyoming (N.H.Darfon, 1904) 
The Mowry is described as containing abundant fish scales 
This is, indeed, a long range correlation, but the possi¬ 
bility exists that this horizon is a reflection of the 
Mowry shale. 

Second Speckled shale . 

The "second speckled shale ?f is the next highest 
marker bed in the Colorado formation, this zone being 
widespread in the western provinces. The term "speckled 
shale" is derived from the very abundant white, calcareou 
specks present in the shale. 

That the Colorado formation thins from west to 
east is shown diagramatically in Fig. 2. The interval 
between the top of the "second speckled shale" and the 
base of the Colorado decreases from 460 feet at N.W. 

Manville #1 to 417 feet at Community Services #29. This 
is in contrast to the following statement made by Hume 








- 38 - 


and Hage (1943.) - ,T .a decrease in thickness from 

east to west in thatpart of the Alberta formation below 
the lower speckled shale zone." 

The top of the zone is recognized in drilling 
samples by a marked increase in the amount of specks. 

The speckled shale can be observed in samples above the 
top of the zone, but they are in minor percentages and 
are due mainly to cavings from the’1st speckled shale 
zone. 

As shown by Fig. 2, this zone has a characteri¬ 
stic "kick" on the electrolog. It is probably in part 
correlative to the limy speckled shale of the Favel forma¬ 
tion (as defined by Wickenden, 1945) in Manitoba and to 
the Greenhorn limestone member of the Benton formation 
in North Dakota. 

First speckled shale . 

The first occurrence of speckled shale marks 
the contact of the Colorado with the overlying Lea Park 
formation. This contact is 770 feet above the base of 
the Colorado at N.W. M a nnville #1 (A.C.B. log), 767 feet 
at Cannar #25 (A.C.B. log), 745 feet at North Peace 
Kitscoty #1 (A.C.B. logj, 720 feet at Community Services 
#7 (F.H Edmunds - personal communication), and 662 feet 
at Community Services #29 (F.H.SdmAnds - personal commu- 
nication). This again demonstrates the thinning of the 
Colorado from west to east. 










. 


















, • : , . 




•f: - 


. 












i ■ - : 








1 \ 






. 




•y: •. .. & 












- 39 


The occurrence of the specks in the shale 
throughout the section is variable. Hume and Hage (1941, 
Fig. 2) show the distribution of speckled shale within the 
Colorado formation in wells extending from Twp. 51, Rge 15, 
W4, to Twp. 49, Rge. 1, W.4 Other than to show the thin¬ 
ning in the Colorado as a whole, no particular significance 
can be attached to the thickness of the speckled shale zones. 
Unless the formation is cored, inaccuracies in plotting 
the thickness of the zones are apt to occur. Cavings in 
the samples from rotary drill cuttings are apt to give 

inaccurate data in the thickness of speckled shale, in that 

■ 

speckled shale from higher up may contaminate the cuttings 
from a non-speckled horizon. 

The writer has examined only one cored section 
of the Colorado formation, this being from a well in the 
Unity, Saskatchewan, area. White specks are abundant at the 
top of the Colorado, but decrease downward. They are , 

present, however, in minor amounts throughout the upper 

. 

part of the Colorado and again become very numerous at what 
is considered the top of the"2nd speckled shale.” This 
•2nd speckled zone is approximately 35 feet in thickness, 
below which no specks occur. 

Speckled shale occurs at least as far west as 
Vegreville in central Alberta, btit the western limits have 
not as yet been determined. In the southern part of the 
province, the speckled shale zones are difficult to recog- 




















- 40 - 

nize west of Lethbridge (G.M. Furnival, 1946) 

The Boyne member of the Vermilion River beds in 
Manitoba is a speckled shale (Wickenden, 1945). This is 
probably correlative to the Niobrara limy shale in North 
Dakota. Therefore it would seem that the upper speckled 
shale zone occupies approximately the same stratigraphic 
position at the Boyne member and the Niobrara formation. 

In view of this, the marine shale lying between the Lea 
Park and Mannville formation is, strictly speaking, Colo¬ 
rado in age. Hence the ?/riter ! s preference for the term 
Tl Colorado formation. 11 
Thickness of the formation ; 

The Colorado increases from a thickness of 662 

feet at Community Services #29 to 770 feet at N.W.Mannville, 

■ 

i.e. from east to west. 

Controversy as to the age of the lower part : 

Considerable confusion exists as to the exact 
age of the lower part of the Colorado formation. In re¬ 
cent years a lower Cretaceous age has been assigned to 
the 140 feet of marine shale below the Viking sand. 

The foraminifera "Haplophragmoides gigas", 

Cushman, has been used by Wickenaen (1938) to show that 
tnis basal part of the Colorado is Lo?/er Cretaceous in 
age. Cushman (1927) originally described this species 

from its occurrence in the British Petroleums #3 well, 
and on the basis of its stratigraphical position in the 










































. * 



' 






. 


- 



























. 


































. 

■ 




■ 































41 


Colorado shale, assigned to it an Upper Cretaceous age. 
Wickenden (1932) identified the same species from the 
Pelican shale in a well drilled by the G.S.C. in the 
Athabasca area (Twp. 56, Rge. 22, W4). The Pelican shale 
is considered as Lower Cretaceous (Albian) because of its 
stratigraphical position. The Grand Rapids sandstone 
(underlying the Pelican shale) is considered to be corre¬ 
lative to the Peace River sandstone (Lower Cretaceous ) 
of the lower Peace River Valley. The Pelican sandstone 
(overlying the P e lican shale) of the lower Athabasca River 
is thought to be the equivalent of the Dunvegan sandstone 
(Upper Cretaceous) of the Peace River area, this correlation 
being on lithologic grounds. Therefore, the P e lican shale 
is correlated with the Ft. St. John (Shaftesbury) shale 
because of their similarities in stratigraphic position and 
lithology (McLearn, 1944). Because of the occurrence of 
"Haplophragmoides gigas" in the P e lican shale, Wickenden 
assigns a Lower Cretaceous age to this species. It has been 
identified in a number of wells by Wickenden in the marine 
interval belowr the Viking sandstone. 

Hume (1933) correlates the Viking sandstone with 
the Dunvegan and Pelican sandstones, here again implying a 
Lower Cretaceous age to the marine shales below the Viking. 

If the top of the Lower Cretaceous is placed at 
the base of the Viking sandstone, then as shovm by Fig. 2. 













- 42 






this boundary would be unrecognizable in the Lloydminster 
area, the Viking sandstone being absent. 

In the writer*s opinion, too little evidence has 
been presented to make this idea tenable. It has not been 

conclusively shown that the range of "Haploohregmoides 

■ 

gigas" is restricted to the Lovv r er Cretaceous. Neither has 
the correlation of the Viking with the P e lican sandstone 
been based on definite proof, the former being considered 
as marine in origin and the latter continental. 

As has been pointed out, if the Lower Cretaceous 
boundary is drawn at this horizon, it could not be recogiizei. 
in the Lloydminster area, and for practical purposes the 
Lower Cretaceous contact should be considered as being at 
the base of the Colorado marine shale. 

B. Lea Park Formation . 

This formation was named and described by J. A. 
Aillan (1918), the type section being near Lea Park on the 
North Saskatchewan river. Only 575 feet of the upper part 
of the formation is exposed along the North Saskatchewan 

our information of the lower part being derived from well 

' 

samples. Allan assigned a lower Pierre age to the exposed 
section. Warren (1955) corroborated this age determination 

on the basis of the occurrence of ’faculties ovatus” from 

■ 

this horizon. 

. 

Lithology : 

In the western part of the area under. discussion. 















' . , ’ ■ .: 

j. .a : " .. J. 

. . .. - .. . .. - J : ; OV 

. 

. ; • I ■ • : , ' J •. . 'o .. '■. . .. ' .i ■. \1 y I 

' 

' 

. , ; ■ - - - y:u:, •.‘ .> . ■ , .. I ■., 

- 

. . .. .• • J ■ .-i • .» • v . 'L -V . • O L si' Hi : 

n. •• - ) ■ . L J .u t« :-J :• .J . j 

i ... 

. 

. •■■... ., - •. ••• I, 1 . ■ . .. 

' . • 

j .j V; . • • . - I :. . . ... .; 

. 

r 

j: .... j 

. 

5 i . ‘ s. i _ .. • 













- 43 - 


this formation consists largely of marine shale. It 
is somewhat lighter in color than the underlying Colorado, 
being medium grey. It is more massive in character, and 
the typical white specks of the Colorado are absent. It 
is frequently silty, and thin bands of "Ironstone" and 
bentonite are not uncommon. The above observations are 
those of the writer. Nauss (1945) points out that some of 
the disintegrated samples from the lower part of the Lea 
Park were about 90 percent glauconite. H e also draws at¬ 
tention to two contrasting types of pyrite, one pale in 
color, the other deep bronze. The two do not occur to¬ 
gether, and their various zones are helpful in local cor¬ 
relation. 

In the eastern part of the area, a prominent zone 
of sandstone is present at the top of the Lea Park. This 
wedges out to the west (see Fig. 2). This feature has not 
been recognized in the Lloydminster area, and it was er¬ 
roneously assumed that this sandstone horizon was the lower 
part of the Ribstone Creek formation. Fig. 8 illustrates 
the prominent sandstone member of the upper Lea Park in 
Community Services #89. 1^ is fairly well developed in 

Community Services #7, and is reflected to a minor degree 
in the electrolog of the well near Kptscoty. At C&nnar 
#25 it is barely evident, and at N.W. Mannville it cannot 
be recognized. 










3 ^ 




















v- . x. 1 . . ;/"i '-.-■v . - . ■ 






- j.r j . 


U 




. • • . , : 


. .. . ' ; : 






'll: 






■ . 


. 


- , - ... . ... -:q .. : . . .. 

■ 









. ' 



































Hume and Hage (1941) recognize alternating 
shales and sandstones near the top of the Lea Park from 
wells in the Vermilion area, and correlate them with sand¬ 
stones at the top of the Lea Park in the.Rlbstone area. 

This interpretation is probably correct. They associate 
these sandstones with those at Altoba #2 in Saskatchewan 
(Twp. 47, Rge. 26, W.3) and, because they are relatively 
thin at this point, they conclude that these sandstone 
members thin to the east. 

An examination of Fig. 2 indicates that the Lea 
Park sandstone is better developed towards the east, the 
two sandstone lenses at a depth of 240 feet and 385 feet 
in the Cannar #25 well become more prominent at the Kitscotyj 
well, and cannot be identified as two sandstone units in 
the Community Services #7 well. The interval between the 
top of the upper sand and the base of the lower sand de¬ 
creases from west to east (150 feet at Cannar, 130 feet at 
Kitscoty). In the Lloydminster field, these sandstones 
become one unit and average 110 feet in thickness. This 
Is not demonstrated on the electrolog of Community Services 
#7, but the writer has observed electrologs of wells in 
the producing area of the field where this sandstone is 
overlain by shale, and therefore its thickness can be 
determined (e.g. El Lee #1 in Sep. 13, Twp. 49, Rge.I, W.4 
and Smythe #1 in Sec. 21, Twp. 50, Rge. 1, W.4). 





















at. ■ a . ' ... '■ •: -. ' 





. 





. 

. -j ... 




£ • 


. . ■ .■ •: f .. ... 


I . ■ ■ I 

. .. * ■ . . . 

■. 











.. 

■ 

i. I '! : T -> . 


. 

■ 

• .> 

• , . ■ ; . ■ , • ... 1 




iiy.j 












<• 

- 








.• 








!. • j ... 1 • . .. ■ r f.J . 








. 






. 







- 45 


Boundaries of the Formation : 

The contact of the Lea Park formation with the 
underlying Colorado is marked by the first occurrence of 
speckled shale. The top of the formation is placed at 
the contact of the shale with the overlying Lower Ribstone 
Creek sandstone. This upper contact cannot be determined 
in the electrologs of the Lloydminster field as the Lower 
Ribstone Creek sandstone, if present, is not recorded on 
the electrolog due to surface casing in the wells. Wicken- 
den (1941, p.154) recognizes two faunal zones, the micro¬ 
fauna "Epistomina carocolla 1 ’ in the lower part of the Lea 
Park, and "Verneuillina bearpawensis” Wickenden in the upper. 
Thickness of the Formation : 

Unlike the underlying Colorado formation, the 
Lea Park thickens from west to east. At U.W. Marmville #1 
the formation is 780 feet thick; at Kitscoty it attains a 
thickness of 850 feet. It is not possible to determine a 
true thickness further to the east as the contact with the 
overlying Ribstone Creekcannot be picked with accuracy. 

It is the writer’s opinion that the sandstone member gene¬ 
rally encountered between a depth of 100 to S00 feet in the 
Lloydminster field is In the Lea Park formation and is 
stratigraphicaliy lower than the Ribstone Creek. Fig. 2 
shows that the Lower Ribstone Creek sandstone rises strati 
graphically from west to east. If the gradient remains 




















- 46 


constant, it would appear that this unit becomes the sur¬ 
face formation in the vicinity of C.S.#7 and would be 
eroded off not far to the east of this well. However, 

Map 490A (Geol. Survey, Canada) shows Ribstone Creek beds 
as the surface formation 39 miles to the east of the town 
of Lloydminster. The writer wishes to point out that in 
all probability a large area of Lea Park sandstone has 
been mapped as Ribstone Creek to the east of Lloydminster. 
Map #2 shov/s the writer f s conception of the probable Rib- 
stone Creek - Lea Park contact in the Lloydminster area , 
based on electrolog interpretation. 

Wiekenden (1941, p. 153) m cognizes the difficulty 
of differentiating Lea Park sandstone from the overlying 
Ribstone Creek sand, and points out that the overlying 
Ribstone Creek is not so well developed in the Lloydminster 
area, and may be made up*of marine deposits. The writer 
suggests that the marine sandstone of this area is a com¬ 
ponent of the upper part of the Lea Park. 

Correlation : 

Wiekenden (1941, p, 154) suggests similarities 
of the microfauna in the Lea Park with that found in the 
marine beds of Southern Alberta that replace the brackish 
and non-marine beds of the Milk River formation. He, there¬ 
fore, concludes that the Lea Park is the marine equivalent 
of part or all of the Milk River formation. 































' 
















. 


! 






■ 


. ... .. ... ; . 






' 























• 















ELECTROLOG CORRELATION 

MANNVILLE — LLOYDMINSTER 












































































































- 47 


The interfingering non-marine sandstone members 
of the overlying Belly River series wedge out and are in 
part eroded off to the east. The marine shale of the upper 
Lea Park in Saskatchewan represent a change in facies in 
the Belly River series of east central Alberta, though 
erosion has subsequently removed some of the upper part of 
these marine shales. 

C. Belly River Series . 

Lying below the Bearpaw and above the Lea Park 
formations in east-central Alberta, are a series of 
fresh water sandstones and marine shales. J*A.Allan (1918) 
working along the North Saskatchewan River, and S.E.Slipper 
(1918) working to the south recognized and subdivided 
this series into four fresh water formations and one marine. 
Though different names were applied to these formations, 
they are correlative to each other. 

Nauss (1945) in his work on the Vermilion area 
recognizes these divisions but further subdivides the 

series on the recognition of two marine tongues, one in 

- 

the Ribstone Creek formation, the other in the Birch Lake 

* 

' 

formation. These have the effect of dividing both the 

. 

Ribstone Creek and the Birch Lake formations into an upper 
and lower sandstone member. 

The writer has not had occasion to study outcrops 
of these formations, nor subsurfacewsell samples. Fig 4 













• • 




i . ■' .. L .. .. . 

. 

. 

■ •• - i ■ . ' 








•• > v’ -tv. _■ .. \r j ! 








J 










i ■ ' s.'": . ■ .... • .. >• • ii. . , , 






... ■ ...; jC: ■■ t \K \ .oi try* l ct ; 

» • . 

' • • > f .. .... ; , . 








■ 






. • •- : , . ,*■ ... . J . 






r...'. ■ •. ■ • .. : ■; .■ r: >. .:>r ■■ 4: r 

. ... .i ... j . 

■ ... 

, 

. 

■ . > .. , ..... 














48 


is Nauss* interpretation of their stratigraphic position. 
For detailed lithology of these formations the reader is 
referred to Hume and Hage (1S41) and Nauss (1945). 

The latter points out that failure to recognize the marine 
tongues leads to misinterpretation in surface structure. 














' 





. 


. 


























3 9 VIS 
S3IH3S 


'IS 3 V 1AJ 


N V I N ON 3 S 


s n o 3 o v13d o d 3 d d n 


a ^ 
a * 
X <*« 

1/5 * 
£ O 


1 


Z <£ Bi 
" (fl UJ 
^ $ 
5*3 

<o J 


UJ UJ 

r 


o 

° I 
" i 


UJ 

z 

£5^ cc 
<«P ^ 




1 


3 

D 

O 

O ^ • 

jJ. 

7> 


40 


li- u. 

□ 


c» 


to accompany THESIS by J.N.WILLSON 






















































































- 49 - 


CHAPTER 5 . 

THE LOWER CRETACEOUS . j 

Introduction . 

The Lower Cretaceous strata in the Vermilion 
area, Alberta, has been studied in detail by A* W. Nauss 
(1945). Previously unnamed, the'Lower Cretaceous section 
is referred to as the 'Mannville Formation ' by Nauss and 
he has subdivided these beds into six members, differentia¬ 
ting them on the basis of lithology. The type locality is 
in the Northwest Mannville #1 well (l.s .d. 1, sec. 18, 
twp. 50, rge 8, W*4). These members have been given names 
of local geographical significance. From the base to the 
top of the formation, the members are as follows : the Dina, 
Cummings, Islay, Tovell, Borradaile, and O'Sullivan. With 
t?\ro exceptions, these names are retained in this thesis. 

Because of the marked lithologic and stratigraphic 
relationship oi the Dina member with the McMurray formation, 
a correlation of these two Is feasible. Since the term 
''McMurray' 1 , as defined by McLearn (1917), has priority, the 
writer has replaced the term *Dina* in preferance to the 
term 'McMurray.' 

Nauss named the principal oil producing sand of 
the Mannville formation the 'Borradaile member'. For a number 
of years this horizon has been commonly termed the 'WainwrigMt 






















- 50 - 


sand 1 since it was from this zone in the Wainwright area 
that oil in commercial quantities was first produced*- 
Hence the writer uses the term 1 Wainwright member 1 in pre ~ 
fere nee to *Borradaile member.* 

The distinguishing characteristics of the members 
in the Mannville formation have been defined by Nauss. 
Briefly they are as follows: 

(1) McMurray (Dina) memb er - Well sorted, frosted and 
rounded, unconsolidated quartz sand with interbedded silt 
and shale. Dark minerals are noticeably rare. The lower 
limit coincides with the base of the Mannville and its 
upper limit is at the highest occurrence of quartz sand. 
Thickness varies from 0 to 150 feet, 

(2) Cummings member - Dark grey to black shale, abun¬ 
dant pyrite and foraminifera, Beds of *salt and pepper* 
sandstone are not uncommon. Thickness varies from 0 to 90* 
in the Vermilion area. 

(3) Islay member - Unconsolidated, wgll sorted, rounded 
and somewhat frosted q uartz sand. Dark minerals present 
only in small amounts. Several very thin coal seams in 
the upper part. 

(4) Tovell member - Massive, coarse, * salt and pepper* 
sandstone, grey shale > with abundant plant remains and some 
thin coal seams. 














51 


(5) Wainwright (Borradaile) member - Unconsolidated, 
well sorted and rounded quartz sand* Grey shale containing 
woody plant remains also present. This is the producing 
horizon in the Wainwright, Vermilion and Lloydminster area. 

(6) O’Sullivan member - Consists of ’salt and pepper’ 
sandstone, grey shale and several prominent coal seams. 

An examination of the above criteria demonstrates 
that the members can be differentiated from each other only, 
on the character of the sandstones contained by them. They 
are alternating quartz and ’salt and pepper’ sands or sand¬ 
stones. This has been the basis for the writer’s division 
of the Mannville formation in the Lloydminster area. 


Method of Study . 

With the aid of a binocular microscope, core 
samples of the Mannville formation in N. W. Mannville #1 
and C.S. #7 were studied, and logged in order of increasing 
depth. It was found that the information obtained was of 


a general nature and not in enough detail for correlation 




purposes. Therefore, these samples were re-studied and 
binocular observation was supplemented by a petrographic 
examination, immersion mounts being made at each lithologic 
change. It was felt that an examination of the core samples 
from the base of the formation to the top (i.e. in the order 

in which they Were originally deposited) would be desirable. 
This was done, even though it represented a departure from , 



























: 




































vj 

>r ' 








. 

■ - , 

■ 

.. 














52 


the usual practice. The core samples of Angle Horae Buffalo 
Coulee #1 and Wainwright Development #1 were also logged 
in this manner. 

Because of the importance of the sandstone units 
for correlation purposes, they were accorded a more de¬ 
tailed study. To prepare them for examination, the fine 
silty material was first removed. This was accomplished 
by crushing the sandstone and then washing the. sample several 
times with water. During this process an art-gum eraser 
was used to scrub the sand in order to remove the silty 
particles adhering to the individual grains. Ether was 
used to dissolve the hydrocarbons from the oil-stained 
sands. The samples were then observed microscopically and 
data regarding their lithologic character and grain size 
noted. 

In addition to the above, samples of a claystone 
and siltstone nature were disintegrated in the hope that 
microfauna could be found. The samples were finely 

i 

crushed and then heated with a solution of sodium hydroxide. 
They were then scrubbed with an art-gum eraser which reduced 
them to a finely divided state. However, with one or two 
exceptions, the results from this operation were negative. 

C. Lithology. 

Sands and Sandstones ; 

The sands and sandstones of the Mannville forma- 














53 


tion may be differentiated into two contrasting types. 

It is on this basis that the Mannville formation may be 
divided into members. They are: (a) "Quartz" sandstones; 

(b) ! Salt and pepper T sandstone. 

The quartz sandstones are common to the MeMurray, 
Islay and Wainwright members. As the term implies, the 
sandstones are composed essentially of quartz grains. They 
range in size from silt dimensions to ,7 mm. The finer 
the size, the less rounded are the grains. They may be 
frosted and pitted or clear and glassy, implying that the 
agent of transportation was not always the same. Feldspar 

4 

generally occurs in minor amounts, and appears to be more 
prevalent when the sandstone is fine grained. The feldspar 
is usually highly altered, and kaolinite, which is regarded 
as the decomposition product of feldspar, is the main matrix 
material of the sandstones, then the grain size is small, 
the kaolinitic material is more abundant; consequently, the 
porosity is reduced. Heavy minerals such as zircon, tour¬ 
maline, apatite and titanite appear to be more numerous 
in the sandstones of this type. 

The term ! salt and pepper * is used to describe 
sandstones which contain dark grains in appreciable amounts. 
This type of sandstone is common to the Cummings, Tovell 
ano. 0 ! Sullivan members. THeir mineral and rock assemblage 
is very heterogeneous and is composed of the following: 














- 54 - 


(1) Quartz grains : Angular to subrounded, clear and 
glassy, and range up to .4 mm in diameter. They can be 
easily recognized under the binocular microscope . 

(2) Feldspar: These grains are cream-colored to 
chalky white, the latter color being confined to the more 
highly altered feldspar. As a rule the grains retain a 
rectangular shape which is a reflection of their cleavage. 
Some of the chalky white grains are fairly soft and appear 
to be kaolinitic aggregates. Commonly the feldspar has a 
sub-vitreous lustre and can readily be confused with chert 

under the binoculars. They can be differentiated readily 

■ 

under the petrographic microscope, not only because of the 
crypto-crystallinity of the chert, but also because the 
feldspar is commonly brown in color, the chert being color¬ 
less except for its black inclusions. Some of the gldspar 
grains show twinning. 

(2) Green minerals : There appears to be three different 
types of green colored grains in the sandstones, though 
all of these varieties are not necessarily present in the 

same bed. 

* 

(a) Very finely cryptocrystalline, fairly hard, 
sub-vitreous, green grains. The green color 
is not apparent under the petrographic micro¬ 
scope. The index of refraction approximates 

that of quartz and on this basis it is assumed 

that the grains are a variety of finely divided 
silica. 






















■ . ’ . ) 

. i : ■ < f! ,,i. ■ Jr??. ■ V I'- - - -j 

. J i . .. . ■ . 1 v„ x 




•c ■ ; i 

■. i . i 

■ • i 


, > 








.*3 , , ; re.- .. J • *: 


i, 




. 


; \ i .>.,j • s,.i 

:a - ' ■ - 


. 













55 - 


(b) Fairly bard aggregates of green mineral 
that show a linear arrangement and retain 
tbeir color under the petrographic microscope, 
Differs from glauconite in having an index of 
refraction less than 1*584. Due to its 
structural habit, it is considered that these 
are fragments of chlorite schist. 

(c) Glauconite. Fairly soft, lamellar grains 
that are a darker green color than the above- 
mentioned grains. They are slightly anistro- 
Die and the index of refraction is greater 
than 1.58 and less than 1*61. This is in 

ij 

keeping with the index for glauconite. 

(4) Chert : These grains are smoky colored and have a 
sub-vitreous lustre. Contain numerous black colored in- 

li 

elusions which are in part magnetic. Under transmitted 
light the grains are colorless with the exception of the 

inclusions. They are cryptocrystalline, and bear a re- 

. 

markable resemblance to the chert f£om the Rundle formation. 

(5) Quartzite : Similar in appearance to quartz grains 
but are readily determined under the petrographic microscope, 
Tney form a minor constituent in the T salt and pepper 1 sand- 
stones. 

(6) Argillite : The main dark colored constituent in 
the *salt and pepper* type of sandstone. The grains are 
hard and have a sub-resinous lustre. Under transmitted 












'• - - -i . ■ , ... .. 

I . 

. 


. 

. 


.. 

L 

. 

■ ■ - ' . •• - -.'i S'-'i. ■: - 

■ ■■ . - ■ ’ • ■ ■ - . - w ^ ^ 

. 

• • ■ ■ M . t ■ 

■ 

• • . . . . 










■.... • : 








• - 










56 


light they are transparent around the edges of the 
grains but opaque in the centre. When very finely 
crushed the material is anisotropic. 

(7) Carbonaceous grains : These are present in minor 
amounts but their dark color gives a ’pepper T effect to 
the sandstone. They are much softer than the argillite 
and are completely opaque and isotropic. 


Silts tones . 

These rocks vary in colors from very light grey 


to dark grey, their variations in color apparently due 
to the relative percentage of carbonaceous material. 

Quartz grains are the major clastic with well- 
altered feldspar present in minor amounts. The light grey 
to white colored siltstones have a kaoiinitic matrix, and 
it is considered that the darker colored siltstones have 
a similar matrix, the darker color being derived from a 
carbonaceous coating on the silt particles. Finely divi¬ 
ded carbonaceous material is also associated with the ar¬ 
gillaceous (kaoiinitic) matrix. 

In places the siltstones are commonly very, thin- 
bedded, with thin alternating dark and light colored bands^ 
Cross-bedding is common when this association is present. 


Claystone . 


I 


Claystones, in the strict sense of the term, con- 






















- 57 


stitute a very small percentage of the beds in the Mann- 
ville formation and their presence is confined to the 
Cummings marine member. These claystones are composed 
of very finely divided argillaceous material and their dark 
grey to black color is due to a fairly high carbonaceous 
content. These claystones are, as a rule, fairly massive. 

The writer also applies the term claystone to 
rocks that are dark grey in color and appear to be entirely 
argillaceous. However, a petrographic examination reveals 
varyingproportions of quartz and some feldspar of silt di¬ 
mensions. Consequently, they are not true claystones. 

When their silty character is not observed under the bi¬ 
nocular microscope, the term claystone is used. 

*Claystone* is used in preference to the term 
1 shale*. If the claystone has a typical shale parting, it 
is described in the logs as fissile or thin-bedded. 

Thin flakes of micaceous-appearing material are 
commonly associated with the claystones and siltstone. 

They have been determined petrographically as transparent 
flakes of selenite. 

Other rock types . 

Coal seams are fiirly common throughout the for¬ 
mation but do not attain a thickness of greater than two 
feet. The majority of seams are only a few inches thick 

with thin claystone partings in the seam quite common. 


















.,‘7. I;.:,,- 


- i 







> ■. i. 









. 


./ 



i L^, 


J 






7 . . •, ...- , j UV; :7 ‘ 

V •> ’ • - J . ..... 

, ■ v J x v. .. 

; ;•••. r..i * i , J 

. . .. J ‘ •; 

i 

■ ..A Ui . 


. . 

. 
















58 


f Ironstone * bands are common and vary in 
thickness from a few inches to two feet. They are very 
hardj buff, dense to lithographic siderite, sometimes 
exhibiting a concentric pattern. 

C arbonate material is commonly found as ‘a cement¬ 
ing matrix in some of the sandstone members. This usually 
takes the form of calcite, but a siderite matrix is some¬ 
times present. A notable feature is that the carbonate ma¬ 
trix, when present, is confined to the »salt and pepper* 
sandstones. 


Discussion of the Type Section of the Mannville Forma¬ 
tion . 

I 

Introduction . 

In order to become familiar with the lithology 
of the Mannville formation, the w r riter first studied the 
type section. This has been designated by Nauss (1945, pge 
1609) as the section in the Northwest Mannville Well #1. 

He states that the names of the members are taken from other 
localities in the Vermilion area where these members are 
well developed. Core samples of N.W.Mannville #1 were ob¬ 
tained fxom the Alberta Petroleum and Natural Gas Conserva- 
tion Board. 

The entire Mannville formation was cored, and the 
interval for each core varied from three feet to ten feet. 





















- { 
























59 


the majority of the cores being of the latter length. A 
cut of the cores was bottled by the Conservation Board 

tu 

and each bottle labled as to depth.. - Unfornately, the 
recovery from each cored interval was not always 100%. 
When this was the case, the interval cored was recorded 
on each sample bottle. If several lithologic changes oc¬ 
curred within the recovered part of thecore, numbers in 
brackets were used to indicate each change. They were 
numbered progressively from the top of each core. For 
example, in the interval 2278»-88’ only 6 ft. 3 in. of 
core was recovered.. This core showed three lithologic 
changes. As the depth of each change could not be placed 
with accuracy, three samples were taken and labelled as 
follows: 

2278»-2288» (l) 

2278 T -2288 1 (2} 

2278»-2288* (3) 

The writer has followed this practice in the detailed log 
of this well. 

Considerable difficulty was encountered in 
comparing iampie depths with those indicated on the electr 
log. The writer has drawn attention to some of these in 
the log and has picked the contacts of the members from 
the electrolog in preference to the sample depths. 

A case in point is the interval shown for the 
Islay member on the electrolog by Nauss (1945, Fig. 3) 
and the depths recorded by him for this member in his 























.. -iv J SCs.'J ;Ui U J 

v . x ; , , .• ... ■ j , . ■}' \;£ - V J 

V .J . ... j ' .... J 1 

. . ) 

- i j i ■ .. 'I v. ■ ... ..; J... ,. . i ... 




I J* .7*1: 


■ •' : 


. . ...■• .. i ,, . ''-if 

j: ., > ... ■ .. •• . 




■ 


■ i jM- 




: . • » 

• 1 . . 


. .; \ • L a . . 




' 


. . ,. 






J.G .v-'i ' i 


. .. y v' 




.. o. ' i 

■. ,.J ' .... J : v Vi ■ J 

. , . .. 


, 


. .. J . ... : ' a 


■ 


■ r, ■ .. 










- 60 - 

sample log (page 1613). The figure shows the top of the 
Islay member to be 254* below the top of the Maxmville 
formation, while the sample log records this contact as 
being 262* below the top, a difference of 8 feet. 

Discussion 

The lithologic criteria for a division of the 
Mannville formation as proposed by Nauss (1945, p.1613- 
1615) has been accepted by the writer. The salient and 
only feature of this criteria that has proved to be ap¬ 
plicable is the type of sandstone within each member. 

(See page 5/L ). 

(1) McMurray (Dina) member ; 

Quartz sands and sandstones, with minor amounts 
of siltstones and some claystones are the main features 
of this member. The potential curve of the electrolog has 
quite a few maxima, thus indicating fairly high porosity 
at these intervals. The impedence or resistance curve is 
of a negative character which suggests asalt water content. 
However, two maxima do occur at 2204* and 2189*; these 
coincide with oil-stained sandstone samples. 

Nauss places the top of the McMurray member at 
2193*—presumably the highest occurrence of quartz sand. 
There is, however, no distinct lithologic difference be¬ 
tween the sands at 2182*-8o* and those at 2205*-09*; both 
sands are quartzose and have dark constituents in only 






















' ’ ' U 


• 




1 


. 




. 













• 





























- 61 - 


miner amounts. The first occurrence of * salt and pepper T 
sandstone is at 2178 T (sample depth) and this sandstone 
contains abundant glauconite; It represents a change 
in sedimentation, the glauconite suggesting marine con¬ 
ditions. This is consistent with the opinion of Nauss 
who considers that the Cummings member (which overlies 
the McMurray) is of marine origin. On this basis the 
writer places the top of the McMurray at 2180 ! -— the high¬ 
est occurrence of quartz sand beneath the glauconitic 
sandstone. 

(2) Cummings, Islay and Tovell Members : 

This member is predominantly a marine shale 
in the type section. A 1 salt and pepper 1 glauconitic 
sandstone is at the base and this is overlain by black 
marine shale containing foraminifera at a depth of 2160 
Interbedded siltstone and *salt and pepper’ sandstones 
are fairly common in the upper part. Cross-bedded silt- 
stone is present at 2165 f . 

The upper limit of this member is placed at the 
first occurrence of quartzsand. (hauss, 1945, page. 1614) 
In the type section well Nauss records a thickness of 
20 feet for this overlying Islay quartz sand member, 

(2095 ! -2115 T ). After a careful study of the sands in 
the Cummings, Islay and Tovell members, the writer is 
unable to make a lithological distinction between them. 











' 










. 


.. ) . . 

t£. 










' • O' 


























' 


- 




. 

■ 




. 










- 62 - 


The Islay member fails to conform to the criteria as de¬ 
fined by Nauss in that appreciable amounts of dark con¬ 
stituents other than carbonaceous grains (i.e. argillite 
and chert) are present. Hence it cannot be defined as a 
f quarts sandstone*. Therefore, if the Islay member can¬ 
not be recognized, the Cummings and Tovell members must be 
! treated as one unit unless other diagnostic properties, which 
! the writer has been unable to find, can be shovm to exist. 

It is of interest to note that foraminifera have been 
found by Nauss in the Tovell member as well as in the 
Cummings in N.W. Mannville #1 (Nauss, 1945. p. 1613), 
thus suggesting marine affinities in each member. 

In view of the impossibility of recognizing 
the Islay member in the type section, the strata between the 
top of the M<jMurray member and the base of the Wainv/right 
member are treated as one unit by the writer. The writer 
proposes the term ^Buffalo Coulee member* for this zone. 

Abbording to Nauss (1945, p. 1609) the name 
* Islay* is taken from a locality to the east of the type 
section well where the qxartz sands of this member are well 
developed. (N.W.Islay well #1 sec. 34, twp. 50, rge 5, W.4). 
This locality is approximately half way between Vermilion 
and Lloydminster. The writer finds the sands of the Islay 
member at Lloydminster a prominent zone, and therefore does 
not question the naming of this member. He merely wishes to 







|M 










. 

. : - j 






. .. . TS 

l -', * . ■ 


■ 

• 

V. 

1 

- . 



:>lp. ■ 


.. 

' 



J \ '■ 

V ■ ‘ 

VW ' J i 

- 




. 

. s . .. / 

. , 

. 

x - n i 1 


• 

... 

- 




. .. . 


' i J ': 0 


JS J • 


zu -u 




j. ■’ 


J •• i vi ' 


• yy. 

i, x A/ - 


Xvj ..X t .1 'i 


‘ ; ■ S 

. 


.j . ■•) . 
















■ U 




.i . -• i ■ 


i < 






- 65 


point out that it does not exist as such in the type 
section well. 

In view of the fact that the Islay member cannot 
be apcognized, the top of the Buffalo Coulee member must 
be placed at the base of the first occurrence of a quartz 
sand. This will be at the base of the Wainwright member 
which occurs at 8080 T in the type well, and the Buffalo 
Coulee member will therefore be 148 T in thickness. It is 
not suggested that this section is marine in its entirety, 
but this could nevertheless be the case. 

Some of the sandstone members of this interval 
have fair porosity, as indicated by the potential curve 
of the electrolog. That they are not oil-sands is demon¬ 
strated by the lack of maxima in the impedence curve. One 
maximum does occur at 8068 f but this is a result of a very 
hard, calcareous horizon, the upper part becoming porous 
due to a decrease in carbonate content. 

(5) Wainwright Member . 

The base of tnis member is placed at the first 
occurrence of quartz sand above the Buffalo Coulee member 
or, if present, the fovell member, i.e. at 8080* in the 
type well. There is no difficulty in recognizing the 
member as the sands are without dark colored constituents. 

The top of the zone is placed at the uppermost limit of 
this type of sand—at 1988». This member is therefore 38 
























, 























. 

. •. J '■ 


I J_ j __ . 



















: - i 


• r . . I 


. 






: j 




j . >-r • . • 




. ■ . J - ■ J : . J: 














. 






















- 64 


feet thick in the type well. 

This horizon is the producing zone in the 
Wainwright, Vermilion, and Lloydminster oil fields. 

In N.W.Mannville #1 the electrolog indicates a porous 
section for the Wainwright member and, though oil-staining 
is present in the samples, the impedence curve suggests a 

salt-water content. 

j 

(4) 0*Sullivan Member . 

This is the uppermost member of the Mahnville 
formation and is characterized by T salt and pepper T sand¬ 
stones in a series of thin-bedded argillaceous siltstones 
and silty claystones. Some thin coal seams are present. 

In the type well this member occurs at a depth of 1833 
1982i, giving a thickness of 149The top of this member 
is marked by a chert pebble .horizon and this is the con¬ 
tact of the overlying Colors-do formation. The uppermost 

■ 

sandstone horizon, with the chert pebbles at the top, is 
commonly referred to as the T Contact sand.’ In the Lloyd- 
minster area it is termed the * Colony sand. T 

The electrolog of the type well shows several 
maxima on the potential curve indicating porous sandstone. 
The impedence curve is not distinctive for these sandstones, 
suggesting an absence of oil or gas. 










-65 


Correlation of the Members of the Mannvill jL^oi^c^lon. 

’ ' (As depicted in Figure.3) 

Introduction. 

Figure 3 shows diagrammatically the correlation 
of the Mannville formation in Community Services #7, 
Northwest Mannville #1, Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee #1 
and Wainwright Development #1. 

The electrolog of Community Services #29 is also 
shown on Fig. 3. This well was completed in the fall of 
1946 and the writer did not have access to the samples. 

Up to this time the only method available for electro¬ 
logging was the type used by the Ealiburton Company Limi¬ 
ted. C.S. &3 and N.W. Mannville #1 were electrologged by 
the Ealiburton Company. Recently the Schlumberger Well 
Surveying Corporation has brought a new type of electro¬ 
logging equipment into the field and C.S. #29 was the first ! 
well in the Lloydminster area to be logged by this method. 
The writer Is not sufficiently familiar with the Schlum- 

i 

berger electrolog to correlate the members of the Mannvillej 
formation in C.S. #7 with those in C.S, #29 though the wells 
are only six miles apart. F.H.Edmunds (pers. comm.) has 
supplied the Colorado/Mannviile and Mannville/Paleozoic 
contacts. The attention of the reader is directed to seve¬ 
ral salient features in each of these electrologs which 

probably represent thesame horizon. It shows C.S.#29 to 
.be structurally higher than C.S.#7 in the upper part of 

the Mannville formation. 










. 
















* • ' ' V • , 








. 










■ 






. 


















. . 




. . 






















66 


The Paleozoic contact is lower in C.S. #29, and as a re¬ 
sult of this the McMurray member is probably much thicker. 

Correlation 

(1) McMurray Member 

A considerable variation in the thickness of 
this member exists due mainly to the irregular surface on 
which it was deposited. Where the top of the eroded 
Paleozoic T Lime ! is high, as in Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee 
#1, the McMurray is absent; where the Paleozoic surface 
is Ioyt, this member attains a considerable thickness 9 

In C.S. #7 this member is 182 T thick and is 
composed almost entirely of unconsolidated to poorly in¬ 
durated quartz sands. In N.W. Mannville #1 the thickness 
is 152 T and its sands are finer grained. The “quartz* 
sands predominate but there is considerable interbedded 
siltstone and. claystone. In Angle-Home Buffalo Coulee #1 
the McMurray is absent and in Wainwright Dev. #1 it is 
difficult to recognize. It may be present in the latter 
well as a quartz siltstone. The top of the Paleozoic is 
also high at this locality. 

From a study of the above-mentioned wells, 
several features of the M c Murrgy member in this area are 
noticeable. It thins from east to west and from north to 
south. This is accompanied in the same direction by a de 






- ■■ .. i : 



. 

. .. 

' .... 

. .. i - ^ 



i ■ i n ) 


1 ■ ■ ■ . 

. 


■ - . . .. j . . ‘ ...Vi ! , 

: •' ■ : ■ : J : J ■ • i 


- '.. • I J,: . •. r - . J 

.. . j- . .... j 


■W ; . r,: 

, .... ........ J 7„...' 

■, • •• 

■■ v u ■ ■. v . ’ S 

; > ■ . i . :j 

■ ' I 


f 


.. j x. . .. > ... 

. vi <J j . ■ . i , »... 

S.... . > . 

• . . .: , . 

j n , i , 

j .J vj . .. ,. j. •• .. : i ; 

j ... - .l.L . 

: • ■ • • , r 

' • 

< ... < . .. J . 

1 ... « .., 

’* > > . 


. • . . :■ i ... v o 


■ (’ ■■ . ■■ 

JJ« , . ' f 


! . • P- f 

< •• 



■ 


. . • J ■ 1. 

i ■: 









- 67 


- 


crease in grain size and an increase in the relative per¬ 
centage of siltstone and claystcne. On this basis the 
writer assumes that the source of the sediments was from 
the north-east. Some may argue that the thickness of the 
McMurray Member is entirely a function of the irregular 
Paleozoic surface. To a certain extent this is true but. 
if this were the only factor involved, the McMurray member 
should be thicker at N.W.Mannville #1 than at C.S. #7, the 

■ 

top of the Paleozoic in the former being 94 feet lower than 
the top of the Paleozoic in the latter. The thicker section 
is, however, in C.S. #7. 


The McMurray member has several distinct litho¬ 
logic features which arenot present in the overlying mem¬ 
bers of the Mannville formation. In Wainwright Dev. #1 
there is 30 feet of pale green claystone interbedded with 

kaolinitic siltstone occurring at the base of this member. 

/ 

Siderite oolites are common at the top of the zone. In N.W 
Mannville #1 oolitic siltstone occurs 85 T above the base. 

In C.S. #7 a thin bed of * waxy*, dark brown clays tone 
with abundant pyrite spherules occurs 100 feet above the 
base. The pale green claystones and oolitic zones are 
more prominently developed to the south in the E&gerton 
#4 and Martin #1 wells (R.L. Rutherford logs. Waxy, 
putty colored claystones with abundant splattered cpartz 
grains are common to the basal lower Cretaceous of the 


. 




l 



southern plains of Alberta, in the Border/Red Coulee 










. 





. . 




■ i . ! 


d 







. 





j : ,, 









68 


field of Alberta and Montana splattered quartz grains 
arecommon in the Variegated Shale member of the Sunburst 
zone, and rest on the Ellis formation of Upper Jarassic 
age, (Erdmann and Schwabrown, 1941). A typical section of 
the Sunburst zone in southern Alberta consists of varicolo¬ 
red shale containing splattered quartz grains and this is 
overlain in many wells by an ostracod horizon. The ostra- 
cod horizon is considered as the top of the Sunburst zone 
with the base of the Sunburst resting on the chert detrital 
zone where the Jurassic Ellis formation is absent. In 
Martin #1, 15 miles south of Wainwright, the ostracod 
horizon is present and overlies 100 feet of loose sand and 
pale green to brovmish, waxy claystone containing splat¬ 
tered quartz grains, some oolites and pyrite spherules. 

(Ian Cook log of Martin #1). In Wainwright Development 
#1 and in N. W* Mannville #1 the ostracod zone has not 
been observed but oolites occur. In C.S. #7 pyrite sphe - 
rules are present in a waxy claystone underlain by 100 feet 
of loose sand. Evidently then, the Sunburst type of sedi¬ 
mentation in the south has a counterpart in the Wainwright- 
Vermilion-Lloydminster area. The zone is much thicker in 
the north wuth loose sand predominating. To the south 
varicolored claystone with splattered quartz grains is 
the main feature, loose sand being thin or absent and the 

zone as a whole being relatively thin. The quartz grains 
whether present as loose sand or as splattered grains in 










. 















• • . I ■ 4 *;M. , , 

• • - • . .. -■ .. .u: 






• 'v; J 4 . fi".4, i.... * ■ • i t-u0 v.-Ji,);.; 




■ -• v.- j-'.-'fO ■ I, .. i:,y . : 

. 




- •• . f • - i • J l . U JS> ■■ k.jy -j - V '1J "’j' ■ ■■i.j;;. 

, 




.« - 1 ‘! t‘. ... > .. j 

' ... j • -.. '• . i ■ . vt ; . ; .... , 

■ ; i : ; J. .. ...... .: ,, i ..... , :: ip .; j 

•: ill 7 


r 

j ■. ix : j 








. TV -v'- < , , ■ ■ J 4^ V ' - . ... ..... 

\ - , '■■. ■ • ' - ..J , • .1- 







..... . i 

. . . . . .. - j , j ■ ... : v , ,,1 . . ; 

... 






■ . . ... V . 1 . . . . J .. 

... 

.; ,,i. ...... .. , 










- 69 


claystone, have a frosted and pitted appearance, and sug¬ 
gest transportation by wind. 

The v,Titer believes that the source bed of the 
quartz grains was toe Athabaska sandstone of supposedly late 
Precambrian age. At the present time this formation our- 
crops over a considerable portion of the Canadian Shield 
immediately to the south of Lake Athabaska and its areal ex¬ 
tent was probably greater in L 0 wer Cretaceous time. Litho¬ 
logically the Athabaska sandstone is essentially quartz 
grains with minor amounts of feldspar. Dark grains of 
chert or argillite were not observed in the specimen 


studied by the writer. 


The loose, frosted and pitted quartz grains of 
the McMurray member suggest aeoli&n opposition. Arid con¬ 
ditions were probably more pronounced in east-central Al¬ 
berta at this time than in the region to the south where 
a better-developed zone of variegated claystone is believed 
to represent the same'stratigraphic horizon. The rounded, 
frosted quartz grains splattered throughout these claystones 
were probably blown inborn the Shield as the claystones were 
being formed under less arid conditions. 

(8) Cummings M P mber 

Nauss (1945, p. 1614) considers that this member 


is a southern extension of the Clearwater sea and he con¬ 
siders that the Cummings is probably a wedge-edge of the 

Clearwater shale which is about 275 feet thick on the 


















- 70 - 


Athabaska river. Foraminifera are fairly common in the 
dark gre to black shales of this member. T Salt and pepper 
sandstones are also prominent. 

In C.S.#7 the writer places the base of this 

j 

member at a glauconite T salt and pepper ! sandstone bed, 
the presence of the glauconite indicating marine conditions 
In N.W.MannvjHe #1 and in Wainwright Dev. #1 glauconite 
is common in this horizon. Its absence at Anglo-Home 
B.C. #1 may be explained by the fact that the Paleozoic 
thigh 1 was an island during the incoming of this sea. 

The term 1 Buffalo Coulee 1 has been applied by 
the writer to the beds overlying the McMurray and -under¬ 
lying the Wainwright member in the?® 11s other than C.S. #7. 
The Islay member is well developed in C.S. #7 and hence 
the Cummings, underlying the Islay, can be recognized in 
this well. Such is not the case in the other wells where 
the quartz sandstone of the Islay member is not present 
and the upper limit of the Buffalo Coulee member is placed 
at the base of the Wainwright member where the first de¬ 
finite lithologic change occurs. In so doing the writer 
does not wish to imply that all the Buffalo Coulee member 
in these wells is marine, for evidence o-f imarine beds is 
confined to the lower part. 

The Cummings member is distinctive in that its 

sandstones contain appreciable amounts of chert and ar¬ 
gillite, and feldspar is more abundant than in the Mc-murra y 








-y 










. i. T - 








. . 


t .. . ;; 

: 






■ •' 





. 

. 

. 

■ ' " ■■ ■ * . 




) 








• . 


, • ... / • . . •; - ; j ' . 




1 ■ : : Y : : 












; 

• V v ; -IX " ;; : • ■ ■, 






■ ■ f v . 





f 


' 


' 












- 71 - 


member. For this reasgn the writer is of the opinion 
that the elastics of the Cummings and McMurray members 
■were not of the same source. The sandstones of the 
Cummings member bear a litnologic similarity to those 
of the Blairmore formation in the Foothills where chert, 
argillite, feldspar ana quartz comprise the dominant 
elastics (J. L. Carr, 1946, p. 217 a). Carr concludes that 
the Selkirk- Mountains were probably the source of this 
group of sediments. This suggests that the Clearwater sea 
has received sediments from this direction for elastics of 
this type occur at least as far east as Lloydminste r. 

Little can be interpreted from relative grain' 
size in the sandstones of the Cummings member . They vary 
from .05 to .4 mm,, and, if anything,appear to be a little 
coarser to the.west. This would be expected as the source 
of these beds is believed to have been to the west. 

(3) Islay Member 

The sands of this member represent a return to 
the McMurray type of sedimentation. They are essentially 
fine grained quartz sand and sandstone with considerable 
quartz siltstone. Dark constituents are confined to 
carbonaceous grains. 

These beds are 83 feet thick in C.S. #7 but cannot 

be recognized to the west in N.W. Mannville #1. In N.W. 
Islay #1, located about halfway between these two wells. 











; j - ■ : ■ . 










Li - r • ' 


, j. ; ». . £*> 


..I 


, : .-I \ 




l . .. . 

; : " ... : .. J . : 




... ... .. ... ' .. t. ii o .... v) j . 

XI -J -J \i :h ;. ..o\.n .... 


: T c.;- j . 


: ■ ) 


■ 


;. o • 0 = f , 

f 

. 


■- • - 




. 










. 


•. . ; ... ... WJ ■ ... i : J iv sCXitt yi itfX 

.. '. 

. i - . ... . . . - . 

X:'- ... .> -i , ... . .,.J r‘i , ■ . AV J ■ '. ...• ‘rJ 




1 j 

I 






. , JL 










'J 







- 72 - 


Nauss (1945, p.1611) gives a thickness of approximately 
GO feet to this member. This demonstrates a thinning 
from east to west and suggests that these sediments were 
carried in from the Shield as were the McMurray sands. 

This idea is further strengthened by the fact that both 
these members have similar lithologic features. The 
quartz in the Islay member is finer grained, less rounded, 
and lacks the attributes of a wind-blown type of deposit. 
Pres umably they were water-transported. 

(4) Tovell Member 

This member can be recognized only when the 
underlying Islay member is present; therefore, C.S. #7 
is the only well observed by the writer in which the Tovell 
occurs (see FIG. 3) 

Lithologically the sandstones of this member 
are so similar to those of the Cummings that they cannot 
be differentiated from each other. The presence of chert, 
argillite, quartz and feldspar in the sandstones indicates 
that the source of some of these elastics was the Selkirk 
Mountains as they existed in Lower Cretaceous time. 

(5) Wainwright Member . 

This member is easily recognized in the four 
wells studied and consists of a quartz sand or siltstone. 

It is overlain by the 0*Sullivan member which contains 














- 74 - 


’salt and pepper’ sandstones. 

In C.S.#7 the Wainwright has a thickness of 
72 feet. In N. W. Mannville #1, A. H. Buffalo Coulee #1, 
and Wainwright Dev. #1, this member has a thickness of 
28, 12 and 4 feet respectively. Grain size attains a 
maximum of .2 mm to the east. Lithologic similarities 
exist between the Wainwright, Islay and McMurray members. 
For these reasons the writer also interprets this member 
as being derived from the Athabaska sandstone of the 
Canadian Shield. The clear, sub-angular to sub-rounded 
quartz grains of this member suggest that they were water 
transported. 


(6) 0 ’SQllivan Member . 

The ’salt and pepper* sandstones of this member 
are well developed in Wainwright Dev. #1. Fig. 3 shows 
that to the east (C.S.#7) sandstones form a relatively 
small percentage of the O’Sullivan, and they are finer 
grained . Lithologically they resemble the Tovell and 
Cummings sandstones. Therefore, it is believed that the 
elastics of this member were brought in from the Selkirks 












- 75 - 


Summary of Geologic History , 

Following the deposition of the Paleozoic 
formation, a protracted period of erosion ensued. Missis 
sippian rocks were probably deposited in the Lloydminster 
Vermilion-Wainwright area but erosion has removed all 
trace of them, as well as a considerable portion of the 
Upper Devonian strata. The erosion surface of the lime¬ 
stone was marked by the irregularities of a T sink-hole ! 
type of topography. In Lower Cretaceous (Aptian) time 
(MeLearn, 1944), diastrophic events must have occurred 
which brought to an end. this period of erosion and sedi¬ 
ments were once again being deposited in this area. The 
frosted and pitted quartz sands of the McMurray member 
of the Mannville formation were blown in from the Cana¬ 
dian Shield, helping to fill in the f lows T of the Paleo¬ 
zoic surface. Conditions became more humid and the 
vegetation which began to flourish is reflected in the 
carbonaceous silts of the upper part of the McMurray 
member. In Albian time the Clearwater sea advanced from 
the north and laid down the glauconitic sandstone and 
marine shales of the Cummings member in this area, v/ith 
the incoming of this sea, elastics similar to the Blair- 
more type of sandstones made their appearance. In the 














' ■ ...... . '-’f* 

' 

. . ' ■ i ’.f 

. 

• ' • ;. . : • - - i • ’ - ^ s’ 




. 

. 

1 ,• ,• • « :• -■ •... • ■ ; ■' • ■-! , • •• ' / 

. 




- . S: • ; 

■ ,, . . - ■. • - 

V- J „• j. .. . j. A . • .... . | 


- 




■ 


,i : . 

t J • . . . 

. .-J. (, . > 3 ' • ' . : 

1 


XC . . 


. 


. 










- 76 


Lloydminster area conditions again changed; the quartz 
sandsof the Islay member were brought in from the 
Shield but did not extend west of Vermilion, The 
overlying Tovell and 0 T Sullivan members contain the 
Blairmore type of elastics, indicating transportation 
from the west, A quartz sand, the Vainwright member, 
occurs between the Tovell and 0 f Sullivan members and 
represents the last influx of sediments from,the 
Shield, 



















- 77 


CHAPTER 4. 


STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY 


Structure on top of the Paleozoic - 
(Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright Area ) 

In this area thirty-three wells have been drilled 
to the top of the Paleozoic, and the following discussion 
is based on the subsurface elevation of the Devonian 
strata in these wells. The reader is referred to Map #1 
which shows the location and surface elevation of each 
well, and also the subsurface elevation on top of the 
Paleozoic. Some of the latter may be somewhat inaccurate 
in that the top of the detrital zone may possibly have 
been mistaken for the top of the undecomposed limestone 
or dolomite. 

Regionally the Paleozoic beds present in the 
plains area of Alberta dip south to southwest in con¬ 
formity to the original slope on the Precambrian surface. 

In general the paleozoics have a wedge-like aspect, being 
thicker to the west, thinning toward the east. Following 
the deposition of these beds and prior to the deposition 
of Lower Cretaceous strata, a protracted period of erosion 
ensued. This resulted in the present configuration of 























- 78 - 


the Paleozoic. Differential erosion has resulted in 
the more resistant beds forming ridges and the softer 
rocks, valleys The Paleozoic beds at the time must 
have been exposed in cuesta-like attitude, dipping gen¬ 
tly southwest with steeper slopes facing northeast (Ruth¬ 
erford, 1946, p.19-6). It should also be pointed out that 
in going toward the shield the Paleozoic surface rises 
in elevation but drops stratigraphically. 

Map #1 shows the approximate limit of the 
Jefferson dolomite. To the north-east of the boundary, 
the Jefferson has been eroded off, and the limestones 
of the Waterways formation are the first Paleozoic rocks 
encountered below the Lower Cretaceous. Difficulties at¬ 
tend an attempt to contour the top of the Paleozoic, for 
local relief is greater than an appropriate contour in¬ 
terval. For example, Edgerton #3 and #4 (twp. 43, rge 4) 
are less than a mile apart, yet their Paleozoic contacts 
differ in elevation by 106 feet. This would seem to in¬ 
dicate a T Karst f type of topography. 

Hume and Hage (1941, Fig. 3) have contoured the 
top of the Paleozoic in this area, and show a thigh* ex¬ 
tending west from twp. 47, rge. 1 to rge. 7 where it 
trends north. They have named this the 1 central Plains 
Paleozoic Ridge.* Subsequent drilling has modified this 
picture considerably for wells drilled in twps. 48,49 & 52. 















- 79 - 


range 7 show the top of the ilime* to be at -96, -187 
and -175 feet respectively; Hume and Hage have the -85 
feet contour at these points. 

In a general way it might be said that a 
T high T exists from townships 45—49, ranges 2—7. 

Paleozoic elevations in wells contiguous to this area 
appear to drop off more sharply. Until further drilling 
has been done, any further statements would be conjectural. 

Another feature of interest concerns the at¬ 
tempts by geophysical methods to determine the structure 
on top of the Paleozoic. The writer had access to a 
seismic map which contoured the top of the f lime T in 
townships 48—50, ranges 5 and 6. Subsequently three 
wells were drilled to the Paleozoic in this area. The 
comparison between seismic elevations and core log ele¬ 
vations is as follows: 


Seismic Core log Difference 
Depth Depth (Seismic) 


V.C.0.#5 (twp.50,Rge 6) 

2100 * 

21551 

55» 

higher 

V.C.0.#15(twp.49,Rge 6) 

21201 

2020 T 

100» 

lower 

V.C.0.#ll(twp.48,rge 5) 

2280 * 

2330 1 

501 

higher 


An examination of the above data indicates a variable dis¬ 
crepancy, the maximum being 155 feet, between the actual 
depth of the f lime T and that depicted by the seismic map. 

To give a true structural picture, the difference in ele¬ 
vation between seismic and core log depth must remain con¬ 
stant. 













' 


1 


■ L..* . . J 


. .. ; j 






■ : ■ ■ : 

. . .. 








I . .) ; 


.....4*.: 




. 










. 




i-i. 




.... 1 


.' > : J 


■ A 


- ■ 

. - ‘ i . . ..; 

''j ■ -• ■ “ •• '• 1 j • , i o J 




, f • i ■;> 










, J , 



r 


■ 


. 

: .... ■ .> 


. 




























80 


Thickness of the Mannville Formation 

( LI oydm in s t er - Ver m i 1 i on -Wa in wr i g h t -a r e a) 

Map #2 is an Isopach of the Mannville formation 
in the Lloydininster-Vermilion-Wainwright area. The iso¬ 
pach lines show the regional variations in the thickness 
of this formation though locally (as in the Edgerton 
wells in twp. 43, rge.4) the picture is probably much 
more complicated. It is to be expected that a formation 
deposited on a surface of irregular relief will vary 
considerably in thickness. 

Despite this variation, some regional aspects 
are noticeable. The lower Cretaceous is thin (av. 200») 
where it overlies the edge of the Rundle escarpment. The 
wedge-edge of the Rundle trends northwest from twp. 30, 
rge. 9. To the northeast of this escarpment the Lower 
Cretaceous thickens rapidly and is 544 feet thick at 
Hudson Bay Paintearth #1 (twp. 39, rge.4). This was 
probably due to differential erosion, the anhydrite series 
of the Upper Devonian having been amenable to rapid ero- 
si©n following the removal of the overlying Rundle formation 

The Lower Cretaceous is thin in the Edgerton- 
Wainwright area (see Map #2), but thickens again to .the 
northeast—5.89 feet at C.S. #29. The thinning of the 
Mannville at Wainwright reflects the Paleozoic T high T of 
















-81 - 


this area. This T high» in all probability is also a 
result of differential erosion, though not of the 
magnitude of the Rundle escarpment. 

Structure on top of the Mannville formation . 

( Lloydminster-Vermilion-Wainwright area ) 

In addition to the wells that reached the Paleo¬ 
zoic, many more wells have been drilled into the Lower 
Cretaceous. Some of these have been used to present a 
regional aspect on .Map #3. The scale of the map limits 
the number of wells that can be feasibly plotted, par¬ 
ticularly in the oil-producing districts where close 
spacing of wells has been carried out. Wells representing 
average elevations have been selected from these districts 
for the purpose of this map. 

The contour map shows a general northwest 
trend to the strike of the Lower Cretaceous. The dip 
is to the southwest with a regional gradient of approxi¬ 
mately seven feet to the mile. Locally, however, both 
the strike and dip may vary. The surface of the Mannville 
formation is much more regular than the top of the Paleozoic 
the lower members of the Mannville having f filled-in ! the 
Karst topography of the erosion surface. It is probable 
that differential compaction has produced the structures 
of local significance in the Lower Cretaceous strata. 
















.. • •• ’ 

. 



















, 






. . ' 






. 








' 














- 82 


though slight post-depositional crustal movements in 
this area may have been a contributing factor. 

In the Wainwright-Edgerton area the south¬ 
west dip averages fourteen feet to the mile. This in¬ 
crease in dip is in conformity with the dip-slope of 
the cuesta-like Paleozoic ridge running through this 
area. The dip on top of the Mannville formation is 
more gentle betv/een Wainwright and Lloydminster, though 
future drilling may reveal local closed structures in 
this area. 

Structure on top of the Mannville Formation . 

Lloydminster Area . 

During the past few years an intensive dril¬ 
ling program has been carried out in the Lloydminster 
area. This has supplied considerable structural in¬ 
formation regarding the attitude of upper beds in the 
Mannville formation. Map #4 shows structure contours 
on top of the Mannville in this area, also a profile 
section across the strike shovwLng the tops of the pro¬ 
ducing sand horizon and Mannville formation. Structures 
with closures up to forty feet occur. 

That folded beds exist, whether from differential 
compaction or crustal movement, is demonstrated by the 






. . . - v . 

!•: . i.* i 

. 




. ... 


. m. - 3 ' .• 


. 



. 

. ' ). , ' .. J J 



J : 











. . 


, ■ J . L i .• 



. 

' 





■ .... 


*• ■ 









83 


the profile section. Therelief on top of the Mann- 
ville has not been caused by post-depositional erosion, 
for the structure on top of the Wainwright sand closely 
parallels the configuration on the top of the Mannville. 

It is considered probable that the f highs ! of the Mann¬ 
ville correspond to similar T highs T on top of the Paleozoic 
Proximity to the source of the sediments causing variations 
in thickness may have also affected the structure. 

The locations on Map #4 are complete to February, 
1947. The close spacing of the wells on the map does not 
permit the printing of pertinent data. This has been 
tabulated on the following pages. Production figures 
have been given where these were available. In some 
cases they are too high as they represent initial pro¬ 
duction. Many recent completions are oil wells but 
have not been produced due to difficulty in securing 
pumping equipment and casing. 

The tabulated data was obtained from various 
sources and this is acknowledged in the column 1 Source 
of Information,* The abbreviations are as follows: 

A.C.B—Alberta Conservation Board. 

Elect—Electrolog 1 picks T by the writer. 

I. M.C,—Ian M. Cook, B.A. Oil Co., Calgary. 

J. S.I.—J.S.Irwin, Consulting Geologist, Calgary 

F.H.E. —-F.H,Edmunds ) 

R.M.C.—R.M.Coons ) Dept, of Geology, Sask. 

H. & H.—Hume and Hage, Mem. 232, 1841* 













84 





pq 

P3 

CQ 

PQ 

PQ 

w 

-P 

-p 

-p 

-p 

-P 

-p 



• 


• 


• 

0 

o 

C5 

o 

o 

o 

o 

uoxq.9uu:ojui 


m 

o 

O 

o 

o 

w 

© 

a> 

© 

© 

© 

© 


• 

• 

• 

9 

• 

<• 

rH 

pH 

1—1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

jo ©ojnog 


Cm 

■=s 


< 

<1 

Pt* 

H 

eq 

w 

w 

pq 

W 


-P 

O 

to 

xf« 

to 


o 

rH 

00 

rH 

CO 

LD 

CO 

^doa moj, 

© 

rH 

05 

00 

05 

IS 

05 

OO 

05 

o 

C 

CM 

O 

r © 

ID 

CO 

00 

00 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

05 

05 

o 

05 


CM 

CM 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 


-P 













Xi3AJ©q.ui 

© 

© 



o 

CO 


CO 

LO 

O 

CO 

05 

to 

Xfl 

to 

o 

CO 

% 

IS 

LD 

to 

CD 

•«M -•trejTC 

pM 



rH 

5 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r-1 


-P 



to 


CM 

X*< 

i—1 

X»< 

CO 

CO 

o 

rH 

PU9S *UM 

© 



E — 


t- 

CO 

00 

05 

05 

05 

o 

o 

© 



CO 


00 

00 

00 

00 

CO 

CO 

05 

05 

oq. qq.d©Q 

Cm 



p- 3 


pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


-P 

Xf* 

00 

to 


o 

CM 

is 

o 

O 

pH 


o 

uo xq.i3A9xa 

© 

S 

ID 

CO 


CO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

05 

o 

© 

to 

CO 

xj-i 



Xf< 

X^ 

Xfr« 

X*< 


CO 

X* 

©o-ejjnsqng 

Pm 


"X 

>k 



'X 

X 

'X 

'X 



X 


-P 

O 

O 

CD 


CO 


CM 

O 

00 

OO 

CO 

CD 

GXXT^mi©! 

© 

a> 

cm 

aD 

CM 

00 

rH 

s> 


pH 

c- 

CM 

S 

CM 

IS 

xl* 

tH- 

CO 

is 

IS 

xh 

c-- 

CO 

ts 

oq. qq.dsa 

pH 

f-4 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

©Xq^I XjTsq-OH 

-P 

© 

X*« 

05 

00 

IS 

05 

CM 

ID 

CO 

X^ 

CO 

CO 

05 

CO 

O 

to 

CO 

ID 

05 

ID 

S 

CO 

CD 

CO 

notq.9A9xa 

© 

Pm 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

pH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

pH 

CM 

pH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

pH 

CM 

pH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 











■sh 

'sH 

xfi 





X* 

XH 

xH 

x3» 

xH 


g* 

FS 


. & 





& 


&B 

te: 


ig: 

& 






g: 







rH 

pH 

rH 





CM 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

J 

1 

» 

rH 



rH 

| 

1 

1 

J 

! 

| 

9 

05 

05 

05 

I 



* 

is 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 


vS* 


05 



s 

xH 

XP 


xs 3 


xh 

xf* 

i 

9 

S 





j 

* 

! 

1 

« 

I 

9 

CM 

CM 

CM 

i 



I 

CD 

rH 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

rH 

pH 

CO 



x*« 

CO 



rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 




rH 

£ 




4h 

CiH 





<M 

<M 

Cm 


o 



Oh 

O 

O 

<H 

<M 

Cm 

<M 

o 

© 

O 


•H 


o 

O 



o 

o 

O 

O 




o 

-P 




CO 

CO 





o 


CD 


CC> 


to 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

oo 

CO 

00 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

o 












o 


w 

pq 

H 


H 

w 

pq 

fee 

M 

£3 

fq 

pq 



CO 

4 

S 


CO 

C0 

£3 

m 

!2i 

CO 

cq 

CO 












rH 





43 

O 









Hl~~ 





O 







rH 

Ow 

• 





4h 







=4!=: 


rH 





M 

rH 

CM 





© 





o 

=tf= 



CM 

rH 

cp 

© 

© 






Co 

CM 

=%= 

*4N 

=%= 

rH 

rH 

© 

rH 



<-H 

rH 

«5 

d 

=#= 

© 

•H 

n 

=£= 



=%= 

CQ 

•H 

♦H 

d 

d 

©’ 

•n 







O 

O 

• 

-P 

-P 

*p 

u 

'tJ 

• 

© 



o 

• 


•H 

o 

rH 

rH 

rH 

© 

as 

X! 

© 



o 

x: 

P 

P 

« 

d 

d 

d 

> 

U 

-P 


1—1 


>5 

f*0 

-P 

•P 


si 

si 

a 

pH 

U 

P 


i—{ 


05 

•H 

d 

a$ 

• 

o 

o 

o 

•H 

C 

o 

rH 

© 



w 

Ph 

Oh 

CO 

Ph 

PH 


m 

PP 


pq 

















85 











s3 


xs 



X 




• 

TO 



TJ 

• 

e 

\ 



V 



R 

R 

V 



<T 

R 

o 

R 

42 



43' 



© 

© 

rO 



40' 

© 

o 

© 







fl 

rO 

■c:^ 

CM 



CO 


to 

t" 


to 

CM 



to 

rH 



• 

, 

• 



. 

# 

© 





e 



w 

pq 

pq 



43 

pq 

pq 

W 

P5 



cn 

xiot^umjojui 


o 

o 

o 



O 

CD 

• 

o 

« 

o 

=8 

O 



o 

jc ©ojnos 


-5 

<c} 

«rr* 



rH 

W 

«3 


W 

• 

■=3 



<5 


+3 

CO 

tr¬ 

o 



CD 

CO 

tH 

IX.) 



CO 

02 


© 

cm 

ee 

to 



c- 

to 

to 

CO 


« 

"d"' 

rH 

it^-asa T*q.oi 

© 

a 

02 

02 



o> 

c— 

c* 

o 

o 

0 

02 

02 


Ph 

iH 

r— i 

rH 



1—i 

i—! 

rH 

CM 

* 

+> 

© 

rH 

rH 













PR 

43 













• 


© 


X'SAa©q.ni 

-P 










Tj 

• 



© 

to 


-P 

• 

• 

CO 

o 

o 

to 

c 

R 

• 


*UM. “•UTg^ 

© 

CD 


© 

r© 

th 

to 

CO 

CO 

CO 

R 

9 

u 

X 

• 

pH 

i-l 



o 

CO 

rH 

t—1 

rH 

rH 

PR 

w 

CO 




XJ 

R 









o 





R 

PR 

• 








02 





© 


£ 








rH 





© 

•4 

is? 










+3 

Oi 



fc- 


CD 

to 

CH 

o 

CO 



43 

puns *uji 
oq. qq.d9CI 

© 

rH 


rH 


+3 

CO 

o 

o 

co 

CO 



© 

r © 

02 


•H 

02 

o 

o> 

02 

02 

cr. 

CO 




pH 

rH 

R 

o 

O 

i—! 

R 

rH 

i —! 

rH 

rH 

rH 



ryH 




•H 











V-/ 

CG 




•P 















© 











rH 


■P 

CM 

d 

CM 



r- 

02 

£** 

to 

C^ 




UOTq/QA3I3 

0 

© 

02 

to 

M 

O 

CM 

S}' 



02 

CO 

rH 

CM 

•v 1 

02 

CO 

CM 



Qonjunsqng 




X 



X 

"4 

x 

x 

X 






R 











• 




•H 











44 















© 




O 











•rl 


4> 



CO 



CM 

to 

c- 

to 

o 



PR 

axiIAtcu^I 

© 

0 

to 

t- 





rH 

CD 

TT> 

t- 

Is- 

£S- 

ts- 

us 

t- 



O 

oq. qq.da“(j 

Eh 

rH 

to 

• 

rH 



rH 

rH 

l-l 

rH 

rH 




©iq-aj; j£jnq.oH 

+'• 

0 

CD 

** 

00 

to 

ID 

CD 



02 

O 

CO 

Tf* 

IS- 

o 

e- 

s>- 

cs- 



CO 

no tq.i3A© X3 

r® 

pH 

r—1 

cm 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 



CM 

CM 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 



rH 

CM 


















t; 

g 

fe* 



pl£ 

& 


is 









rH 



rH 

rH 



rH 






rH 

i-l 

• 1 



t 

i 

«H 

rH 

1 



rH 



1 

02 

| 

05 



02 

02 

1 


02 



i 



02 




"© 


02 

02 




05 



Ti-I 

'vT* 

i 



J 

a 

*vl-» • 


1 






t 

I 




rH 

us 

S 

1 

co 



1 



CO 

CO 

rH 



CM 

CM 

CO 

CD 

CM 



c— 



rH 

iH 






CM 

CM 




CM 

R 




<H 




<P 







o 


<H 

©i 

O 



o 

O 

<H 


O 




•H 


o 

o 






O 

. O 




C 

43 




CO 



CO 

o 



to 




© 

Q 


CM 

CO 

rH 



rH 

rH 

CO 

02 

rH 



02 

o 


P3 

CO 

.13 

i 

M 



1 

w 

02 

w 

g 

i 



I 





rH 






rH 









=4r 




CM 

rH 










R 



' 

=41= 

—H. 

© 









© 





© 

t- 








+3 




• 

• 

43 







<M 

CO 

w 




© 

© 

© 



CM 




=£= 

R 



rH 

43 

43 

O 








•H 




© 

© 


rH 






© 

© 

g 




PR 

PR 

• 

© 



© 



© 

© 

■X) 






X5 

*rl 



R 

rH 

rH 


PJ 

PI 

& 



& 

1 

1 


©1 

XI 



•H 

R 

© 


iH 

rH 

rH 



§ 

45 

45 

rH 

•H 



© 



w 

H 

pi 



02 

02 

02 

kJI 

r4 














86 





x 

X 










X 


\ 


X 







\ 

rO 

rQ 


\ 


rO 






rQ 












to 

13 

00 

CM 


CM 


CO 

rH 


O 

CO 




o 


W 

P4 

PH 

PQ 

PQ 

ca 

PQ 

P4 

uoiq.suuojux 


d 

o 

<D 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

d 

• 

O 

jo ooanos 


M 

rH 

ca 

<4 

<5 

*4 

<5 

<4 

<4 

<4 

<4 


•P 

CO 

to 

CO 

ID 

rH 

x 

P 

CD 

CM 

03 


<D 

rH 

rH 

CD 

CM 

■rH 

o 

rH 

O 

03 

CM 

qq-asa xisq.0X 


0? 

O 

03 

03 

03 

o 

03 

03 

03 

03 


rH 

CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

X^AJoq.ux 

-P 






X! 





© 


CD 

00 

03 

o 

a 

CM 

o 

CO 

C- 

•UjVi --UT3H 


CD 

CD 

LO 

CD 

ID 

P 

CD 

CD 

to 

D 


jH 

rH 

1—1 

rH 

rH 

u 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 







© 












CO 












42 












o 





PUBS *UM 

-P 

<• 

X 

03 

CD 

CO 


CD 

CM 

c 

CM 

(1) 

o 

D- 

CD 

rH 

C 

-p 

o 

o 

00 

CM 

— 

© 

o* 

03 

Oi 

Oi 

O? 

o 

03 

Ci 

CO 

03 

oq nq.a©d 

Pm 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



CD 

rH 

CD 


rH 

.© 

CO 

o 

CM 

CM 

uoxq.'8A8xa 

O 


O 

C 

CO 

CM 

CO 

CO 


CO 

rH 

© 





X 

X 

X' 


•s^J 


ooisjansqns 

pH 

"X 


"S. 

'H. 


X, 

X 

x 

\ 

X 


-P 

O 

00 

03 

O* 

00 

rH 

X 

CM 

t“ 

D 

3XXXA UUB]ft 

CD 


O 

03 

X 

ID 

LO 

X 



CD 

© 

t- 

05 

D- 

P* 

t> 

P 

p 

Eh 

t- 

t~ 

oq qqdoQ 

Pm 

i—! 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r~l 

rH 

©iq-3X Aub^oh 

-P 

■ Cl? 

CD 

00 

« 

03 

o 

CO 

o 

rH 

00 

03 

p 

rH 

CO 

CM 

CO 

82 

03 

P- 

P 

P- 

uoxq.BAoxa 

£ 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

rH 

CM 

tH 

CM 

rH 

CM 

r— 1 

CM 

21 

rH 

CM 

tH 

CM 







X 




s 







x 

fe: 

X 

X 







fe; 

te: 


& 

£= 

p' 


P» 



rH 




rH 




rH 




1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

i 

rH 

rH 

rH 

a 

rH 



03 

! 

I 

J 

G3 

i 

1 

a 

03 

1 



M 1 

o> 

03 

Oi 

X 

03 

03 

03 


O) 



| 


X 1 

X 

j 

x 

X 


1 

■M* 



P- 

1 

1 

1 

X 

» 

1 

1 

LO 

1 



CM 

CM 

to 

X 

CO 

CO 

ID 

ID 

to 

CO 




to 

CO 

CO 


CO 

CO 

CO 


CO 

a 






©h 




<n 

o 


O 


<H 

<p 

c 

<p 

<H 


o 


•H 



o 

o 

o 


o 

O 

o 


© 

-P 


CD 




LO 




LO 


fiS 

o 

o 

►1 


rH 

00 

CO 

CD 

rH 

rH 

X 

D 

rH 



CO 

Pa 

05 

ft 

ft 

pa 

CD 

f-t 

s 

fi 


ft 

rH 











D 

X* 

=41= 





















. 

• 

£> 



rH 

rH 

CM 

X 

CO 



© 

© 

o 



=Hs 


IrjH 



r j 

pH 

=%• 

-p 

-P 

C3 

PH 

•P 

P4 



flS 

$3 

ft 

5“ 

is* 


H- 

Q-i 

« 

X 

rH 


•H 


P 

U 

p 

O 

© 

te 

£ 


r— 1 



2 

a 

«$ 


rH 

© 

cd 

s 

o 

O ' 


2 

m 

PH 

ru 

Cm 

a, 

eS 

M 

44 

44 

rH 

te; 


ca 

Ci2 

C5 

03 

Q 

05 

ta 

CO 

rdl 


! 


Husky Refinery #1 SE 11 of 1-50-1 W4 2138 1706 /432 Hot observed 2000 A.C.B. 

C.L. #3 HE 6 of 10-50-1 W4 2200 1768 /432 1934 166 1953 J'.S.I. Prod 








ssi-imus^i 


aotq.euiaojtii 
jo eojnog 


qjaoc moj 


X'SAaaq.U'f 
'UJ4 --UBJU 


pir&2 •ujyx 
oq. qq-dSQ 


uoiq.'8A©xs 

aoisjjnsqns 


sXITAinr sjj 

oq. qqd©Q 


©iqisj Aj^qoH 
uoxq©A8X3; 


87 


•tj 



-P 

M 


pq 

-p 


o 


• 

• 

o 


© 

CO 


O 

© 


rH 

* 

• 

• 

r-i 


W 

P> 

Eh 

<4 

W 

-p 

co 

CO 

to 

o 

05 

© 

o 

O 

C- 

C5 

rH 

-© 

05 

O 

o 

05 

o 

(A, 

rH 

CVS 

CvS 

(—! 

CVS 

-P 

© 

TJ 

© 

05 


05 

00 

© 

r» 

to 


UO 

to 

& 

P 

rH 


rH 

rH 

•P 

© 

© 

to 

* 

■P 

o 

05 


CO 

00 

CO 

05 

r © 

O 

GO 


05 

05 

Eh 

S25 

rH 


rH 

rH 

-P 

CV> 

60 

00 

c 

CO 

© 

to 

rH 

CVS 

o 

o 

© 



X 

■'tf 1 




X 

X 

"X 

"X 


■sH 

CVS 


^X 


00 


o 

^X 


PO 


05 

rH 


-p 

00 

rH 

C- 

t> 

CO 

CO 

o 

CVS 

05 

© 

CVS 

to 

tn 

CVS 

CO 

CO 

CVS 

C- 

CO 

r © 

Eh 

C- 

t- 

c- 

00 

CO 

GO 

CD 

c-- 

to 

rH 

rH 

r—i 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


+5 

O 


to 

C- 

CD 

cv; 


CD 

CO 

C*- 

o 

© 

co 


CO 

CV3 


CD 

CO 

t* 

CO 

rH 

c- 

r © 

rH 

rH 

r-i 

CVS 

CVS 

CVS 

cvs 

H 

05 

o 

o 

Eh 

CVS 

CVS 

CVS 

CVS 

CV3 

CVS 

CVS 

CVS 

rH 

CVS 

CVS 


pq 


C*- 

CVS 

*X 


H 



2 




■SH 




CO 

CO 

CO 


W- 




^5 

fe: 


«cM 


fe; 







CVS 







cH 



& 

cvs 



CD 

CD 

c- 


1 

rH 

rH 


1 

9 

CVJ 

CO 

cvs 

CVS 

cvs 


o 

1 

t 

Cvi 

O 

O 

9 

1 

9 

f 

1 


LD 

o 

O 

1 

to 

to 

O 

o 

e» 


c~ 


1 

LD 

to 

O 

I 

9 

to 

to 





rH 

9 

i 

to 

o 

rH 

l 

s 

i 

! 

i 


rH 

cvs 

00 

9 

05 

rH 

rH 


CD 

CD 

05 




rH 

rH 



rH 

CO 


CVS 

rH 

d 

4h 




Ch 

<M 


Ch 


o 

O 

4-i 


Cm 

o 

O 

<A 


c 


O-l 

•r! 

CVS 

O 

o 

O 



O 

o 


O 

O 

•P 

sH 



CVS 

cc 



CO 


© 

rH 

c- 

CO 

rH 

rH 

ca 


1 — I 

05 


V 

o 

Al 

S 

to 

6 

Eq 

CO 

i 

6 

Pq 

co 

55 

£ 

R 

e 

r-« 










A4 












O rH 












O 











Ph 






rH 






© 




rH 






rH 

rH 

d 




*=#5 


CVS 



=Hs 

o 






P> 

r-f 

CO 

A! 

CVS 


. » 

b 

CVS 

o 




© 

r>5 

i 




© 

o 


rH 

■P 

TO 

=t= 


•P 


4h 

<* 

* 

♦ 

© 

o 

A 

© 


ca 

A! 

P-. 

CM 

PA 

nO 

o 

© 

rD 

>5 

rH 


« 

o 

• 

9 

© 

TO 

TO 


o 

M 

rH 

•to 

A1 

a> 

o 

o 

o 

£ 

-P 

-p 

p 

TO 

© 

© 

» 

rH 

« 


• 

•H 

♦f=$ 


rH 

H 

£ 

P4 

o 

PC| 

A? 


A1 

Q 

CA 


<5 



Lone Rock #2 HE 16 of 16-47-27 W3 2082 1655 /427 Not observed 1671 Elect. 4500 M. 

’(Colony) 








■ 




1 I i 











3 

a 

a 

tr* 

> 

fc> 



o 


> 



<D 

H* 

H* 

<<J 

*-» 

• 


(-*• 


O 

•— 4 


CD 

w 

M 

i— 1 

o 

ct 

td 


d* 

CO 

3 

eh 


J— 4 

d- 

t—' 

t—' 

3 

o 

• 


3* 

• 

cn 

O 


l— 4 

* 

£D 

a. 

01 

Kf 



<0 



O' 




»1 

d 

*#5 

P> 


3 


a 

P 



o 

O 

o 


H 4 


ra 

03 

o 

=tt= 



CD 

3 

3 

CO 

cn 



i 

O 

o 



P 

*Ha 





o 


pr 

r- 1 



<+ 





3 







h-* 

CO 





o 


^4= 




P 







so 


03 




(— 1 






=#= 

d- 

l 












to 







H 4 






cn 

ST 

3 













3 













cn 













w 













01 






g 

s 

% 


S 


s 


1 


s 


t" 

O 

M 

M 

i— 1 

-0 


03 

H 4 


1— 1 

CO 

H 4 


O 

P 

03 

03 

CO 


cn 


03 


M 


cn 


c+ 




o 


O 




O 



H* 

o 

O 

o 


o 

►V 

o 


O 

<-+, 

o 


O 

*-b 

d> 

►*> 

03 

•tj 

r- 4 

dj 


►* 

CO 

»-*) 


t3 

Icn 

03 

03 

cn 

ro 

03 



03 

CD 

CO 



cn 

cn 

cn 

i 


J 

CO 


1— 1 

1 

to 



I 

1 

i 


i 

4^ 

J 


J 

rfw 

1 



£ 

00 

4^ 

CD 

CD 

I 

CD 

00 

1 

00 


£ 

-3 

i 

-3 



I 

1 

1 

ro 

1 

CO 

1 


1 

CO 

i 



ro 

ro 

CO 

CD 

CO 

oo 

ro 


CO 

-3 

CO 



00 

00 

00 


CD 


CD 


-3 


-o 





$ 

o3 

sj 

a 



3$ 

03 




cn 

03 

03 


03 


03 


03 


03 



ro 

H 4 

ro 

H-» 

CO 

t-< 

CO 
!— J 

CO 

H 4 

ro 
j— 4 

CO 

O 


CO 

i- 4 

CO 

i—» 

CO 

o 

<n 

Elevation 

4s» 

o 

M 

CD 

O 

03 

00 

CO 

CD 

O 

4^ 

00 

CO 


CO 

O 

M 

CO 

CD 

03 

d- 

Rotary Table 









ere 













3 





M 

M 

H 4 

M 

H 4 

h 4 

H-» 


J— 4 

I- 4 

J- 4 

htj 

Depth to 

-3 

*-3 

CO 

'1 

03 

-3 

O 

J 

O 

CD 

CO 

03 


03 

co 

C3 

CO 

CD 

-3 

CD 

<0 

Mannville 

CD 

ro . 

-3 

CD 

o 

cO 

o 


CO 

00 

cn 

eh 


K 

"K 

"K 

K 

"K 

K 

\ 


\ 

\ 



Subsurface 

4*> 

CO 

4^ 

N 4 

CO 

03 

4* 

CO 

O 

*fe- 
•— 1 


4* 

CO 

CO 

43 * 

H 4 

<n 

<n 

Elevation 

ro 

CO 

03 

CO 

CD 

cn 

CO 


h-J 

H 4 

° 

d- 


M 

CO 

i- 1 

00 

h-> 

CO 

00 


i- 4 

00 

t— 4 

00 


V- 4 

00 


J2 4 

b 

<0 

Depth to 

00 

00 

CO 

03 


cn 

s 


cn 


ct 

<D 

Wn* sand 

CD 

03 

CO 

03 


03 


00 


O 

d* 













CT* 













03 



H 4 

S- 4 

J- 4 

t-» 


*=• 

I-* 




<n 


Man.- Wn. 

CD 

CD 

CD 

03 


cn 

-3 


cn 



<D 

00 

I- 4 

CO 

O 



o 


CO 



CD 

interval 











a 

c+ 



J— 4 

K-* 

M 

t—J 

s— 1 

t— 4 


j— 4 

c.. 

H-* 



bo 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

CD 

00 

-0 

03 

00 

03 

CO 

4^ 


CD 

>0 

• 

CO 

-3 
i— 4 

<D 

(D 

Total Depth 

CD 

to 

o 

CO 

03 

03 

“O 


CO 

« 

O 

cf 










M 

• 




w 

• 

t> 

• 

a 

« 

• 

a 

9 

a 

• 


> 

« 


> 


Source of 

fe? 

* 

o 

• 

o 

• 

• 

a 

* 

m 

* 

m 

• 


o 

8 


O 

• 


Information 

o 

td 

CD 

o 


O 

o 


bJ 


td 




* 

• 

• 

• 

* 

* 


• 


* 



*Tj 




& 

ro 

cn 

-3 

O 


cn 

o 


& 


Remarks 

o 




?o 




o 


P 



A. 




3 


CT* 




3 



• 




• 


\ 


m 


• 








* 

CD 


9 












' 













I 







r 


■ 





89 


XS TJ 

\ xs \ 





• 

• 


O 

s' 

• 


,© 







a 

PS 



P 

xs 









as 

as 


o 


o 


o 







P 

,0 


o 

to 

p 


o 







<5 

< 


rH 

CM 

PU 


rH 






• 

• 



, 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 


# 



o 

W 

W 


w 

-P 

w 

W 

-P 

+> 


-p 



• 

• 



• 

© 

• 

• 

© 

cs 

© 

© 

UO I^-8XIIJO JUI 


m 

• 

K 

“8 


M 

• 

© 

1—i 

w 

• 

• 

© 

rH 

© 

rH 

© 

rH 

© 

rH 

jo ©oatios 



Cm 

K 


&H 

h 

Cm 

Cm 

w 

w 

W 

w 


-P 

to 

to 

to 


O 


si 1 

CM 

CO 

CD 

to 

CM 


0) 

cm 

rH 

o 


00 

as 

as 

00 

fr- 

00 

CO 

CO 

qq.d©a i^qoji 

£ 

as 

rH 

CM 

CM 

c- 

rH 


CO 

rH 

CO 

rH 

CO 

rH 

CO 

rH 

00 

rH 

00 

rH 

CO 

rH 

as 

rH 


-p 

*T5 












X^AJaq.ux 

© 

© 

o 

o 

OS 

o 

rH 

CM 

o 

to 


C 

CD 

© 

{> 

CO 

D- 

to 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CD 

to 

to 

CD 

as 

•iiM --iisti 

Cm 

P 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


© 














01 



% 











rQ 














o 













■P 


o 

o 

CM 

CD 

OS 

o 

o 

rH 

CO 

00 

CD 

piT3S *UJ\4 

© 

-P 

to 

to 

C- 

C- 

c- 

00 

CD 

tH 

CD 

c*- 


_© 

o 

a o 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

as 

00 

co 

00 

00 

00 

oq. qq-dsc 

Cm 


rH 

«H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

pH 

rH 


-P 


o 

as 

o 

C- 

to 



t- 

to 

rH 

t- 

no tq.BA©X 3 

© 

CM 

CO 

i—! 

to 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

r-! 

,© 




X 

H.i 





sh 

X* 

stJ 

so^jnnsqng 

Cm 

X. 

X 


X 

"X 


X 


X 

\ 

X 

\ 


-P 

to 

o 

O 

to 

CO 

CO 

CO 

o 

CO 


CO 

o 


© 

rH 

as 

CO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

pH 

rH 

CM 

eiiy^ujxej j 

© 

t>- 

CD 

CO 

C" 

t> 

S>- 

P- 

C- 

D- 

t- 

ES- 

t- 

T 

Cm 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r~i 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

oq. qq.a©a 














©iq ej; A*nsq.o£[ 

■P 

OS 

o 

a> 

to 

DO 

rH 

CM 


to 

t- 

OS 


© 

to 

CM 

as 





'sP 


DO 

to 

to 

uopq.TSA©X3' 

© 

pH 

rH 

O 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH! 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

Cm 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 



£ 

to 

to 


to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 

to 



CO 

CM 

is 

is 

CO 

is 

iS 

is 

feR 

fS 

& 

p; 

te: 




tH 

o- 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

00 

CO 

CO 

as 



j 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

<\? 

CM 

CM 

CM 



00 

1 

1 

CM 

f 

i 

I 

1 

J 

l 

1 

I 




as 

OS 

|| 

OS 

as 

OS 

Os 

OS 

as 

as 

OS 



i 

*4< 


a> 


"SH 





"cr 1 

St-l 



ID 

1 

l 


J 

t 

J 


1 

i 

1 

1 



to 

as 

rH 

i 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

to 

O 

O 

O 




rH 

CO 

CM 






rH 

rH 

rH 



«h 




A) 

Cp 

Ai 

<P 





o 


O 

On 

<H 

<H 

O 

O 

© 

© 

© 

<H 

<P 





O 

o 

O 






© 

o 

O 

-p 






c 

CM 

to 

to 

CD 




ej 


rH 

to 

’Sf* 

JS- 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

pH 

CO 

OS 

o 

o 

►4 


& 

CM 

w 

£5 


6 

S 


s 

1 

g 


E3 

£ 

















rH 




CM 



rH 










to 











P 


CM 










-P 




• 










P 

to 

* 

XS 

rH 

to 

'a 

* 






© 


© 

XS 


=8= 








O 

rH 

>s 

o 

C 

to 

CD 




• 

S' 

L0 

P5 

a 

pH 

P» 

c* 

o 

rH 

AJ 

• 

o 

4r= 



r*H 


-P 

o 

aS 



• 

* 


•0 

• 

9 

• 

rH 


KJ 

rH 

•H 


Pi 


<! 

Pi 

<^5 

CO 

CO 

GJ 

a? 


© 

O 

P 


aS 

• 


© 

• 



m 

is 


■S 

o 

EH 

> 

> 

CO 

oa 

fc> 

ca 

o 

o 

o 






: 






90 


s^nmtcag 

no xq.'euuojTii 
jo aonnog 

qq.d©d T^qoj, 

X’SAaaq.xiT 

•iijyi -•ira’CT 


-p 

© 


Pm 


•p 

o 





O- 




C~ 

C-* 






« 

• 


• 


0 

• 






'd 

T? 


. T« 


T) 

Tj 



TO 



o 

O 


O 


O 

O 



o 



P, 



J-. 


u 

P 



*« 



Pw 

Ph 


PM 


PM 

PM 



CM 


# 

» 

* 


• 



• 

# 

• 


w 

H 

-p 

w 

W 

-P 

M 

P-1 

+3 

W 

PI 

frl 

• 

« 

o 


• 

o 

• 

A 

O 

• 

• 


w 

W 

0 

w 

W 

© 

W 

W 

0 

W 

w 

w 

* 


rH 


« 

rH 



rH 




Pm 

Pm 

w 

Pm 

Pm 

PI 

Pm 

Cm 

pq 

Ph 

Pm 

Cm 







LQ 






'SH 

O 

05 


CO 

rH 

co 

rH 

oo 


CO 

00 

05 

CO 

CO 

£> 

CO 

CO 

IS 

IS 

CO 

ts 

IS 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

co 

CO 

co 

CO 

00 

i—! 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

pH 

«H 


CD 

rH 

CO 

pH 

o 

CO 

CM 

o 

sC 

o 

o> 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

lO 

CO 

LO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r—H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


pires •iijyL 
oq. .qq-daQ 


+5 

C> 

LO 


CO 

CO 

LO 

05 



00 

05 

© 

CO 

CS 

CO 

CO 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CD 

r © 

00 

00 

00 

00 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

CO 

00 

OO 

Pm 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


TiotqjeASxa 

©o'ejnnsqng 


-P 


is 

o 

CM 

05 

05 

CD 

CO 

CD 


CO 

© 

rH 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

04 

CM 

© 



"vh* 

'si 1 








Cm 

N 



x 

x 


x 

X 


X 

X 


a XI lAuu'SjJ 
oq qqdad 


•p 

CO 

<1 

rH 

LO 

CO 

CM 

t— 


O 

CO 

o 

0 

CM 

rH 

O 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

rH 

o 

rH 

<© 

IS 

tS 

IS 

Cs 

<S 

IS 

is 

IS 

Is 

Is 

IS 

pH 

r-i 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


©iq«I iCaieq.oH 
no x%~&as>X& 


+3 

IS 

rH 

rH 

(S 

CM 

rH 

CO 

O 

CO 

CM 

CO 

0 

CO 


CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

eo 

CO 

CO 

0 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r-1 

rH 

rH 

r-1 

r-1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

Pm 

CM 

CV7 

CM 

CM 

CM 

00 

04 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 


CO 

CO 

co 

co 

CO 

eo 

CO 

co 

CO 

co 

co 

CO 

is 


Is 

s- 


is 

te: 

fen 


£ 

F 

teg 

CO 

CO 

00 

00 

00 

00 

oo 

co 

00 

CO 

00 

CO 

CM 

CM 

03 

03 

03 

03 

02 

03 

CM 

02 

03 

CM 

1 

1 

l 

r 

J 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

4 

3 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 




Vf' 



SH 


sH 

'd 


H« 

1 

l 

1 

4 . 

1 

J 

i 

1 

J 

1 

* 

1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r-1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

r-1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

<H 

«H 

<H 

<H 

<H 

<H 


<H 

«H 

<#H 


Ch 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

O 

o 

O 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 





g 

Eo 

1 

pq 

53 


fe 

pq 

co 

a 

fe 

fa 

1 


i 


CO 

LO 

CO 

05 

rH 

ca 

•^9 

IS 



O 

CO 

r-1 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

op 

05 

r \ 

rH 

q.b 



==#= 


^t= 

=#= 


hN 

=ii= 

• 

© 

* 

• 

e 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

•o 

0 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

m 

CD 

CD 

C/4 

CO 

CD 

m 

CD 

0 

• 

• 

« 

• 

• 

0 

0 

• 

0 

• 


o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 












I I I 1 t 

till 









91 


S2[j:Bma£ 




• 

# 

• 

« 

• 

• 

* 

« 

© 

O 

9 



W 

w 

w 

CO 

w 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

iiopq.'G'uuojui 


• 

W 

• 

w 

• 

w 

O 

• 

w 

a 

• 

• 

m 

4 


* 

jo oojnos 


• 

Cm 

Cm 

• 

Cm 

<* 

• 

Cm 

• 

Pi 


Cm 

04 

* 

C4 

• 

(4 


+> 

rH 

C 

xH 

CD 

xi* 

00 

c- 

O 

05 

O) 

O 

Hq.d©a l^o i 

© 

© 

C- 

co 

o- 

CO 

CD 

00 

C~» 

CO 

O 

05 

xj< 

00 

o 

o 

CD 

CO 

CO 

CD 

00 

00 

CO 

00 


pM 

iH 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

CV} 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

XUfi.J8q.UT 

© 

ID 

lO 

to 

00 

CD 

ID 

•cH 

CD 

CD 

O 

t> 


© 

ID 

D 

ID 

CD 

CD 

CD 

ID 

xp 

LO 

CD 


* u13 j/u 

pM 

rH 

rH 

H 

r— ! 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

rH 

rH 

pUT3S •Tlifl. 

-P 

LO 

to 

iH 

CV 

O 

05 

X*i 

CO 

xj« 

H 

o 

© 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CD 

o 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CV 

CO 

CV 

oq. qq.de Q 

© 

Cm 

00 

rH 

00 

rH 

00 

H 

00 

H 

05 

H 

00 

H 

00 

rH 

00 

H 

CO 

H 

oo 

H 

00 

H 

noiq,©A©xa 

-P 

CO 

to 

CV 

CV 

05 

CO 

CO 

00 

Xp 

CO 

00 

© 

rH 

CO 

CV 

CO 

05 

D 

ID 


CD 

ID 

ID 

80T3J jnsqns 

© 


xH 

xH 

xfrl 

CO 


x}4 

xfr* 

x}* 

xH 


Cm 



X 


X 

Nx 




'X 

x 

©Xip^ucreyi 

-P 

o 

O 

CD 

xf* 



O 

O- 

00 

rH 

CO 

© 

«H 

rH 

o 

CD 

CO 

c- 

00 

00 

CD 

t- 

c- 

oq. qqdsQ 

© 

e- 

E>- 

e*- 

CD 

t- 

CD 

CO 

CD 

CD 

CO 

co 

Cm 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

H 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 


©iqTBj; iCj-3q.oH 

no*cq.8A©xS 



-P 

00 

CO 

0c 

CD 

CO 

© 

CV 

CO 

CV 

CV} 

CO 

(U 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

1—t 

Cm 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 






CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

Sc; 

te- 

££ 

is 

fer 

r " 





00 

00 

00 

CO 

CO 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

! 

1 

* 

1 

I 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

xri 

xfl 


XT< 

xH 

1 

1 

1 

| 

1 

rH 

H 

H 

rH 

H 

H 

r—i 

H 

H 

H 

r. . 

<H 

<H 


4h 

o 

o 

O 

© 

O 

CO 

LO 

ID 

LO 

CD 

rH 

6 

S 

W 

CO 


is 


tr- 

CO 

ID 

CV 

05 

H 

CV 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CV 

CO 

«H 

H 

rH 

rH 

H 

H 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 


CO 

CO 

S5 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

te: 

is 

is 

is 

fee 

0Q 

00 

00 

CO 

co 

CO 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

1 

J 

J 

J 

J 

1 

05 

05 

05 

05 

05 

OJ 

xf 

xf< 

x^ 

Xt* 

xH 

xH 

9 

i 

i 

i 

i 

T 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

to 

CO 

H 

H 

H 

H 

r-3 

rH 

Cm 

Cm 

«H 

<H 



O 

O 

o 

o 

O 

o 

XT 1 

x^ 


ID 

D 

D 

M 

CO 

6 

te; 

CO 

| 

s 



H 

CV 


CO 





















-P 

■P 

•P 

-p 









ei 

a$ 

ffi 

cJ 









o 

o 

O 

o 









P 

u 

u 

Jm 

H 








o 

O 

es 

CO 

=&5 













CD 

D 


CV 

D 

•H 

o 

OT 

M 

m 

ca 

S3 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

CV 

u 

© 

t-r 

© 

u 

© 

P 

© 

0 S 



=th 


H=: 

= 4!= 


r£ , 


43 

X! 

ft 

• 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

-p 

+3 

+3 

-P 

ai 

01 

ca 

CO 

01 

CO 

OQ 

t) 

•H 


•H 

•H 


• 

* 

# 

• 

• 

• 


tec 




o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 


SW 6 of 13-49-28 W3 2122 1676 /446 1844 168 2012 R.M.C, 














l^jn3IU9£[ 


- 98 - 




• 

0 

• 

• 


* 


* 

• 

• 

S3q 

0 

uoi^tsoijojux 


PQ 

• 

Prl 

♦ 

P3 

• 

♦ 


pq 

W 

• 

pq 

4> 

•P 

o 

w 

jo ©ojnog 


o 

• 

w 

•» 

• 

W 

• 


H* 


w 

M 

0 

© 

c8 

w 

• 



<1 

Cm 

Cm 

Pm 

w 

Cm 

w 

Pm 

Pm 

pq 

S3 

Cm 

iiqd©a I*V>I 

© 

o- 

02 

O 

O 

(X) 

00 

CO 

O 

ID 

CO 

04 

rH 

o 

o 

ID 

OS 

rH 

O' 

ID 

as 

a> 

o 

os 

o- 


© 

00 

02 

00 

O 

t- 

O 

O' 

CD 

CO 

CD 

t> 

CO 


Cm 

r~! 

04 

rH 

02 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

XtJAj:©q.ui 

■P 


TO 


T* 









•um -*um 

© 

,© 

00 

G 

t> 

CO 

CD 

© 

s> 





co 

ID 





pM 

1-0 

D 

i—1 

p 





pH 







© 


© 












02 


02 












rQ 


pD 









pu©s •ujul 

-P 

O 

o 

o 

o 





02 




oq. t*q.d©a 

© 

<D 

rH 

00 

•p 

o 

00 

CO 

-p 

o 





02 

00 





Pm 

rH 

S3 

pH 

S3 





pH 




uotq.i3A©x3 

•P 

o 

CO 

CD 

as 

o- 

ID 

rH 

co 

O 

04 

o 

as 

©oXJjnsqng 

<D 

© 

ts 

pH 

rH 

o 

CO 

"cH 

"CH 

CD 

O' 

<vH 

t-. 

"cH 

C- 

CO 

ID 

HI 

Pm 

^k 

^k 

X 

^k 

'X 

'k 

X 




X 


aXXTAira©^ 
oq qqd©c 

-P 

02 

o 

O- 

pH 

O 

o 

o 

CD 


CD 

r—I 

CD 

© 

CD 

02 

rH 

CO 

04 

rH 

CO 

CD 

CD 


o 

c>- 

G 

CO 

P- 

O' 

fc- 

C- 

o> 

CD 

CO 

CD 

CD 

0- 

CD 

Pm 

rH 

rH 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 







Pm 

Pm 

Pm 




Cm 

Pm 

iiJT8q.OH 






Q 

Q 

Q 




P 

Q 

ID 

-P 

02 

CO 

CO 

O 

O 

m 

rH 

rH 


CO 

rH 

uoxq.-8A©Xt5 

G 

CO 

CO 

CO 


CO 

ID 

5f* 


CO 

rH 

CO 

CO 

<£> 

r—4 

pH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 


Pm 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

02 

04 

04 

02 



CO 




CO 


CO 

CO 

P 

CO 

CO 




te; 

CO 

fee 

CO 

£ 

i 

te; 

£ 

£ 

fee 

£ 

£ 

CO 

fe: 



00 




CO 


00 

CO 

00 

CO 

CO 




02 

00 

00 

00 

03 

00 

04 

02 

02 

02 

04 

co 



| 

02 

02 

02 

I 

02 

i 

1 

i 

1 

l 

. 02 



OS 

4 

? 

1 

Os 

i 

as 

OS 

as 

as 

as 

i 




OS 

as 

OS 


as 

-sH 



Sfl 


OS 



1 



H 

r 



t 

5 

1 

! 




CO 

i 

I 

i 


i 

CO 

"tfl 



ID 

f 



1—1 




pH 

CO 

02 

02 

04 

04 

02 

CD 




rH 

rH 

pH 


02 






o> 



44 


4-j 




4s 

Cm 

4 h 

<M 

4-4 


o 


O 

Cm 

<M 

o 


O 

O 

O 

O 

O 

4s 




O 

O 

o 


o 






O 

4.' 


02 




CO 


CO 

04 

CO 

u-s 

'Cfl 


CD 


rH 

CO 


LO 

pH 

ID 

rH 

rH 

r-H 

rH 

pH 

rH 

O 

o 

Pi 


s 

P*q 

CO 

§ 

6 

& 

6 

i 

s 

i 







rH 














*#8 














• 

rH 



CO 



«p 







> 



CO 






=4h 




© 












Q 

+5 



o 



ta 



<a 







Qj 

02 


d 


rH 

00' 



C- 

ta 

ci 


© 

■P 

=#= 


O 


=#= 

C5 



02 

ai 

u 

id 

sjb 

pH 

© 

iH 


04 




■=8s 

O 

a 

to 

a. 

k 


• 

'd 

*#= 

& 

Ti 

y- ’■"j 


9 

«8 

• 

• 

d 

S? 

O 

» 

S>s 

• 

O 

r'S 

f«q 


CO 


■p 

CO 

•H 

£ 

rH 

CO 

o 

w 

rH 

O 

0 


• 

• 

aJ 

• 

U 


O 

9 

rH 

• 

o 

pH 

£ 


o 

O 

3 

o 

EH 

w 

O 

o 


o 

o 

rl 


i 










95 


s^jretire^j 


UOTq.T3UIJOjUI 

jo aojnos 


qq.Jaa I*q.oj; 


XT2AJ0q.lI I 

•«M -•new 


puss *11/14 

oq. qq-dsa 


pq 

pq 

pq 

P 

W 

pq 

• 

• 

• 

o 


• 

w 

W 

W 

© 


w 

• 

• 


r—j 



pm 

P»h 

Pm 

pq 

w 



+> 

rH 

c- 

CO 

LO 

in 

O 

© 

O 

o 

o 

CD 

o- 

CM 

© 

C 

o- 


rH 

o> 

CO 

pM 

Oi 

rH 

rH 

CM 

rH 

CM 


-P 

tJ 


TJ 

•© 

© 

© 


© 

© 

© 

P 

0~ 

> 


Pm 

U 

rH 

P 

P 


© 


© 

© 


w 


10 

OT 


rO 


P 

P 


O 


o 

o 

-p 





© 

-P 

crs 

-p 

p 

© 

O 

C- 

o 

o 

pM 


rH 

K-3» 

4 


noiq.0Asxa 

soejjnsqng 


p 

in 

ID 

in 

o- 

CM 

o 

© 

in 


in 

o 

CM 

rH 

© 




s*< 

Sfl 


Pm 



'X 

"X 

x 

x 


QliyumByi 

oq. qq-dsa 


©Xqej toq.o^ 
no Tq.-BA9XS 


o 

o 


4 


p 

rH 

0~ 

o 

O 

o 

O 

© 

O 

C~ 

CO 

CM 

05 

OJ 

© 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

CD 

Pm 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 

rH 



Pm 

Pm 


Pm 




« 

n 


« 


p 

CD 

CM 

in 

t- 

CM 

o 

© 

CM 

CM 

CO 

CM 

rH 

o 

© 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O 

rH 

rH 

Pm 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 



CO 

£ 

U 

CO 

P? 

CO 

CO 

SB 

oo 

00 

CO 

CD 

00 

CM 

02 

CM 

f> 

CM 

02 

8 

9 

1 

02 

1 

T 

a> 

05 

05 

9 

o 

C 




O 

to 

ID 

» 

J 

8 

UD 

t 

i 

CD 

CD 

ID 

4 . 

rH 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CO 

rH 

r-H 

<P 

<P 



<k 

<!h 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

a> 

CD 

CD 

co 

CO 

CO 


pq 

co 3 


m 

CO 



rH 

CM 

*#= 

m=: 

#*4 



=#S 

to 

03 



03 

ea 

a 

<si ■ 


Cu 

aS 

CO 

C* 

© 


CO 

e> 



rH 

t- 



V 

• 

bD 


• 

• 

T3 

V 

d 

TO 



h 

© 

« 

>s 

l» 

O 

o 

•H 


O 

O 

rH 

rH 

P 

• 

rH 

rH 

.4 

4 

6-i 

o 

4 

4 




; 













- 94 


CHAPTER 5 

ECONOMIC GEOLOGY . 

I 

Lloydminster Oil and Gas Field * 

HISTORY OF DEVELOPMENT . 

The first exploration work in search for oil 
and gas in the Lloydminster area was done by the Altoba 
Gas Company in 1929* Following geological reconnaissance 
work, a magnetometer survey was made in the Lone Rock area 
by this company in 1930. Detailed geological work fol¬ 
lowed and in 1933 tw r o wells were drilled—Altoba Manito #1 
in twp. 47, rge. 27, W.3, and Altoba Manito #2 in twp. 47, 

| rge. 26, W.3. The former was completed at 1710 feet in 
the Mannville formation with some gas in the Contact 
(Colony) sand at 1700 feet?, the latter ?vas completed as 
a dry hole at 2875 feet in the Devonian. 

Resulting largely from the gas showings in the 
Altoba wells, a Lloydminster group formed the Lloydminster 
Gas Company to secure a local gas supply for the town. 

In 1954 Lloydminster Gas #1 well in twp 50, rge. 28, W.3 
was completed as a gas well with an open flow potentia 1 
of 16,750 Mcf. The producing horizon was the r Lloydminster 

sand ! —a stray sand in the Islay member. The town was 
supplied with gas from this well. 





















95 


Following the discovery of gas, there was 
sporadic development in the years 1934 to 1940. During 
this period, fifteen wells were drilled, of which three 
were dry. Twelve of these wells were located in Saskat¬ 
chewan. The main objective sand in these wells was, 
presumably, the *Lloydminster sand* of the Islay member 
from which Lloydminster Gas #1 was producing. Only three 
of the fourteen holes drilled subsequent to this well 
reached the 1 Lloydminster sand*, the remainder being com¬ 
pleted in the Contact sand. At the end of this period 
there were six gas wells producing from the Contact sand, 
Lloydminster Gas #1 had been abandoned and four wells were 
completed in the Contact sand as oil wells, but actually 
non-commercial. 

During the years 1940 to 1943 there was no 
drilling in the Lloydminster field. Due to the war, the 
railroads were gradually cut off from their normal source 
of supply for fuel oil. A ready market ana a good price 
for black oil revived interest in the Lloydminster field. 
The development of the Vermilion black oil field, thirty 
Smiles to the west, producing from the Wainwright sand, had 
a direct bearing. Operators now considered the Wainwright 
sand, not the Contact sand, the main objective. 

In N 0 vember, 1943, Sparky #1 in twp. 49, rge. 1, 
W.4, was completed in the Wainwright sand as a commercial 











. V • 




. i.; • 




j. • :T ' Jo 'Jii.Q-1 









. 






. -r • .■ i j rC 









- 96 


oil well. In 1943, three wells, all producers, were 
completed in the field. In 1944, seven wells were drilled 
three of which were in Saskatchewan. The four Alberta 
wells were producers and of the three wells in Saskatchewan 
one was an oil well, one was dry and the other completed as 
a gas well in the Contact sand. 

In 1945, fifteen wells were drilled, nine in 
Alberta, of which three were dry and six in Saskatchewan, 
of which two were producers.and two gas wells. 

In 1946, fifty-eight wells were drilled, fifteen 
in Alberta and forty-three in Saskatchewan. Of the fif¬ 
teen Alberta wells, two were abandoned, one indicates a gas 
well, five were completed as oil wells and seven indicate 
commercial production though not as yet placed on the pump. 
Of the forty-three Saskatchewan wells, four were abandoned, 
nineteen were put in production and twe nty were standing 
waiting to go on production. 


PRODUCING HORIZONS. 


Contact Sand . 

This sand is commonly called the ! C61ony sand 1 
in the Lloydminster field, after Colony #1 well in twp. 49, 
rge. 28, W.5, which first produced gas from this zone. 

The name 1 Contact sand 1 has been used for this horizon 
in east central Alberta for some time; hence, has priority 













- 97 - 


over the term’ * Colony• T 

This sand forms the upper limit of the Mannville 
•formation. In some wells a basal Colorado sand is present 
and where this occurs a thin shale break separates this 
sand from the underlying Contact sand. 

The Contact sand is usually well developed but 
in some wells it is thin and silty. In the field the sand 
averages ten feet in thickness. 

A number of wells at Lloydminster produce gas 
from this horizon. The gas area is mainly in Saskatchewan 
centering in the Northern half of fractional twp. 49, 
rge. 28, W.3. (See Map #4). Wells have an initial flow 
as high as 8,000 Mcf. daily, under 400 pounds pressure, 

Wainwright Sand 

The common field terra used for this producing 
horizon in the Lloydminster area is * Sparky sand,* named 
from the discovery well Sparky #1. This sand goes by a 
number of local names—Wainwright sand in the Wainwright 
field. Vermilion sand in the Vermilion field. Meridian 
sand at Dina. Nauss (1945) calls it the Borradaile member 
The name T Wainwright» has priority. In the Lloydminster 
area, the Wainwright sand has been divided into ! upper ! 
and 1 lower ! members. The latter is the main producing 
horizon in the field. 










J 






. i 


. ) 7 '■ : -i ’ -L - \l. }\ : .s .1.!. L 














,,j U .; !'-I j 




•’ » f ■'* :3h' 






. ' A. •*! 








.1 ... . . ‘I J ' .. ■ ■ 




Ii. ... ' I ■. J .... 


... J : . ■ .. ; * i 




. ■ 




. ... ri::. • 




. 

. 


i -j 










- 98 - 


(a) Ur/oer Wainwright sand . 

The top of this horizon is considered to be at 
the base of the * Wainwright coal,* This coal seam is 
regionally wide spread and occurs 150 T to 145* below 
the top of the Mannville formation in the Lloydminster 
field. In the Wainwright and Ribstone areas a coal 
zone occurs 110* to 150* below the top of the Mannville. 

In the Vermilion field a coal horizon occurs at approximate¬ 
ly 110 * below the top. It appears that these coal seams 
are stratigraphically correlative; they prove to be 
valuable horizon markers. In the Lloydminster area this 
seam is usually two feet thick and occurs from eighteen 
to twenty-five feet above the top of the Lower Wainwright 
sand. 


1 

i 

j 






The Upper Wainwright sand is a variable zone and 
in many wells consists mainly of argillaceous siltstone. 

A hard, well-cemented sandstone is usually present at 
approximately thirteen feet below the top of the *Wainwright 
coal*. A number of wells find some saturation in a six- 
foot sand overlying the Lower Wainwright zone, and separated 
from it by a thin shale break. One or two wells have at¬ 
tempted production from this sand but with little success . 




it 


(b) Lower Wainwright Sand 


This productive horizon occurs on the average 
of 160 feet below the top of the Mannville. Very little 















f .... ■ • 


■ 


ro_-v v. : 


' 


: : 


- :: . 


- 






‘X :• i 




, ;■ . - 


' 


. 

- 




V‘ , v- * . , 

■ ■ 




. 


' : 

*■ • •• 


!‘“V, 


. 




v jy .: 






J 



■ 











) >L 













- 99 


information is available on the thickness of this zone 
within the field as the majority of the wells are com¬ 
pleted in the upper few feet of the sand. Edmunds (1947, 
p. 19) estimates an average thickness of 20 feet but 
considers that the oil ! zone T is from 40 ! to 110 T thick. 
The latter thickness would include the Tovell member and 
upper part of the Islay. 


i 


g eneral Petroleum Sand 
The General Petroleum #1 well in twp. 49, 
rge. 1, W.4 has produced some oil from a sand occurring 
204 feet below the top of the Mannville, and considered 
to be near the base of the Wainwright member. This zone 
is referred locally as the ? General Pete 1 sand. Production 
from this well has been poor. At the present time another 
well is standing and waiting to go on production from this 
sand. 


Lloydminster Sand . 

Within the Islay member is a sand horizon which 
carried gas in the Lloydminster Gas Company well #1, 
twp. 50, rge. 28, W*3. Locally this horizon is called the 
r Lloydminster sand. ? No oil production has been obtained 
from this sand tnough. oil-saturation has been encountered 
in the wells that have reached this depth. This * discovery f 















100 


well has subsequently been abandoned, and gas production 
now comes almost entirely from the Contact sand. 

PRODUCTION 

Cumulative Field Production 

The Lloydminster field has produced 294,071 
barrels of oil to the end of January, 1947, made up of 
120,580 barrels from twenty-three wells in Alberta and 
173,491 barrels from the same number of wells in Saskatche¬ 
wan. Lack of a market has restricted production and many 
potential producers have been held up due to equipment 
shortages. 

Market 

In the past the production has been purchased 
by the Excels ion Refining Company of .Edmonton who operate 
a Petreco dehydrating unit just west of the town of Lloyd¬ 
minster. The chief customer for black oil lias been the 
Canadian National Railway but early in 1946 the supply of 
oil exceeded the demand. At the present time the Husky 
Refining Company of UQfoming and California are in the pro¬ 
cess of erecting an asphalt plant. This development will 
increase considerably the market for the Lloydminster oil. 

Quality of the Oil . 


The current production is mainly from the Lower 

























> f... ... • . - ..I , 

t - :n .. v? 'X 0 y 7 j" ■ : hfi 77 » 1 0 d 

• i ; ; : ... .< . .: -v , . *■ •, ... v -; ; 


?■••• t:. ■ 




.. ; •> : .o ;v; / .■ 


i ’ Ii \ . ti : ; ■ 




' . vf.' ■ • 7 . 

■ 

• : . •• 






■: 


h .. > j 


•••> 










101 


Wainwright horizon. The oil is black, 14.8 A.P.I, with 
.3.327% sulphur and a varying percentage of B.S. & W. 
the oil includes 2.5% gasoline, 6% kerosene, 7% Distillate, 
3% Diesel, 10,5% Gas oil, 5% First Lube, 7.5% Second Lube 
and 55.5% Residium. 

Water, as in other Wainwright sand oil fields 
in east central Alberta, is the chief production problem. 
Almost without exception, water content shows an increase 
with production. Wells in the Vermilion field, on steady 
production for five years, show this gradual increase. 

The older wells in the Lloydminster field experienced a 
rapid increase in water percentage, but the improved 
completion methods in recent wells have kept the water 
percentage relatively low and net oil returns have been 
high. It would appear, however, that there is no effec¬ 
tive shut-off from bottom water in the sand. 

Structural Significance . 

Structure apparently has a bearing on production 
possibilities.,(See Map #4). The structural thigh* in the 
gas-producing area (Sec, 24, twp. 49, rge. 28, W.3) has 
had only one well that penetrated the Wainwright member. 
This is a recent completion (Lloyd, #6 in l.s.d. 13 of 
sec. 24 and indications are that it is a better-than- 

average oil well. If structure is an important factor, 
this part of the field should offer the best production 
















102 


possibilities. In the remainder of the field structures 
with smaller closures exist. They are separated by 
structural saddles. Generally speaking, the wells drilled 
below the /405 foot contour (on top of the Mannville) 
have been dry holes. Those that have produced are poor 
wells. To date, the majority of the best w&ls lie between 
the / 420 and the /430 contour lines. 

From the records of w r ells that have drilled the 
Wainwright member, it appears that this sand contains more 
silt in the non-producing wells. The oil accumulation is, 
therefore, due to both lithological and structural condi¬ 
tions. There is insufficient structure, however, to sepa¬ 
rate the oil from the water. 

Production area . 

The drilling has found oil along 26 miles of 
the strike of the structure, the width being limited 
to approximately three miles at the present time. The 
fact that 90% of the T wildcat * wells have been successful 
points to the existence of a field of major proportions. 

On the basis of sands with a thickness of 20 feet, a 
porosity of 20% (actual determinations show an average 
porosity of 27%) connate water content of 10% and a re¬ 
coverable factor assumed at 25%—there are 7000 barrels of 
recoverable oil per acre. (Edmunds, 1947, p. 19). 









j 















- 103 


Production of Individual wells . 

That the more recent wells have enjoyed 
better production is illustrated by figures quoted 
by Edmunds (1947, p. 20). They are as follows: 

C.S.#4 - 19,073 net barrels oil. in 18 months; 

C.S.#6 - 15,425 " » 10 » ; 

C. S. #9 - 11,835 " " » 6 " ; 

S.A.C.#4 - 14,306 " « " 7 " . 

These are probably the best wells to date. The fol¬ 

lowing graph shows production figures of 3 represen¬ 
tative wells in the field. It shows that structure 
is important, that recent completions fare better 
than older wells and that, even in the good wells, 
bottom sediments and water (B.S.&W.) gradually increase. 








■j , . j .. ; . v. 

. 


.. J 




... J (. . 




■ ■ 






■ .■ : " ■ - >.'i 

• ' ' i . . ’ 

■ 

"1 . i . J !. ,L a 

- > ■ ■ ' .A .. L, i . ' vi . ■ >■ , .1 .. Jil .o.' ■ . 


' . 


1’ 




. S 


A? ■ 


























1 -^ 00 - 



- 104 


-4- O 


ID !UJ < 

£ -j * 

CD CC 
3 ! J O 

ifl j.m.ct 


































































































































































APPENDIX 


Detailed Lower Cretaceous Logs , 

of 

Community Services #7 . 

Northwest Mannvilie #1 , 
Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee #1 « 


Wainwright Development #1 . 























- 105 - 


Community Services #7 


Location: L.s.d. 3 of Sec. 4, twp. 50, Rge 27, W3 

- (Province of Saskatcheiran) 

Elevation: 2027 1 (Rotary Table) 


Dace Spudded: December 5, 1945. 

Date Completed: December 17, 1945. 
Total Depth: 2166* 


History : Drilled and abandoned. 


Synopsis of Detailed Lower Cretaceous Log 


mnville Formation. 


Name of 
Member 


0* Sullivan 


Depth Thickness 

1620*-1754* i34t 


Description 


Silty, med. grey 
claystone, light 
grey kaolinitic silt- 
stone. Chert peb¬ 
bles at the top. 


Wainwright 1754*-1826* 


72* 


Quartz and feIdspathic 
sandstone, partially 
indurated and frequently 
oil-stained to oil- 
saturated . Some inter- 
bedded silty claystone 
and limy siltstone. 


Tovell 


1826 *-1846 * 


20 * 


*Salt & Pepper* sand¬ 
stone, limy matrix. 
Thin partings of argil¬ 
laceous siltstone and 
coaly claystone near tof 

































- 106 - 


Name of 

Member Depth Thickness Description 

Islay 1846 ! -1929* 85» Silty, fine grained 

kaolinitic sandstone 
with some argillaceous 
siltstone. 


Cummings 1929*-1981 52* Fine grained, T salt & pep¬ 

per *, glauconitic sand¬ 
stone i some very pure 
claystone with abundant 
fish scales and some sea- 
urchin spines. This mem¬ 
ber considered marine in 
origin.. 


MeMurray 1981*-2163* 182* Mainly unconsolidated, 

fairly well rounded, fros¬ 
ted and pitted quartz 
grains. Some interbedded 
argillaceous siltstone in 
upper part. 


Detailed Log of the Mannyilie Formation . 

Note: The samples were examined in ascending order; i.e. 

from the bottom of the well to the top of the Lower 
Cretaceous. 

Depth Description 

2165 T -2163* - Limestone . Massive at base, finely crystal¬ 
line, buff, grading upward into thin bedded with 
numerous carbonaceous flecks and somewhat silty. No 
decomposed lime. Abrupt transition. Abundant 
crystalline pyrite or marcasite at the contact. 





































- 107 


Note: 2163Contact of Paleozoic (Waterways fm.) with 
base of Mannville fm. (McMurray member) 

2163 T -2077 f 5 tT -Sandstone (at base) Poorly indurated, very 
porous, slightly silty. Quartz grains, well-rounded, 

.1—.7 mm.in diam. (average .3 mm), clean, frosted, 
pyrite crystals common. One quartz fragment 3 mm. in 
diam. . The sandstone becomes better sorted going up in 
the section; grains range from .2—.4 mm. Zircon in¬ 
clusions in quartz grains noted. Crystal form evident 
on some grains (primary or secondary)? White encrus¬ 
tation on surface, probably crystallized from drilling 
mud. At 2123 T grains well rounded and average .3 mm. 
At 2102 1 grains well rounded, average size .4 mm. 

At 2092* becoming more consolidated, matrix silty, con¬ 
siderable carbonaceous material but still very porous 
and grain size consistent with sample at 2102 T . No 
large quartz grains. 

2092 T -2082 ? . Sandstone -more indurated. Average size of laxq 
grains .3 mm. Interstices contain some silty materi¬ 
al and find grained quartz, good porosity. Some 
stringers of sandstone with soft, white matrix, poor 
porosity; grains average .2 mm and fairly we 11 rounded, 
Very fine angular quartz grains embedded in the ma¬ 
trix. Matrix not a sulphate, carbonate or chloride . 

Probably kaolinitic clay. 


















- 108 - 


80821-2077 y 5 11 —Sandstone -—finer grained (av .1 mm) and sub- 
angular, contains considera ble silty material (crypto¬ 
crystalline) and also some carbonaceous material as 
flakes and coating on quartz grains. A few grains of 
chloritic material. Contains very fine grained angular 
q uartz in the matrix as in preceding sa mple. Some 
patches more silty than others. 

2077 ! 5 n -2076»— Siltstone —angular quartz grains of silt di¬ 
mensions in an argillaceous matrix (isotropic) some 
flakes of mica (selenite). Plant remains common. The 
siltstone is interlensed with sa ndstone, crenulations 
show structure which was probably induced in the un¬ 
consolidated material. The sandstone occurs in irre¬ 
gular patches. A few crystals of tourmaline and one 
or two zircons noted. 

2c76i-2073 T — Sandstone .- pure, indurated, very fine grained 
to fine grained,(.05—.15 mm) angular to subangular, 
some argillaceous coating on individual grains. Con¬ 
siderable carbonaceous flakes. Titanite, muscovite 
and apatite grains in minor amounts. Good prosity. 

2073*-2072*— Siltstone —hard, massive, med-grey, angular 

quartz fragments (<(,.05 mm) in an argillaceous ground- 
mass. Plant stems common. 

2072 1 -2068 1 — -Sandstone —pure, poorly indurated, massive. 


i i 
























- 109 


white kaolinitic-like matrix, good porosity. Very 
fine to fine grained (.05—.15 mm), angular to sub- 
rounded. Inclusions of apatite in quartz grains 
common. A few flakes of carbonaceous material. 

S068 1 -2063*5 n — Sandstone ,- Hard, massive, white and medium 
grey silty matrix, some large plant fragment remains. 
Sub-angular to fairly well rounded, very fine grained 
quartz (.1 mm), commonly coated with argillaceous ma¬ 
terial. Numerous titanite grains. Hods and flakes 
of carbonaceous material common, hiotite, muscovite, 
calcite and burmaline present in minor amounts. Po¬ 


rosity low. Patchy appearance -to core due to matrix 
changing from white to medium grey. 

8063 1 5 lT -2062 T 3 T1 --Claystor^e - Hard, massive, waxy, grey¬ 
ish brown, abundant pyrite spherules. The claystone 
is cryptocrystalline in character, with an iron stain; 
a few very small angular quartz grains and flakes 
of carbonaceous material present. This shale is dis¬ 
tinctive and considered lithologically similar to 
the sunburst type of shale. 

2068 1 3 11 -2045 T - Sanastone - Indurated, massive, white ma¬ 
trix, very fine to fine, angular to subangular quartz 

, 

. grains (.05—.15 mm). Very abundant plant remains 
near base; tourmaline, titanite, zircon quite common. 



















., 


. J J, ;i ■ 








' .. 




- • i 




, 




, . . 








’ 


• - I 








■ 

-■ *>■ • : C>lv r. •... *i • .• •; ; l 

• ••• - J :> • . 1 i ./ •. . , 

■ - - . . . 

■ V-.-v •' • *• ■ rrli ,.-? i . 





. 


. 




. 


» V 

















110 


Flakes of selenite numerous. 

2045 1 -2042*— Claystone - Hard, massive, dark grey to black, 
silty (sub-rounded quartz grains up to ,1 mm). 
Pyritized plant remains common. Zircons, tourmaline, 
titanite fairly common. Numerous carbonaceous flakes. 

2042*-2030*—S andstone- Hard, massive, white and light grey 
matrix, with patches of dark grey silty claystone. 
Abundant .small pyrite or marcasite crystals. Angular 
to sub-rounded, very fine quartz grains (max. diam 
.15 mm). Zircons abundant; titanite, gypsum, tourma¬ 
line and chloritic material in minor amounts. Car¬ 
bonaceous flakes common. Crystocrystalline argilla¬ 
ceous matrix. 

2050 1 -2026*— Siltstone - Hard, thin bedded, argillaceous, 
medium grey, with patches of light grey siltstone. 
Rock is mainly angular quartz grains of silt dimen¬ 
sions in a cryptocrystalline groundmass. Flakes of 
carbonaceous material fairly common. 

2026*-2016*— Siltstone - Massive, indurated, quartzose, 
light grey. Minute angular quartz grains comprise 
90% of the rock, and appear to be held together by 
carbonaceous material. Gypsum, tourmaline, zircon 
and rutile main accessory minerals. Carbonaceous 
flakes common. 

2016*-2008*— Sandstone - Massive, indurated, clean, light 






















Ill 


grey to white * good porosity; few pyrite grains. 

95 % quartz grains; sub-angular to sub-rounded (av .3nni) 
Few highly decomposed grains of feldspar present, 
also some cherty fragments. Accessory minerals rare, 
a few grains of tourmaline present, also a little 
carbonaceous material. 

2003»-2006t—Sandstone.- Quartzose, light grey to white 

matrix; interlensed with thin bedded, dary grey silt- 
stone. Plant remains comprise 50% of the rock. 

Quartz grains are sub-rounded, fine grained (av .15 nm^ 
Gypsum common, with minor amounts of tourmaline and 
zircon. Interbedded sandstone disappears near top, 
and rock is hard, massive siltstone, dark grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous, with plant remains common. 

2006t- 1984* —Sandstone - Massive, indurated, fairly pure 
but with some carbonaceous material, light grey to 
white, good porosity. Quartz grains dirty (many 
inclusions), sub angular, very fine grained (av .1mm). 
Zircon and gypsum numerous. Feldspar common. 

1985 f -19851S» —Siltstone - Hard, massive, quartzose , ar¬ 
gillaceous matrix, dark grey. 1/2 IT band of kaolinite. 
Quartz grains subangular (av .1 mm), dirty (many in¬ 
clusions), gypsum, zircon, tourmaline and feldspar 
present. Some pyrite in patches. Electrolog indicate 
salt water sandstone from 1983 *8 fJ -2163 1 . 













. . . . ... 

■ 


v. ,-j.. /■ '2.U 
















* 

aac ... .1 


. 

... .. ; 

■ . 


< - •• • v .!. .• • , . J ‘r,, . . 

.. .. . .. . ,. . . < . .... 

■ .. : ■ ' •- '.'\i '• - : 

. 

_ . • ‘ i! . , - ■> '* .. , .. j ■■ "i i 












. 7- v • •• • 


■ J • 


. 

... 


, . . 

. . 

i I . .. o . • i .. 














- 112 


1S85»6 !1 -1981 T — Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey, 

some plant remains and pyrite specks. The clays cone 
is thin-bedded and interlensed with sandstone as at 
base of preceding sample and grades into massive 
claystone. Rock is 95$ argillaceous, with fragments 
showing very finely cryptocrystalline around the edges. 
Remainder is quartz of silt dimensions with a few 
grains of calcite. 

Note: 1981* -McMurray (Dina)/Cummings contact (base of 
glauconitic sand). 

1981 T -1974 ? 10»— Sandstone - Hard, massive, medium to 

light grey, some pyrite and plant remains in layers. 

1/8 T! layer with abundant glauconite. Some porosity. 
Quartz grains are angular to sub-angular, poorly 
sorted (fine to coarse), dirty. Other minerals are 
feldspar, calcite, gypsum. Silty material is 
isotropic—probably caroonaceous. Some pieces of 
quartzitic material. 

1974*10 n -1973 ! -— Claystone - Hard, fissile, black, pyritic 
spherules. Very finely cryptocrystalline on the 

1 

edges of the fragments. Chitinous fish scales common. 

1975 1 -1968 ! — Siltstone and Sandstone - Thinly inter- 

bedded. The sandstone is thin-bedded, hard, silty, 
light grey, quartz grains angular and poorly sorted, 
from silt dimensions to coarse. Calcite is common. 












» • i 








■... . ..;i . \ .t 

. £ 

•.- • 

■ 

. a . 

V 



. 




IXW- K i ..L , . 


, 

\ ji 

'• \ •'; i. : i . i. ■ 


J :I. : .. '■ ' 


. 


■ 

■iv . ,J 

i' i '■ •: . . ( :G , 

. 

. 

x:;.; .. 








| 












. 






r 






. 















115 


glauconite fairly common; other accessories are 
zircon, tourmaline, gypsum and feldspar. Argilla¬ 
ceous grains and flakes are numerous and give »salt 
and pepper f aspect to the rock. The sandstone is 
predominant in middle of interval. The interbedded 
siltstone is dark grey and composed mainly of car¬ 
bonaceous and argillaceous material. Angular to 
sub-angular quartz and feldspar grains (of silt di¬ 
mensions) are in equal proportion to calcite grains. 
Titanite and zircon present in minor amounts. 

1968*-1966* —S iltstone - As in preceding sample, fissile, 
with a few thin lenses of sandstone as in preceding 
sample. 

1966 T -1951 f — Sandstone - Hard, massive, silty, light grey 
matrix, pyritic, T salt and pepper. 1 Subangular fine 
grained quartz (.1 mm). Argillaceous matrix; calcite 
common, some feldspar; carbonaceous material ana ar¬ 
gillite grains give ! pepper ! effect to rock. Grains 
not well sorted; electrolog shows some porosity. The 
quartz grains become coarser (av .2 mm) towards the 
top and patches of oil staining occur. These patches 
are capped by a thin layer of non-porous argillaceous 
siltstone. Calcite is common, glauconite occurs 
throughout, and pieces of chalcedonic or cherty silica 
become common towards top. Carbonaceous material is 
c ornm on thr ough out • 









n yo 



1 


















- 114 - 


1951’-1947 ! — Sandstone - Massive, very hard, ’salt and 

pepper 1 , glauconitic. One inch ironstone band and 
several ironstone inclusions in the sandstone. 

Abundant plant remains. The ironstone is dense side- 
rite. The 4uartz grains comprise 50% of the rock 
and are angular with dimensions up to .15 mm. Car¬ 
bonaceous flakes and glauconite are abundant. The 
upper 6 ft is hard, thin bedded, non-calcereous silty 
claystone with abundant fish scale remains; some 
pyrite. Sea- urchin spines present. Indicates marine 
environment. 

1947’-1941’ —Sandstone - Massive, indurated, well oil- 

stained, some thin silty partings. The sandstone is 
’salt and pepper’; the quartz grains are subangular 
to sub-rounded (av .15 mm) a small percent being 
quartzitic. The darkgrains are carbonaceous material 
Glauconite common. 

1941’-1940’—S iltstone and Sandstone —Interlensed and 

mixed. S iltstone hard, massive, medium grey, argil¬ 
laceous. Contains quartz grains poorly sorted as to 
size—range up to .2 mm., angular to sub-rounded. 
Sandstone hard, very fine grained (av .1 mm) sub- 
angular quartz grains, some feldspar and dark argil¬ 
laceous grains. Glauconite and gypsum common. 
Tourmaline and Zircon in small amounts, feolinitic 




















1 

. . 1 


. 


*, •' 

, " . , ' , . .. , 

. J.L 

: - . 

• \ i. 1 ■ 1. ... 

■ 

■ ; , . . 

. . 




. 


. 



. 

. 


. 

0 ■ .. . V . i . . . : 

* J 1 . 



. 

' 

:.>J J . :> )7 . . 

. 

• ■ 


■ 

■ • v .'i . : a'x . : . ■; ..o j .i'j 



. 

i T X . ■ ... 

■ - 

i. > n< , , 

J s' , , . . J : 

] 

*. i ; 









- 115 - 


Note : 


matrix gives light grey to white color to the rock, 
1940 1 -1938*— Sandstone - As in preceding sample- Top 9” 
very hard, abundant glauconite, 50% carbonate. 

1938 ! -1929 f — Claystone - Hard, bedded to massive, slightly 
waxy, dark brownish grey, fish scale remains common. 
Composed entirely of cryptocrystalline argillaceous 
material, no silty quartz; some gypsum. A very pure 
shale. Sea urchin spines present. 

Cummings/Islay contact at 1929 1 
19291-.1919*-- Siltstone - Thin-bedded, hard, dark grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous, with a few patches of light grey, quartz- 
ose siltstone. Some fish scale remains. 

19191 1917 *-- Siltstone - Very hard, massive, grey, abundant 
bituminous plant remains, silty quartz particles in 
a carbonate matrix—probably sideritic. Gypsum com¬ 
mon, some tourmaline. 

1917 1 -1916 T _ Siltstone - Thin bedded, indurated, medium grey 

angular silty to very fine quartz grains in a crypto¬ 
crystalline argillaceous groundmass. Some carbonace¬ 
ous material, tourmaline and zircon present. 

^ 91 61-1891 * — Siltstone - Thin bedded, grades upwards into 
Sandstone, massive, indurated, greyish buff, porous; 
very fine, angular to subangular quartz grains 
(av .1 mm). Some carbonaceous grains, feldspar and 


kaolinitic material. 


























. 


' 






■ • - - - 




* - 




. . 

••.i -• ' 




• ■ 






.... 

- ' i ... ■ . 'i v ■ i. : . .... 

f. . > 




) i. • .. . o' , . i. 


■ • . u--'z 




. . • - - • • .... 






. 

• i V. .. .. 











- 116 - 


At 1897 1 the sandstone is le>ss indurated, oil-stained and 

the quartz grains have increased in size (av .15 mm), 
are sub-angular to sub-rounded. 

At 1891* the sand is oil-saturated (1891-1894*), 
the quartz grains are sub-rounded and average .8 mm 
in diam. Carbonaceous material practically absent. 

1891 *-1890* —Sandstone - Hard, massive, light grey, silty, 
patches of oil staining, sub-angular quartz grains 
(av .1 mm) in a kaolinitic matrix. Gypsum, tourma¬ 
line and zircon in minor amounts. A few specks of 
carbonaceous material. 

1890 1 -1889*— Sandstone - Hard, massive, dark grey to dark 

brown, silty, abundant fragments of bituminous plant 
remains, some fibrous gypsum, patches of lean oil- 
staining. Non-porous. Quartz grains as in previous 
sample. 

1889 T -1879* —S andstone - Poorly indurated, massive, silty, 
light grey to white. Quartz grains poorly sorted 
and subangular (av .15 mm). Kaolinitic material abun¬ 
dant, carbonaceous grains common. 

1879 1 -1876*— Siltstone - Indurated, thin bedded, grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous. A mixture of angular quartz grains of 
silt dimensions, oayptocrystalline argillaceous ma¬ 
terial and dark brown to black carbonaceous particles 












■ •-< ,j. i :1 vCwTWBX X,i\ 

. 

- • : •• i-- v' C •: >.. ' ; :.v;.XJ J 

'...(• v . ... : 

■ . _ . ■ ~ f 

. . j • ... X .... ; ; ; j, 

. : : , t - w 

. . 


. 

. . 


. *>, tai • •: > . . ■! V 

. 


' 


... , ... i.... . , 

-. • ; , : .. .. ;. , 




. 

. • j.- . j 

> • ' ... 

■ 














. 

X -a i. ..... j. 













- 117 - 


gypsum, tourmaline and zircon are present in minor 
amounts. 

1876*-1870 *— Sandstone and SHistone - Thin bedded and 

interlensed, hard; Siltstone as in preceding inter¬ 
val and sandstone, very fine angular quartz grains 
( .1 mm), abundant white kaolinitic material. 

1870 ! -1857 f — Sandstone - As in preceding sa raple, some pat¬ 
ches of lean oil-staining; tourmaline and zircon pre¬ 
sent in minor amounts. From 1860 T -1857 1 the sand¬ 
stone is oil-stained; the quartz grains are sub- 
angular, firly well sorted and somewhat coarser than 
at base (av .1 mm). Kaolinitic material not so abun¬ 
dant as in lower part. Dark carbonaceous flakes 
fairly common. Tourmaline and zircon present. 

1857 T -1851 *-- Sandstone .- Similar to preceding interval,but 

abundant kaolinitic matrix and numerous carbonaceous, 

■ 

plant remains in flakes and grains; lean oil-stainirg 
throughout. The quartz grains are sub-angular and 
poorly sorted, range up to .15 mm. 

1851 1 -1846 T -- Claystone - with some thin lenses of s andstone 1 
as in preceding interval at base. The claystone is 
hard, somewhat fissile, medium to dark grey, silty, 
pyritic and with some plant remains. 95% crypto- 
crystalline argillaceous material with some quartz 


grains of silt to fine-grained dimensions. 


I 


















. ' ■ 





- 

_ 


■ 


i ■ 

. 




• 





... J. '■ ; ... , vi;:) ; . 

■ 

■ 

■j . 


. 


•;. 7 -L- 

. 




- 




■ 


fi 



• 

> H, 



• • 1 . . 

. 

m \ Sfo ' ^ m '■ 

... . :i 

. ■ . 




















- 118 - 


Note: 


Islay/Tovell contact at 1846» 

1846 T -1843*— Arenaceous Limestone - Hard, light grey, 

50% calcite, 15% quartz (coarse —,4 mm angular), 

10% Kaolinitic material, 15% dark chert or quartzitic 
material, 10% smoky colored grains of chert, 5% fid- 
spar. Dark grains give T pepper f effect* 

1813 1 -1838*--Sandstone - Massive, indurated, silty, light 
grey. Quartz grains very fine and angular (av .1 mm). 
Silty feldspathic matrix and some oryptocrystalline 
kaolinite. Carbonaceous material in flakes and grains 
common. 

1838 1 -1837 1 — Siltstone - Hard, massive, argillaceous, medium 
grey; abundant coaly plant remains. Angular quartz 

grains of silt dimensions in a cryptocrystalline ar- 

■ 

gillaceous matrix. 

1837*-1836 T 5 n — Claystone - fissile to friable, black, car- 
bonaceous and coaly. 

1836*5 n -1855 r 2 n —S iltstone - Thin bedded, dark grey, argil¬ 
laceous, interlensed with Sandstone , very fine grained, 

. 

light grey kaolinitic matrix. Gypsum common; fish 
scales present, Pelecypod cast? 

1835*2"-1834 f — Sandstone - Vffiy hard, massive, fine-grained 
angular opartz (av .15 mm), »salt and gepper 1 9 Carbon¬ 
ate matrix (dolomite) comprises 50% of the rock. 






















.. • ■ . .. 




, 










* 


■ 






1 • ; i - 






. 

: - - . • • 




■ ■. • •; , • .. 






. 

■ 

.. 

..... 

. 








: 


. 




. 





























- 119 - 


Note: 


Quartz and feldspar (30%) present In equal amounts. 
White, cryptocrystalline kaolinitic material and 
dark, quartzitic or cherty material make up the re - 
mainder. 

Tovelu/Wainwright contact at 1826*. 

1854*-1826 1 — Claystone - Massive, hard, dark grey. Very 
fine cryptocrystalline argillaceous material with 
some silty quartz and lldspar grains. A few car¬ 
bonaceous plant remains, and some apatite and gypsum. 
The rock becomes lighter grey in color as the silty 
feldspathie (kaolinitic material) increases towards 
the top. 

1826 1 -1794*— Sandstone - Thin-bedded at base, grading into 
massive in upper part, indurated, light gre y to 
white, some layers of lean oil-staining. Dark grains 
in very minor amounts . Very fine grained angular 
quartz and highly altered Feldspar grains average 
grain size .05 mm). Gypsum, tourmaline, titanite 
and zircon are accessory. The quartz grains become 
less angular tow'ards the top and increase in size 
(av .1 mm). Oil staining is commonly in patches and 
layers where the sandstone becomes less silty. 

1794*-1788*—C laystone - Hard, massive, dark grey, silty. 

A few plant remains; cryptocrystalline argillaceous 
material with some silty quartz and feldspar grains. 




















120 - 


1788*-1785 f — Limestone - Very hard, massive, very finely 
crystalline, a few carbonaceous grains and some 
silty quartz and feldspar. Becomes more silty at 
the top and is slightly oil-stained * 

1783*-1776* - Sanastone and Siltstone - Indurated in 

patches and lenses; medium grey, sandy patches light¬ 
ly oil-stained. Some carbonaceous plant material. 

The sandstone lenses are fairly clean; quartz grains 
are sub-angular and range up to .2 mm in diameter. 
Kaolinitic material is common. The siltstone is ar¬ 
gillaceous with quartz and feldspar of silt dimen¬ 
sions. Grades upwards into sandstone. 

1776*-1760 —Sandstone - Massive, indurated, fine grained, 
light grey, very clean. Composed of quartz (angular 
to sub-rounded, av .15 mm). PaiHy decomposed feld- 
' spar vd.th kaolinitic matrix in patches and bands. 

At 1770 1 the Sandstone is mass ive, poorly indurated, 
clean, buff (due to lean oil-staining); quartz 
grain more rounded and larger (av .2 mm); rema inder 
. {20%) partially decomposed feldspar and kaolinitic 
material. Accessory minerals rare. Some plant re¬ 
mains. Good porosity. 

From 1765 1 -1760* the quartz grains become somewhat 

finer (av .15 mm) and silty white kaolinitic lenses 

are common. Plant remains common; lean oil-staining 
in less silty lenses. 












. 

. .. 

• ■ - '■ . r.:> ... .. : ■■■ ... 


















. 

. 

. 


• . 




•-! 






... • 




• .' . ■ J. 


t. ..... 





















- 181 - 


Note : 


1760 1 -1754»— Sandstone - Oil stained to oil-saturated, 
silty lenses less common. Grains not well sorted, 
angular, up to .3 mm in diameter. A quartz, £Idspar 
ratio of 4:1. Accessory minerals still rare. 

Wainwright/0 ! Sullivan contact at 1754** 

1754*-1753 ? — Siltstone - Hard, massive, dark grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous, silty grains of quartz and feldspar, a 
few coaly plant remains. 

1753*-1745*— Claystone - Fissile, dark grey to black, ar¬ 
gillaceous and coaly, a few feldspar and quartz grains 
trace of zircon. Becomes silty towards top. A hard, 
calcareous silty band at 1746*. 

1745*-1750 T —Siltstone - Thinly laminated and cross-bedded, 
hard, banded, medium grey and light grey to white. 
Silty particles of feldspar and quartz in a dark argil 
laceous and white kaolinitic matrix. Trace of zircon. 
Three thin, hard, brown-weathering, calcareous bands. 

A few plant remains. 

1730 ! -1720Sandstone - Massive, indurated, very silty, 

light grey to white. Poorly sorted sub-angular quartz 
grains up to .2 mm; highly altered feldspar grains and 
abundant white kaolinitic material. Dark grains of 
argillite and chert common giving a somewhat *salt and 
pepper* aspect to the sandstone. 
































i 




■ - 


















- 122 


1720 T -1688* — Claystone —Hard, massive, medium to dark 
grey, argillaceous with some fine silty feldspar 
and quartz; a few zircons and some gypsum. Some 
carbonaceous grains. The claystone becomes more 
silty in the upper part and carries more carbonaceous 
material. Electroloc shows sandy or silty breaks 
at 1716 f and 1712 f . Probably unrecovered part of 
core. Brown weathering sideritic band, 1’ thick 
at 1696 ! . Plant remains common. 

1688»-1686 1 — Sandstone .- Very hard, massive, fine grained 
angular quartz and feldspar. Carbonate matrix 
(50% of rock). Some plant remains. Ironstone type . 

1686*-1681 ! — Sandstone - Massive, poorly indurated, silty, 
grey. Poorly sorted angular quartz grains (max .2m$ 
with fresh and altered feldspar; quartzitic material 
and argillaceous grains common. Kaolinitic matrix 
abundant. 

1681 1 -1679 ? — Claystone - Hard, bedded, medium grey, and 

dark grey; silty, a fewcarbonace ous flecks. Hock 
composed largely of an aggregate of finely divided 
clay minerals; some silty angular feldspar and 
quartz grains. Flakes of gypsum only accessory 


mineral noted 















. 




■ \ . (■.. ■ i .... c : ,.;j 


■ ■■ ■ ■ • 






. 








■ ■ •, . v - - ■ & 7 ' - -V> 




. 

...... 










•. . ... 

’ 




■ 

■ 

' 


. 


' . \ , •• 

■ ' • . • > ■. .../ s;fu,:.;X3 .^o vQ&llx&irt 

‘ 






- . - . • > 

• '••• - • 

■ . - . » • • ■ -• 











123 


1679*-1668*— Siltstone - Thin bedded, indurated, light 

grey, kaolinitic; silt grains of feldspar and quartz; 
some larger angular quartz grains; Carbonaceous flakes 
common; tourmaline fairly common. Becomes darker and 
more argillaceous in upper 2 feet. f Ironstone* band 
at 1668*—Y/eathers brown and contains very fine grains 
of carbonate as a matrix for the silty quartz and 
feldspar. Some thin stringers of kaolinitic sandstone 
and waxy claystone at 1668*. 

1668*-1688* — Claystone - Hard, fissile to massive, medium 

grey, some silty quartz and feldspar; a few carbonace¬ 
ous flecks. Bark grey at base grading into medium 
grey at top. Coaly plant remains fairly abundant in 
upper part. * Ironstone* bands at 1657* (shows con¬ 
centric structure), at 1642*; at 1633* (5** thick) 

1628*-1624* —S iltstone - Thin bedded, poorly indurated, 

light grey, quartz and feldspar particles in a kaoli¬ 
nitic matrix. 4* ! ’ironstone* band at 1626*. Becomes 
darker and more argillaceous in upper two feet. Plant 
remains abundant. 

1624*-1625* 11 ** —Sandstone - Indurated, massive, very 
fine sub-angular quartz grains (av .1 mm), some 
feldspar in a kaolinitic matrix. Plant remains 
common. Fairly clean sandstone. 














- 124 - 


1623* 11 T, -1683 1 8”—Oil staining and abundant coaly plant 
remains. Kaolinitic silty matrix from 1623 T 8 n — 
1623 f 5 n . Claystone partings at 1623 T . 

Remainder poorly indurated, oil saturaded-sandstone. 
Angular,coarser than at base (av .2 mm), clean. 
Quartz 80$, Feldspar 20$. 

L-Cret - Colorado contact not observed. 

Placed at 1620 T (Electrolog) 








■ 

























- 125 - 

Northwest Mannville #1 


Location : L.s.d. 1, Sec. 18, twp. 50. Rge 8, W4. 

Elevation : 2094 feet (Rotary table) 

Date Spudded ; September 27, 1942. 

Date Completed : October 12, 1942. 

Total Death ; 2435 7 

History : Drilled and abandoned. 


Synopsis of Detailed Lower Cretaceous Log . 


Manyilie Formation 

Name of 

Member Depth Thickness Description 

0 T Sullivan 1833 f -1982 7 149 7 7 Salt & Pepper 7 sandstone, 

Medium grey silty claystone. 
Argillaceous siltstone. 

Wainwright 1988'-2081' 39' Very fine grained, quartz 

sandstone with a kaolinitic 
matrix. Some siltstone and 
claystone. 


Tovell Cannot be recognized 
Islay in core samples 


Buffalo 8021'-2180' 159' 'Salt & Pepper' sandstone; 

Coulee (Blectrolog) argillaceous siltstones and 

silty claystones. Glauconite 
and marine claystone in 
lower part of the member. 




































- 186 - 


Name of 

Member Depth Thickness Description 

MeMurray 8180 1 -8581 1 141’ Quartz sandstone with inter 

(Electrolog) bedded argillaceous silt- 

stone and claystone. 

Detailed Log; of Mannville Formation , 

Note; Samples examined in ascending stratigraphical order. 

Depth Description 

8524 T -2515’ —Limestone - Hard, massive, finely crystalline 
to dense, medium-grey, some flecks of carbonaceous 
material. 

2515 ! -2508’— Limestone - Fairly hard, massive, finely cry¬ 
stalline, light-grey, silty quartz or feldspar absent. 

2508’-2298 T •—(5) Limestone - dolomitie, as in previous 
sample, some carbonaceous flakes. 

(2) Claystone - calcareous, massive to irregularly 
bedded, indurated, pale green to grey, some silty to 
very fine grained quartz in a cryptocrystalline to 
silty matrix. Some carbonaceous material. 

Note: Top of limestone (Waterways) taken as 2505’+ 2’ 
according to depths on sample bottles. Electrolog 
indicates top of lime at 2521’. 

2508’-2298’—(l) Siltstone - fairly soft, massive, light 

grey, few flecks of carbonaceous material; fairly pure 
silty quartz and feldspar. Some pin-point poros ity. 

A few very fine sub-angular quartz grains. 


















- 127 


2298*-22881 — (7 & 6) The siltstone grades upward into very 

fine grained sandstone, sub-angular quartz and feldspar 
(<.15 mm) in a silty feldspathic matrix. Some pin¬ 
point porosity with lean oil-sta ining. 

Note: Slectrolog depths do not check with core log depths. 
Electrolog indicates the above silt and sandstone mem¬ 
ber at 2308*-2302 ? , Core log 2302 1 -2296», difference 
6 1 . Apparently A.C.B. samples are incorrect as to 
depth in this part of the core. 

2298 f -2288 T —(5) Claystone - massive, indurated, medium grey 
abundant silty quartz and feldspar in a dark, argil¬ 
laceous matrix. Some plant remains. 

(4) As in previous sample. 

(3) Siltstone - massive, indurated, light grey weather¬ 
ing brownish. Silty to very fine grained sub-angular 
quartz and feldspar. Abundant Sideritic oolites, 

(av .5 mm) (Electrolog - 2296 ! -94 ! ). 

(2) and (l) Claystone - fissile, cross-bedded, inducted 
dark grey. Very fine silt coated with carbonaceous 
material. 

2288 *-2278 T — (3) Sandstone - massive, firly soft, light 

grey, some porosity. Large fagments of plant remains 
common. Quartz grains poorly sorted—sub angular 
( < .2 mm). Some colorless silty matrix material. 
Accessory minerals very common and large-tourmaline 
and zircon. 

















.. : 


i 


\ 



■ 


, 



‘UP, 




. 











r 



- 128 


2288 T -2278»— Claystone - massive, indurated, medium grey. 
Abundant silty feldspar and quartz coated with very 
fine argillaceous material. Some carbonaceous flecks. 
2278*-2268 f (4) Coal - with lenses and patches of sandstone . 
fairly soft, greyish to white; sub-angular quartz 
grains (av .2 mm) in a fairly coarse silty quartz and 
feldspathic matrix. 

(3) Claystone - massive, indurated, medium to light 

grey. Some silty to very fine grained quartz in a 

cryptocrystalline to very fine silty argillaceous 

matrix. Grades upwards into siltstone. 

(2) and (l) Siltstone - fairly soft, massive, greyish 

white. Fairly pure, well sorted, silty sub-angular 

grains of quartz and feldspar. Trace of carbonaceous 

flecks. Some pin-point porosity. 

2268 1 -2258 ! —(3) Siltstone - as in previous sample. 

(2) Claystone - fissile, dark grey with lenses and 

patches of siltstone, as in previous sample. 

Note: Electrolog shows porous siltstone from 2280»-2272 T 
Samples ” « n " 2273»-2265*, 

depth difference 7». 

(1) Siltstone - massive, well-indurated, medium grey, 
argillaceous. Quartz grains of silt size, some larger, 
sub-rounded. Carbonaceous flecks common. Matrix of 
very fine silt particles with dark carbonaceous coating 















- 129 


2258*-2248*— (7) Siltstone - indurated, to fairly soft, 
massive, light grey; well sorted silty particles of 
quartz and feldspar with small amount of very fine 
matrix material. Some pin-point porosity. A few 
carbonaceous flecks. 

( 6 ) Claystone - fissile, dark grey, silty. Numerous 
sub-angular, silty to very fine quartz grains in a 
matrix of carbonaceous material. Some larger plant 
remains. 

(5) Claystone - as in previous sample with some lean 
oil-stained silty patches. 

(4) Claystone - hard, massive, medium grey; some sil¬ 
ty material; a few flecks of carbonaceous material. 

(3) Siltstone - fairly soft, massive, oil-stained, 
well sorted, angular silty quartz grains with very 
little matrix material. Some carbonaceous flecks. 

Fair porosity. 

(2) and (l) Siltstone - as in previous sample be¬ 
coming hard and more argillaceous, light to medium grey 
2248*-2237*8" — (2) Siltstone - as previous sample, medium 
grey, argillaceous. 

(1) Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey, very little 
silty material. 

2257 *8*-2252 *9 11 — (2) Cla ystone - as previous sample. 

Fissile, very thinly bedded with some light grey to 















• • . . . ' t ; 




- ' • 30 ...:. I 














- . . .• : v. . i ; . : , ; 








. - • - /.» i ' ■ - ■ ;j ■ 


..v . . . . 




" >-■' . - ' . . ii T J ■ : i/jS-J I I 'H / ,U \J 


-..V “ .1 


' - ••• • ■ ■■ , • • , J - - i • - : . : _ 

. - m ) j 

,J J - ■■ ' •• • u • -i . . j, o .. i j , ;j 

■ ■ !■.■■■-i.- 

• . ■ . • •> ■ ■-• . ■ '. . • ,.... , . • 






. - ... . .. V J 




. 

. i. j.! .L ... . ^ J ... j , 
















- 150 


2232 


white siltstone. 

(1) Sandstone - well indurated, massive, light grey 
to white, some lean patches of oil-staining. Fairly 
pure quartz grains ranging from cryptocrystalline di- 
mensions up to .1 mm. Some carbonaceous flecks. 

! 9 f, -2222 *9”—(8) Siltstone - hard, massive, medium grey, 
argillaceous. Some plant remains. 

(7) Claystone - hard, thin-bedded, dark grey to black; 
some silty grains and plant remains. 

(6) Siltstone - finely cross-bedded, hard, medium grey, 
argillaceous. 

( 4 ) Sandstone - hard, massive, light grey, very fine 
grained. Fairly pure, but poorly sorted. Some larger 
sub-rounded quartz grains that average .25 mm. Matrix 
very fine silty quartz or feldspar. Fine carbonaceous 
grains common and some larger plant remains. Titanite 
and zircon fairly common. 

( 3 ) Sandstone - softer, massive, fine-grained (av .2mm] 
sub-rounded quartz. Well sorted. Some patches of 
lean oil-staining. Some silty matrix material. 

(2) Sandstone - as in previous sample, more silty and 
with some large plant remains. 

(l) Claystone - thin-bedded, dark grey. Some lenses 
and patches of siltstone, light grey to white. 





















. . j- t.> ,jf V'i: .;A . ,.{ 


. 

" 






" ■ 




■. ■ , .... 




. ' ' 

. 

■ j . . .■ . :.. ...... . ■ > 




; i \ I. vi < l/:', \b. — ; -> 




■ / . . J 3 - ■ ' • 


. ' i - j ■> >• ' ■ ■ 1 V 

... •.y.... ...L -j . /: ... -• ^ ;v ■; ;* -■ 

. 

. 

, ■ , • . . ...... J • .•; ....... 


l • 


o , . J. .. 


ip , ,■ . 




, . ..4 .« . '• 




• V’V ....- ' '■ ... 

. . , 31 


.J ■ J / ' v. - ■ .. 


' . , . ... 1 J- ... . . ■ V 


: , , ./ 












- 131 - 


2222*9”-2212*7 n *—As in previous sample. Finely cross- 
bedded claystone and quartz siltstone. 

2212*8"-2210 T 3 n — Sandstone -.fairly soft, mass ive, light 
grey to white, in part oil-stained. Quartz grains sub- 
angular (av .1 mm). Matrix more silty in non-oil-staled 
parts. A few carbonaceous flecks. Individual quartz 
grains have dirty appearance due to numerous inclusions. 

Note: Electrolog indicates salt water sand. 

2210 T 3 Tf -2209 i9 tT — Siltstone - fissile, medium grey, very ar¬ 
gillaceous. Silty to very fine grained quartz and feld¬ 
spar in argillaceous matrix. Carbonaceous flecks abund¬ 
ant. 

8209*9 T> -2205 1 7 tT —- Sandstone - soft, massive, weld oil-slained; 
medium to fine, rounded, quartz grains (av .3 mm). 

Silty material fairly abundant. Good porosity. Posi¬ 
tive saline test. 

2205 t 7 t! -8192 | 8"— Claystone - finely cross bedded, well in¬ 
durated, medium grey. Numerous fine silty particles 
of quartz and feldspar coated with car bonaceous material. 
Some patches of white siltstone. 4 TI coal seam at 
2199»9 n . IQ 11 coal seam at 2197 ! ll f! . White silty part- ’ 
ings more numerous toY/ards the top; some slightly oil- 
stained. 

2192 1 8 T, -2188 f — Sandstone - fairly soft, massive, lean oil- 
stained. Fery fine grained sub-angular quartz (av .1mm) 
Fine silty material fairly abundant. F&ir porosity. 
















152 


8188’-2187’6” —Coal - soft, friable 

2187*6"-2186*10"— Claystone - very coaly, thinly in- 
terbedded with greyish white siltstone. 

2186’10 n -2182 1 8 n — Sandstone - fairly soft, massive, well 

oil-stained, very fine grained with some silty matrix 
material. Carbonaceous flecks quite common. Fair 
porosity. 

2182 f 8 Tf -2179’ 6”— Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey; 
considerable amount of silty quartz. Carbonaceous 
material common. 

McMurray/Buf.Coul.contact at 2173 T 6”. 

2179 1 6»-2178’ 1 >! — -Sandstone - indurated, massive, ’salt and 

pepper®, in part oil-stained. Very fine grained (av .km) 
sub-rounded quartz and altered feldspar in a kaolinitic 
matrix. Carbonaceous grains common and some larger 
fragments of plant remains. Some siderite grains. 
Glauconite grains fairly common, 

2178’l”-2174’ll"— Claystone - indurated, massive, dark grey, 
silty to very fine grains of quartz and feldspar nume¬ 
rous. Some fine, disseminated pyrite. ’Ironstone 1 band 1 
at top. 

2174 ! ll Tt -2172 ! 7 n — Siltstone .- well indurated, massive, medium 
grey. Sub-angular to sub-rounded silty quartz and feld¬ 
spar grains in an argillaceous matrix. Apatitd , 
zircon and tourmaline in minor amounts. Fine carbonace- - 

i 


our grains common 



















2172 t7 ,T -2169»7-a— Clays tone - thin bedded, well indurated, 
dark gray. Silty, sub rounded quartz and feldspar 
grains numerous. Carbonaceous material abundant. 

Some fine disseminated pyrite (plant material re¬ 
placement). Becomes more silty in upper part. 

2169 T 7”-2165’ll”— Sandstone - well indurated, massive, 
f salt and pepper T ; very fine grained (<r.l5 mm) 
sub-angular quartz, some altered feldspar; kaolinitie 
matrix. Carbonaceous grains numerous. Some glaucon¬ 
ite and brov/n weathering grains of siderite. Some 
carbonaceous partings. Abundant glauconite in upper 
part, matrix becoming limy. 

.2165 T 11”-2165*5”— Limestone - very hard, massive, medium 

grey with very fine grained quartz and feldspar; some 
glauconite and carbonaceous grains. 

8165 f 3”-2163*8"— Siltstone - finely cross-bedded, indurated 
medium to dark grey, very argillaceous; silty to very 
fine grained quartz and feldspar, coated with car¬ 
bonaceous material; glauconite fairly common. Becomes 
light grey and kaolinitie in upper part. 

2165 T 2”-2152 T — Claystone - indurated, thin-bedded and fis¬ 
sile, dark grey to black; some silty quartz and 
pyritized plant remains. Forainnifer s abundant in 
middle. 6” ”Ironstone”, brown weathering, very hard, 
at 2157 f 6”. Some small patches of light grey silt- 
stone in upper part. 1” of coal at top. 





















J 




■ i t... .. r l • 

i'l J . . ,0;) : KX7 '*I- - 


i• J: .. ) ... ; 


. . . . - ' .. -• . • 

. 

. ' . - I. * , V r 

. 


.. j j. \'.j L,.. • i\ ... . 

, ’ / wi_ : 


. 


s- ■ ./> / . 


.... 




■ 


■; ' J 'j. 




JL 

, 

: .. ■ lx, . . 






. 




; i. y . 

.. . 1 

’ 




. . . 


■ .. ■ 








. 

‘ 




-. " : i. - :V' .• .. :r , - .. . o.- i 


. 


, „ . , : ... . . 


O t. 










- 134 - 


2152*-2151 T 6”—S ANDSTONE - ! salt and pepper*, indurated, 

massive, light grey; fine sub-rounded (av ,2mm) quartz 
grains and aggregates of kaolinitic material; a few 
quartzite grains. Carbonaceous grains common. Some 
glauconite grains. Some small patches of lean oil- 
staining. 

2151*6 n -2129*6”— Ciaystone - indurated, very thin-bedded 
and fissile, black; very little fine silty material 
in an extremely fine cryptocrystalline matrix of dark 
brown argillaceous material, the individual grains 
being anisotropic. Some isotropic flecks of plant 
remains. The ciaystone has a * coaly* lustre. Some 
larger plant fragment remains have taken on a coaly 
character. 

2129*2”-2127*7 51 — Sandstone - *salt and pepper*, indurated, 
massive, light grey (interlensed with ciaystone as in 
top four inches of preceding sample) . Fine grained 
sub-angular quartz; altered feldspar and kaolinite 
aggregates (av .15 mm). Carbonaceous grains common. 
Kaolinitic argillaceous matrix. Trace of glauconite. 

2127 *7**^2126*2**— Ciaystone - indurated, fissile, medium to 
dark grey, some silty material and a few plant re¬ 
mains, in part pyritized. Some thin lenses of sand¬ 
stone as in preceding sample. 

2126*2 T! 2121 *8*»--Sandstone - as at 2129*2**. 














T 


7 '.,. 






77 V 7 - 

... 7*3 i ' 

' ■■■ 








■ 

. 

, , .. ...... » , j ■ w • t .. . , 

■ ■ -■ • • 

■ .» . 7 i '. . 

J .• . .7 « . & M i . ' ' . . ' ■' } •' 

„ ..... : , ■ 






135 - 


2121 f 8 T, -2120’8 U — Sandstone - As in preceding sample, cal¬ 
careous cement, very hard. 

2120 f 8 n -2108’6 ft —S andstone - hard, massive, T salt and pep¬ 
per’. Numerous carbonaceous grains and some glaucon¬ 
ite. YMtj fine to fine grained, sub-angular quartz. 
Feldspar grains numerous and highly altered. Matrix 
kaolinitic and slightly limy. Becomes fine grained, 
(av .2 mm) and non limy in upper part with some lean 
oil staining. Altered feldspar grains predominate 
over the quartz and argillaceous kaolinitic aggregate 
abundant. Chert and dark argillite grains common. 
Matrix is white, silty kaolinite. Less indurated in 
upper part and fairly well oil-stained in upper foot. 
The sandstone is capped by a 6 ff ’ironstone 1 band at 
2109’. 

2108 1 6 n -2106 ’ 6 tT —Cl ay stone - hard, fissile, medium gey. 
Silty grains in minor amounts. 

2106 T 6 ,f -2105’6 r! — Sandstone - indurated, massive, light 

grey with medium to dirk grey patches. Fine grained 
quartz and altered feldspar, the darker patches 
having a dark argillaceous coating on the grains, the 
lighter patches with a kaolinitic matrix. The light 
patches are lithologically similar to the above sa nd- 
stone member with the exception that glauconite is 
absent and larger fragments of plant remains are more 


common. 










- : • 




















. 

. 






| 


. 









156 - 


2105 T 6 ,T -2090 1 6 n — Sandstone - fairly soft, massive, f salt 

and pepper 1 , light grey. Fine grained quartz, altered 
feldspar and argillaceous grains in about equal amounts 
Matrix kaolinitic. Fiectrolog indicates good porosity, 
One or two grains of glauconite, so s.s. is probably 
still marine. Some lean oil staining in upper p art. 
Quartz grains increase in size towards top and become 
the dominant clastic. 

Note: Nauss places the Islay member at 2095*-2115A 
critical examination of the sandstone units of this 
interval fails to reveal sufficient criteria for 
a division in this part of the section. The percent¬ 
age of quartz grains increases slightly with respect 
to the dark constituents (chert and argillite) in 
the upper part of the interval 2090 * 6"-21G5 ! 6 ff . It 
is a gradational change, but the ! salt and pepper 1 
aspect is still retained. The naming of a separate 
member is not, in the vv r riter ! s opinion, justifiable, 
as the criteria suggested by Nauss for this member 
have not been met with. 

The Islay manner, as defined by Nauss, can be 
recognized in Community Services #7. It is well 
developed and would serve as a good type section 
of the Islay. 











- 137 


2090* 6"-2081 *6"—(2) Clay stone - indurated, thin-bedded 
and fissile, dark grey to black. A small amount of 
silty material and a few carbonaceous flecks. 

(1) Sandstone as at 2090*6". Dark argillaceous 
grains common. 

2081*6"-2071*6"—- Claystone - hard, fissile, dark grey; 

(Elect, depths G.K) 

some fine silty grains. 

2071 1 6"-2062 1 6"—(2) Sandstone - very hard, massive, 

*salt and pepper*, limy. Poorly sorted sand grains 
( < .3 mm), some altered feldspar and carbonaceous 
grains in a limy cement. 

(1) As in preceding sample; becomes soft and well 
oil-stained. 

2062*6"-2051 * 1" —Sandstone - indurated, massive, medium 
grey, argillaceous. Medium to fine grained, sub-ang¬ 
ular quartz with feldspar, chert and dark argillite 
grains numerous. Some chlorite schist and glauconitic 
grains. Dark argillaceous coating to many of the gram 

2051*1"-2046*6" —Claystone - indurated, massive, medium 

to dark grey. Cryptocrystalline argillaceous material- 
carbonaceous content gives dark color. Becomes finely 
cross-bedded with light grey siltstone from 2047*10"— 
2047 *. 

2046*6**-2044*8**—Siltstone - massive, indurated, light 

grey; silty quartz and feldspar in a kaolinitic matrix. 
Flecks of carbonaceous material common. 




























' 

. , 








. • 

. 








. 

• ' 

■ ■ i s, 

! . ■■ . ... x ■ ... f 






' 






. . 

; ■ ...j •. •: 

!.■ : o X y; . / 






f r;. 





- 138 


2044»8 T! -2043*2* t — Limestone - hard, dense, dark grey. 

Very finely divided carbonate with carbonaceous 
flecks common. Silty quartz and feldspar rare. 

2043*2**-2042 * 5**—S iltstone - as in preceding sample, 

finely cross-bedded. Grades upward into sandstone. 

2042 *5”-2023*— Sandstone - indurated, massive, *salt ai)d 
pepper T , very fine grained, poorly sorted, angular 
to sub-angular quartz. Feldspar grains common, and 
in ail stages of alteration. Carbonaceous material 
common. Kaoiinitic matrix. Becomes coarser, better 
sorted and more rounded in upper part. (av .25 mm) 
Fair porosity with some lean oil-staining. Grains of 
smoky chert and dark argillite still common. Upper 
part less indurated, fairly soft. 

2023 T -2021*10 * T — Sandstone - as in preceding sample at 

top, W'd indurated, dark grey, verj argillaceous, with 
lenses of dark grey silty claystone. 

2021*10”-2016*— Siltstone - dark grey, argillaceous, with 
patches of light grey, kaoiinitic siltstone. 

§016*-2006*—(5) Siltstone - indurated, light grey, kao¬ 
iinitic, very thinly interbedded with siltstone, dark 
grey, argillaceous. 

Note: Base of Wainwright member 2021* (Electrolog pick— 
sample depths apparently not accurate.) 

(4) and (3) Sandstone - fairly soft, massive, oil- 














r.! . 













- 139 - 


stained. Fairly pure, sub-angular, very fine 
grained quarts and feldspar (av< .1 mm). Good 
porosity- very little silty material. Dark piece s 
of rock and smoky colored chert absent . Some car¬ 
bonaceous flecks. Quarts and feldspar grains coar¬ 
ser toward top. 

(2) Claystone - fissile, dark grey, coaly plant re¬ 
mains common. 

(1) Siltstone - massive, indurated, medium grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous, plant remains common. 

2006 T -1396 1 — (3) Sandstone - fairly well indurated, mas¬ 
sive, some lean oil-staining. Very fine grained 
sub-angular quarts and feldspar with carbonaceous 
flecks common. Some silty kaolinitic matrix. Pin¬ 
point porosity. 

(2) Siltstone - very hard, massive, greyish buff 

(large plant fragment remains abundant) 

Silty quarts and feldspar grains in a sidentic 

matrix. 

(1) S andstone - as in (3) 

1996 T -1391 1 — (3) Sandstone - very hard, massive, medium 
grey, very fine grained to silty; sidenitic matrix; 
some lean oil-staining in patches. Carbonaceous 
flecks fairly common. 

(2) Siltstone - indurated, massive, medium grey, ar- 



















- 140 - 


Note: 


gillaceous. Feldspar and quarts particles, coated 
with carbonaceous material. 

(l) Sandstone - fairly soft, interlensed with car¬ 
bonaceous material, medium to light grey, fine grained 
quartz and feldspar (av .15 mm), not well sorted. 

Some light-colored cherty grains. Some lean oil- 
staining near top. 

1988 1 -1985*—(2) Sandstone - as in preceding sample. Dark 
grains in minor amounts 

Wainwright/0*Sullivan contact at 1985 f (1982* Electrolog) 
(!) Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey, some poorly 
sorted silty to fine grained quartz and feldspar. 

1985*-1974*—(2) Claystone - as in preceding sample, some¬ 
what fissile. 

(l) Claystone - as in preceding sample, interlensed 
with sandstone , * salt and pepper*, indurated, oil- 
stained, very fine grained sub-angular quartz and 
altered feldspar. Cryptocrystalline kaolinitic ag¬ 
gregates abundant . Carbonaceous flecks, argillite 
grains and chert common. 

1974*-1964*—(4) Claystone - as in preceding sample, thin¬ 
ly interbedded with siltstone, light grey to white, 
kaolinitic. 

(5) Sandstone - *salt and pepper*, fairly soft to 
indurated, massive, silty, (less silty layers oil- 





















- 141 - 


stained). Poorly sorted frosted quartz ( < .2 mm,}' 
and feldspar with kaolinitic material abundant. 
Carbonaceous flecks, argillite and chert grains nu¬ 
merous. 

(2) Siltstone - indurated, thin-bedded, medium grey, 
argillaceous, some lighter patches with lean oil-stain 
ing. Large fragments of plant remains common. 

(1) Claystone - indurated, massive, medium to dark 
grey. Some silty material and carbonaceous plant 
remains. 

1964i-1954* —(3) Sandstone - As at 1974*-1964* (4), lean 
oil-staining. 

(2) Claystone - thin bedded, friable, dark grey to 
black, coaly plant remains common. 

(1) Claystone - as in preceding sample, less friable. 
1954*-1943*=— Claystone - fissile, dark grey, coaly plant 
remains common. 

1945*-1941 * —Claystone - massive, indurated, medium to dark 

grey. 

1941 * -1940 *2* T — Coal 

1940*2**-1934*2* ! — Sandstone - well indurated, massive, *salt 
and pepper*; white kaolonitic matrix. Medium gained 
(av .4 mm) 

1933*6”-1931*6”— Siltstone - very hard, massive, medium 

grey, very limy. Could be considered medium crystal¬ 
line silty limestone. Plant remains common. 



















■ 



.. . , . - •:« .... j i- ■' .. v. 

. ,j ■ ‘I 















.L , 









. ; . , . 












j 















- 142 


1931 , 6 ft -1923*4”— Sandstone - massive, f salt and pepper T , 
sub-rounded, fine gra ined quartz (av .2 min); white 
kaolinitic matrix; coaly plant remains abundant in 
lower part. Lithologically similar to s.s. at 1940 f . 
Carbonaceous plant remains in thin layers in upper part 
gives laminated appearance. Grades upward into very 
fine grained sandstone to siltstone. 

1923 T 4”-1922 T 8 n — Claystone - indurated, massive, medium 
grey, very little silty material. 

1922*8"-1922»—- Coal - friable. 

1922 T -1920*—S iltston e - indurated, finely cross-bedded, 

light grey, kaolinitic and medium grey, argillaceous. 

1920*-1905* —Claystone - massive, indurated. Medium grey. 
Plant remains common. 

1905 t -1895 T —(2) Claystone - as in preceding sample, 
becoming silty. 

(1) Sandstone - massive, indurated, ? salt and pepper 1 , 
very fine to silty sub-angular quartz grains (av .1 an). 
Same composition as at 1940. Abundant kaolinitic 
material. 

1895/-1887 ? 6 IT —-(2) Sandstone - as in previous sam le, 

some patches of darker, more argillaceous sandstone. 
Plant remains common. 

(l) Sandstone - fairly hard, massive, f salt and pe££er f . 

kaolinitic matrix. Medium grained (av .3 mm) Some 
clastic calcite grains. 




















, u:/j„ 





■ t. ■ . 








- 145 - 


1887 y 6 tl ~lQ85^~S todstone - as in previous sample. 

1885 T -1876* (3) Siltstone - light grey, kaolinitic, in- 
terlensed with claystone, medium to dark grey* 

(2) Siltstone - Thin-bedded, light grey, kaolinitic* 

(1) Sandstone - As at 1905»-1895* (l). 

1876 T -1866*—(5) & (4) Sandstone - as in previous ample. 
Dark argillite and chert grains in lesser amounts. 

(3) Sandstone - as in previous sample, crossbedaed 
with siltstone, medium grey, argillaceous. 

(2) Claystone - friable, dark grey, coaly plant re¬ 
mains abundant* 

(1) Claystone - fissile, medium to dark grey, plant 
remains common. 

1866 T -1856 f —(4) Coal - with some argillaceous material. 

( 3 ) Claystone - indurated, massive, medium grey, 
waxy appearance. 

(8) Claystone - fissile to friable, dark grey. 

(1) Siltstone - indurated to fairly soft, massive, 
light grey to white, kaolinitic matrix. Some pat¬ 
ches of medium grey. 

1856*-18461 — (5) Siltstone - as in previous sample. 

(4) Siltstone - as in previous sa'rople. 

(3) Claystone - massive, indurated, medium to dark 


grey, some silty material. 
(8) Coal - friable. 





















-j v ,i 


























144 


1856*-1846* —(l) Siltstone - as in (5) 

1846 T -1836i—(5) Claystone - dark grey, and siltston e, 
light grey to vdiite, very thinly cross-bedded. 

(4) C laystone - thin bedded, indurated, medium grey, 
considerable silty material. 

(3) Sandstone, not well indurated, massive, medium 
grey, argillaceous. Poorly sorted sub-angular to 
sub-rounded quartz grains ( .3 mm) which are the 

predominant clastic. Some feldspar. Dark grains in 
small amounts. Carbonaceous coating on many of the 
grains. Plant material common. 

(2) Claystone - tnin bedded, indurated, medium grey, 
considerable silty quartz and feldspar, 
a) Sandstone - as in (3.) 

18361-1833 f 8 TI —-AS in previous sample. 

18331-8ii-1855 T --S andstone - indurated, massive, grey, poor¬ 
ly sorted quartz grains ( .3 mm). Chert pebble hori¬ 

zon. Pebbles well polished and sub-rounded, up to 
8 mm in diameter. Cryptocrysta lline with many black 
inclusions which are magnetic. Not unlike Bundle 
chert, but has more inclusions. Top l f! has chert peb¬ 
bles in claystone. One fish tooth noted. 

1833 ! _ Top of Manville formation. 


















i , i 




i 



■ 


\ • 








- 145 - 


AN GLO-BOME-BUFFALO COULEE #1 

Location; l.s.d. 16 of sec. 27, twp. 47, rge.7 W4. 

Elevation : 2265* (Rotary Table) 

Date Scudded ; September 26, 1942. 

Date Completed ; October 24, 1942. 

Total Depth ; 3385* 

. 

History : Drilled and abandoned. 


Synopsis -of Detailed Lower Cretaceous log . 


Name of 

Member Depth Thickness Description 

Q * Sullivan 2025 f -2155 f 110 f Medium grained, * salt & 

pepper 1 sandstone, argil¬ 
laceous siltstone and 
silty claystone. Some 
coal 

Wainwright 2135*-8152 f 17* Quartz siltstone and very 

fine grained quartz 
sandstone. 


Buffalo 2152»-2270* 118* Very fine grained »salt 

Coulee • • and pepper 1 sandstone 

and silty claystone. 

McMurray This member not present; 

the location of this well 
is on a Paleozoic *high T 


Detailed Log of Mannville Formation . 
Samples examined in ascending stratigraphical order. 
Depth Description 


2540» 


Top of undecomposed Jefferson dolomite 




































. 


















. 


























■ 

. J 

~ 

.... t • •• • . U 

' 1 . (V- r •• 







. 

- 

















: 












Note: 


- 146 - 

De pth De scription 

2340*-2270*—Detrital zone - Sugary to powdery dolomite, 
quartz siltstone and green claystone. 

2300-2295 T — Dolomite - sugary, highly oil-saturated. 

2295*-2275 T — Dolomite - finely crystalline, and green 

claystone, intermixed. SQme oil-staining in vugs. 

2275*-2265*— Dolomit e - hard, very fine grained to dense, 
pale greenish; fine silty quartz and feldspar grains 
common, pyritic; with sandstone - hard, massive, very 
fine-grained ( .15mm) sub angular, quartz ana feld¬ 

spar. Abundant carbonaceous grains chert and ar¬ 
gillite giving * salt and pepper 1 effect. White, non- 
limy, kaolinitic matrix. 

2270 ! - Base of MannviHe formation iBuf.Goul. member) 

2265 T -2255 T -- Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey; argil¬ 
laceous material with some very fine-grained sub-angu 
lar to sub-rounded quartz and feldspar. 

2255*-2245 T — Sandstone - ! salt and pepper*, indurated, me¬ 
dium grained (av .3 mm) sub-rounded, well sorted. A1 
tered to fresh feldspar fairly abundant. Kaolinitic 
matrix. Carbonaceous grains, chert and argillite, 
common; lean oil-staining. 

2245 T -2225 T — Claystone - fissile, dark grey, coaly plant 
remains and pyrite common. Some very fine-grained 
quartz and feldspar in the argillaceous ground mass . 






























- 







. . A - j. . ■. 



















;. ;: V - ... . , . ..... ... 

.. '• 


'' ’ . ..... . 4 .... - ■ 1 I 


; i.. : ■ i - - • • : 




-i' • <. 




V . 


• . . m 

- , ■ V- ' ; ' 




. 


' 


' 

. : 


) 


' 




. 


■ 








. 

I 


■ ; . - 1 







- 147 


2825 T -2204*— Sandstone - very hard, massive, limy, ’salt 

and pepper*. Fine-grained, sub-rounded quartz (av. .Sn) 
some fresh to altered feldspar, calcite in grains and 
as cement, kaolinitic material abundant, carbonaceous, 
chert and argillite grains numerous, 

2204*-8194*— Sandstone - massive, indurated, non-limy, 

*salt and pepper.* Sub-angular, quartz (av. .1 mm); 
abundant fresh to altered feldspars. Plant fragment 
remains numerous. White, kaolinitic matrix. Some 
fine disseminated pyrite. Lean oil-stained from 
2195*-94*. 

8194*-8184*— -Claystone - hard, fissile, medium grey, abun¬ 
dant quartz and feldspathic material from silty di¬ 
mensions to cryptocrystalline. Some flecks of car¬ 
bonaceous material. 

8184*-2164*— Sandstone and claystone - as at 2204*-8184*. 
Thinly interbedded. Quartz grains become a little 
coarser in upper part (.15 mm). 

2164*-2152 * —Sandstone - indurated, massive, * salt and pep¬ 
per* Quartz grains sub-rounded (av. .2 ram). Feldspar 
abundant, carbonaceous, chert and argillite grains 
common, silty feldspathic matrix. With siltstone , 
light grey to white and claystone , fissile, dark grey 
to black with seme carbonaceous material. 


Note: 


2158 * -*uf.0qul/wain'wright contact. 


i 












3 








- 148 - 


2135 1 -£125 1 _Slltstone -veil indurated, massive, medium gvey 

argillaceous* Finely divided silty feldspar and 
quartz in an argillaceous matrix. Dark colored grains 

common. 

p.ip.5i-2120 T — Clayston e- fissile, dark grey, a few silty 

quartz or feldspar grains in a cryptocrystalline, ar¬ 
gillaceous matrix. 

p.ip.ot- 2 H 8 * Sandstone - indurated, very fine-grained, 
t salt and pepper ! • Abundant kaolinitic material. 

Plant fragment remains common. 

2118 1 -2117 * 6 n — Clayst one - dark br own to black, mainly 
coaly plant remains. 

PIP 716 ”-2100 1 — Sandsto ne - very hard, massive, T salt and 

pepper». Very finely divided calcite with some fine¬ 
grained (av. .2 mm) sub-rounded quartz, and some feld¬ 
spar. Dark grains common. Becomes softer toward top, 
loses carbonate content and becomes kaolinitic. 

Quartz grains somewhat smaller and more angular. 

21Qo 1 -2085 T — -Siltstone - massive, indurated, medium to 
. light grey, fine silty quartz and feldspar, indivi¬ 
dually colorless, but collectively give medium grey 
color due to finely divided carbonaceous content. 

2 n coal at 2098*. 

2089 1 -2087 ! — Coal . Siltstone becomes medium-grey and 
more argillaceous toward top. 





















- 149 


2085 1 -2075 T — Claystone - fairly massive, indurated, medium 
grey. Silty angular quartz and Hldspar common. Car¬ 
bonaceous material common. A few brown weathering 
T ironstone* bands (siderite). 

2075*-2065*— Sandstone -massive, indurated, light grey, 
very silty (kaolinitic matrix), very fine-grained 
quartz and altered feldspars. ( .15 mm) Dark con¬ 

stituents common. Some layers of plant fragment re¬ 
mains with adjacent sandstone somewhat oil-stained. 

2065*-2055* —Clayston e - fissile, medium to dark grey, 

some silty quartz and feldspar in an argillaceous ma¬ 
trix. Carbonaceous flecks common. Quartz ©rains become 
larger toward the top. One sandstone break from 
2054 *-2053 *. 

2035*-2025*— Claystone - as in previous sa mple, with 
s andstone , very hard, massive, *salt and pepper*’. 
Fairly well rounded, fine to medium-grained quartz 
(av. .25 mm). Some silty feldspar material. Matrix 
mainly calcareous but some kaoiinite. 

Lower Cretaceous contact in the above interval, but 
* chert pebble * horizon absent or missing from samples. 

Top of Mannville formation (0*Sullivan member) 


i 


2025* 

























150 - 


WAINWRIGHT DEVELOPMENT #1 

Location: L.s.d.8 of sec. 17, twp. 45, rge 6, W4. 

Elevation: 2308’ (Rotary Table) 

Date Spudded: April 23, 1942. 

Date Completed: May 25, 1942. 

Total Depth: 2369’. 

History: Plugged back to 2238’ (Wainwright member) and 
completed as an oil well. Has produced 6,529 
barrels to J a n. 1, 1947. 


Synopsis of Detailed Lower Cretaceous Log . 


Name of 

member Depth Thickness Description 


0 ’Sullivan 2090’-2235’ 145’ 

Wainwright 2235’-2239’ 4’ 

Buf falo 88391-2365' 126' 

Coulee" 


Fine to medium grained, 

’salt and pepper’ sa nd- 
stone, argillaceous silt- 
stone and silty clays tone, 

Very fine to fine 
grained quartz sandstone. 


’ Salt and pepper ’ sand** 
stone, argillaceous silt- 
stone and silty claystonej 
in upper part, some glau¬ 
conite . 

Quartz siltstone and gr«m‘ 
claystone in lower part. 


McMurray Not recognized: the location of 

this well is on a paleozoic ’high’. The 
lower part of the Cummings containing quartz 
siltstone, green claystone, and sideritic 
oolites may be equivalent to the McMurray. 






















Ksj 


i 


. 



: ; A.)ti 













l 





j 








. 




— . 
























- 151 - 


Note: 


D etailed Log of Mannville Formation 

Samples examined in ascending stratigraphical order. 

Depth Description 

2569 ! -2353 1 6” — (2) Dolomite , hard, sugar, medium grey,' 
some vuggy porosity. 

(1) Claystone - pale green, very finely divided, 
cryptocrystalline, brownish; argillaceous material 
with some silty quartz and feldspar grains, inter- 
lensed with 

Siltstone, white, altered feldspar and angular quartz 
grains in a kaolinitic matrix. 

2365 1 - Base of M a nnville formation iBuf,o 0 ul.member) 

2353 f 6 n -2335 ! — Claystone and Siltstone - as in previous 
sample, interlensing and patchy. Some lean patchy 
oil-staining in the silty layers. Siderite spherul - 
ites common in upper part . 

2335 T -2322 ! 6"—Core missing (A.C.B. log) 

2322 ! 6 n -2314 T 6 TI —Sandstone - hard, massive, fine-grained, 
grey, some carbonaceous lenses and becoming more 
carbonaceous towards base (A.C.B. log - samples missing, 

2514*6»-2514*— Siltstone - indurated, brownish-grey, very 
fine,silty particles of quartz and feldspar, lamina¬ 
ted with thin bands of carbonaceous shale. 

2514 T -2504 1 — Claystone - hard, massive, dark grey, ar¬ 
gillaceous material with some well-rounded quartz 
grains. Pyrite abundant, weLl crystallized; g l auconi te- 
















. 


. . ... 




. fritz 



. ■. 


■■. i• JLi.V j ; i 

< .v.j; . -J‘ 








0 


i 




- 152 


common. Some thin, silty lenses towards the top. 

2304*-2298 T 6"—C laystone - as in previous sample, thinly 
laminated with siltstone, hard, light grey to white 
with dark grains of carbonaceous material, angular 
grains of altered feldspar and quartz, matrix kaoli- 
nitic and some calcareous material. 

2298*6 n -229318»— Siltstone - as in previous sa mple, cal¬ 
careous, carbonaceous partings. Some siderite (brown) 
grains. Pyrite common. A Few glauconit e grains. 

2295 T 8 fT -2292 T — Claystone - massive, hard, medium to dark 

grey. Cryptocrystalline, argillaceous material, some 
highly altered feldspar grains, some silty quartz; 
carbonaceous material common. 

2292*-2290 T --S andstone - hard, massive, T salt and pepper * 
frosted quartz grains, sub-rounded (av .2 mm) Matrix 
kaolinitic. Dark grains and glauconite common. 

2290 f -2280*6»— Claystone - massive, hard, dark grey; ar¬ 
gillaceous material, with some fine silty, highly 
altered feldspathic grains. Some fine disseminated 
pyrite. 

228016»-2268* —Siltstone and Claystone - interlensed. 

Claystone as in previous sample with siltstone , well 
indurated, light grey, silty grains of altered feld¬ 
spar and angular quartz in a kaolinitic matrix. Abun ¬ 
dant plant remains . Becomes morethinly laminated 
near the top. 


















iiUi ■ via. 


i 






. 







■ 














- 153 - 


Note: 


22681>2867 ' —Claystone - black, coaly. Some quartz and 
feldspar grains. 

2267*-2260 T — Siltstone - indurated, greyish-white, high¬ 
ly kaolinitic, with some very fine, silty feldspar 
grains. I n terlensed with claystone, dark grey. Car¬ 
bonaceous flecks abundant, some larger plant fragment 
remains. 

2260 T -2253»— Siltstone - (with carbonaceous material in 

bands), indurated, heavily oil-stained. Dark consti¬ 
tuents common with silty quartz and feldspar. Thinly 
bedded near top, with non oil-stained kaolinitic silt¬ 
stone. Plant fragment remains common throughout. 

2253 T -2239* — Siltstone - massive, medium grey, finely 

divided quartz and feldspar in an argillaceous matrix. 
Some oil-stained lenses of siltstone (as at 2260-53 T ) 

2239* —?uf .Gou-fe/Wainwright contact. 

2259*-2235 f — Sandstone - soft, oil-saturated, angular feld¬ 
spar and quartz, very fine to fine-grained; silty 
kaolinitic matrix. Zircon and tourmaline common. 
Carbonaceous material abundant. No chert or argillite 
observed. 

2235 f -Mnwright/O’Sullivan contact. 

2235 1 -2230 f —C laystone - indurated, very thin-bedded (has 
varved appearance), medium grey. Cryptocrystalline, 
dark brownish, argillaceous material with some very 














- 154 - 


Note: 


fine, silty feldspar grains. Thin bands of light grey, 
kaolinitic siltstone and carbonaceous material com¬ 
mon in upper part. A 5" siaerite (Ironstone) band 
near base. 

2250*-2225*— Siltstone - indurated, light grey; grains 
somewhat larger than in preceding sample, kaolini¬ 
tic matrix. Coaly plant remains in layers gives 
thin-bedded appearance to the siltstone. 

22£5*-2218*— Sandstone - indurated, massive, ! salt and pep¬ 
per T , very fine to fine-grained subangular quartz 
(<.25 mm), very fine angular altered feldspar grains, 
some quartzite, chert and argillite grains; kaolinitic 
matrix. Abundant coaly plant remains in lower part. 
2218*-2216.f5"- —Coal , with partings of carbonaceous claystme 
This horizon fairly widespread. Commonly known as the 
iWainwright Coal 1 . 

2216 1 5 n -2215 T —- Claystone and siltstone - Claystone, dark 
grey to black, fissile, carbonaceous, and siltstone 
light grey, kaolinitic, abundant coaly flecks. 

'2215*-2210* —Siltstone - indurated, massive, light grey. 
Silty quartz and jgldspar grains in an argillaceous 
(Kaolinitic) matrix. 

2210*-2200 T —Samples missing (Recov. 2*9") 

2*0" Shale, dark grey, argillaceous ) A.C.B. log_ 

1*3" ceai. 

Electrolog indicates sandstone, .possibly unrecoverea 
part of core. 


























. 




•;J ' , ' A 


• v 














' 






• • • 

'■ ", • -*• ! - r 1 V- <4, .• , v . ... 

r 

' 




' ' 


. 






' ' ’ 4 SJ i .1-. ■ .. 

> Jj . _ _ _ . ' . i- ■ V .. 



















- 155 


2200*-2196*— Claystone - massive, indurated, dark brown, 

finely divided cryptocrystalline, argillaceous material 
colorless in grains but aggregate is dark brownish. 
Appears to be small specks of limonitic material ad¬ 
hering to colorless cryptocrystalline grains, 

2196*-2188*— -Siltstone - indurated, thinly bedded, light 
grey. Very fine silty material,pell-sorted. Carbo¬ 
naceous flecks in layers giving thin-bedded appearance 
Grains become coarser towards the top. 

2188*-2186*—- Stodstone - very hard, massive, ’salt and pep- 1 
per*, very fine sub-angular quartz grains, some silty 
feldspathic material, sideritic cement. Abundant car¬ 
bonaceous plant remains. 

2186*-2175* — Sandstone - as in previous sara pie, non-limy, 
kaolinitic matrix, with lenses of carbonaceous plant 
remains. Becomes fine grained (Av .2 mm) subangular 
to sub-rounded near top. Better sorted and less car¬ 
bonaceous material. Abundant kaolinitic material in 
grains and as matrix. Some highly altered feldspars. 

2175*-2174* —I ronstone - sideritic, with flecks of plant 
remains. 

2174*-2171 * —Sandstone - indurated, massive, ’salt and pep¬ 
per * poorly sorted, very fine-grained quartz and 
feldspathic material, angular to sub-angular, coated 
with carbonaceous material. MAEfiix kaolinitic. Dark 

a 











, 1 











■ • 








■ 


> 

J 

. 

. 











.... • * 

. 

. 

■ 

■ 


. , 


' 




' >' » •. ■; ' ■ j -.i. < >; 

' 

, 


’ , * 

• '£ - • ' • ■ ' ... • '.* ;j ’.j 












156 


grains common. 

2172 T -2170*—C laystone - massive, hard, "?/axy l! , medium 
' 

. 

grey. Some silty feldspathic material in a dark 
brown cryptocrystalline groundmass. Plant fragment 
remains common. 

21701-2160 1 —No core recovery. Electrolog indicates sand 
stone grading upward into claystone. 

2160 ! -2158 1 —- Claystone - massive, hard, medium grey, silty, 

2158*-2156*— Sandstone - massive, loosely indurated, grey¬ 
ish-white. Fairly well-sorted, sub-rounded to rounded, 
frosted, fine-grained quartz (av .2 mm). Some feldspall 
matrix kaolinitic. Fair porosity. Carbonaceous grains 
in miner amounts. Chert and argillite not observed. 

2156*-2155 T 5 T — Sandstone - as in previous sample, hard, 
siderite cement. 

2155 ! 5 U -2143— Sandstone - massive, loosely indurated, 

’salt and pepper 1 , medium-grained, sub-rounded to 
rounded, wll sorted, (av .5 mm). Minor amounts of al¬ 
tered feldspar. Abundant carbonaceous grains, chert 
and argillite; kaolinitic matrix. Siderite crystals 
minor amounts. Sandstone becomes harder in upper 
part as sideritic content increases. 

21451-2142'— Claystone - hard, platy, medium to dark grey. 
Dark, argillaceous material with some fine-grained 


quartz and altered feldspar 
Some plant remains. 


A few siderite grains. 














- 157 - 


2142'-2119»6"— Sand stone - as at 8155»5"-2143'. 4" clay- 

stone break at 8141 T 10". Q uartz grains larger 
(av ,5 mm) less rounded, dirty. Some granular sider- 
ite. Some thin coaly lenses between 2134'-38'. 

Quartz grains smaller (av .3 mm) at 8138 T . Quartzite 
fragments numerous, some feldspar. 8 TT very hard band 
at 8123 ! —50% siderite crystals. 

2119'6»-2115'6” —Claystone - hard, fissile, medium grey. 

Some fine silty quartz and feldspar in an argillaceous 
groundmass. Some thin lenses of sandstone, massive, 
indurated, greyish-white with carbonaceous grains. 
Mainly feldspar grains in all stages of alteration and 
some fine-grained sub-angular quartz in a white kao- 
linitic matrix. 

2113 1 6"-2112 T 6”.— Sands tone - as in previous sa mple with 
some thin lenses of coaly plant remains. 

2112 '6 IT -211Q' — S a ndstone - indurated, massive, 'salt and 

pepper', calcareous. Euhedral grains of calcite, ap¬ 
preciable amounts of feldspar, some fine-grained to 
medium, sub-angular quartz in a matrix that is pre¬ 
dominantly kaolinitic but contains some carbonate 
as cementing material. Smoky chert common. 

2110'-2093'— >Sahdstone - as in previous sample, buff co¬ 
lored. Bee ernes harder fom 2105 f -2103 * - sideritic 

ix increases and less kaolinite. Some dark grey 











- 158 


NOTEs 


claystone lenses in upper (21CQ ! -2093 T ) part with 
quartz grains (av .4 mm) 

2093 1 -2091 i — Sandstone and Claystone - as in previous 
sample. 

20911-20901— Sandstone - medium grey, argillaceous. "Chert 
pebble horizon, pebbles rounded and highly polished 
- black; up to 1/4 inch in diameter. They are crypto 
crystalline in texture, with some particles of silt 
dimensions. Black inclusions abundant, are isotropic 
and become slightly magnetic after heating in re¬ 
ducing flame. The sandstone is composed of angular 
feldspar, sub-angular to sub-rounded quartz grains 
(av .15 mm) in an argillaceous cement. Some patches 
of dark grey claystone associated with the sandstone. 

20901 - Top of Mannville formation (0 T Sullivan member) 












Allan, J. A. 1918 

Allan, J. A. 1932 
Warren, P.S. 
Rutherford, R.L. 

Antevs, Ernst 1945 

Berry, G. S. 1943 

Beach, H. H. 1943 
Bretz, J. H. 1943 

Carr, J. L. 1946 

Cushman,J.A, 1927 

Barton, N.H. 1904 

Edmunds, F.H.1940 


-159- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


TT Sect ions along North Saskatchewan 
River, and Red Deer and South Sas¬ 
katchewan River”, Canada Geol. Surv. 
Summary Rept., 1917, Pt.C, p 9-13, 
Fig, 2, map, 

n A preliminary study of the eastern 
ranges of the Rocky Mountains in 
Jasper Park, Alberta." Trans. Roy. 
Soe. Can., vol 26, sec. 4. 


"Correlation of Wisconsin Glacial 
Maxima." Am. Jour. Science, vol. 243- 
A, Daly Volume, p. 1—39. 

"Stratigraphy and Structure at 
Three ForksJ Montana."• Bull. Geol. Soc 
Am., Vol. 54, p.p.1—30. 

"Moose Mountain and Morley Map-Areas, 
Alberta." Geol. Surv. Can. Mem. 236. 

"Keewatin end moraines in Alberta, 
Canada." Bull. Geol. Soc. Amer., 
vol. 54, pp. 31-52. 

"The Geology of the Highwood-Elbow 
Area, Alberta." M.Sc. Thesis, U. of 
Alta. 


"Some Foraminifera from the Creta¬ 
ceous of Canada." Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Can., vol. 21, sec. iv, pp. 127-132. 

"Comparison of the Stratigraphy of 
the Black Hills, Bighorn Mountains, 
and Rocky Mountain front range." 

Geol. Sbc. Am. Bull. vol. 15, 
pp. 394-401. 

"Oil and Gas Developments in the 
Lloydminster Area." Trans. Canada 
Inst. Mining k M e t., vol. 43, pp.261- 
( 3 . 
















-160- 


Erdmann, C.E. 
Schwabrow, J, 

Edmunds* F. I 

Furnival, G.I 
Hume, G. S. 

Hume, G. S. 

Hume* G. S. 

Hume, G. S. 
Hage, C. 0, 

Johnson, W.A 
Wickenden, H 

MeLearn, F. i 

Moore, P. P. 


, 1941 "Border-Red Coulee Oil Field, 

,R. Montana and Alberta, Canada*" 

Stratigraphic Type Oil Fields - 
A.A.P.G., 1941, pp. 267-323. 

I. 1947 "Major Canadian Development Seen 
in the Lloydminster Area." The 
Oil Weekly, vol. 124, No. 6, In¬ 
ternational Section, pp. 16-20. 


£. 1946 "Cypress Lake Map-Area, Saskatche¬ 

wan," Geol. Surv. Can. Mem. 242. 


1924 "Oil and Gas Prospects of the 

Wainwright-Vermilion Area, Alberta." 
Geol. Surv. Canada, Summ. Rept. 

1924, Part B. pp. 1-23. 

1930 "The Highwood-Jumping-pound Anti¬ 
cline, with Notes on Turner Valley, 
New Black Diamond and Priddis Valley 
Structures, Alberta." Geol. Surv. 
Can. Summ. Rept, 1929, Pt. B. pp. 1- 


1933 "Oil and Gas in Western Canada", 

Geol. SUrv. Canada, Econ. Geol. 

Series No. 5. 

1941 "The Geology of East-Central Al¬ 
berta." Canada Geol, Survey, Mem.232. 


"Moraines and glacial lakes in 
T.D.1931 southern Saskatchewan and southern 
Alberta, Canada." Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Canada, vol. 25, sect, iv, p. 29-44. 

.. 1944 "Revisions of the Lower Cretaceous 

of the Western Interior of Canada." 
Geol. Surv. Can., Paper 44-17. 

1931 "Paleozoic of the Southern plains 
of Alberta." Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. 
Geol. vol. 15, No. 10, pp. 1141- 
1155. 


i 







’• »5fU ? 





:? .j 

- ; v.t 

. 

, 


. 

















-161- 


Nauss, A. W, 1945 "Cretaceous Stratigraphy of Vermilion 

Area, Alberta, Canada." Bull. Amer. 
Assoc. Petrol. Geol., vol. 29, No. 11 
pp. 1605-1629, 5 Figs. 


Palliser, Capt.1865 "The Journals, Detailed Reports and 

Observations relative to the Expedi¬ 
tion, by Captain Palliser," with 
accompanying "Index and Maps." 
Government, London, 1863. 


Peale, A. C. 1896 "Three Forks Folio, Montana." 

Geologic Atlas of U. S., U.S.G.S. 

Perry, E. S. 1928 "The Kevin-Sunburst and other oil 

and gas fields of Sweetgrass arch." 
Montana State Bur. Mines k Met., 
Mem. No. 1. 


Schedule of Wells Drilled for Oil and Gas to 1944. 

The Petroleum and Natural Gas Conservation Board, Province 
of Alberta. 

1945 Supplement to Schedule of Wells Drilled for Oil and 
Gas—The Petroleum and Natural Gas Conservation Board, 
Province of Alberta. 

Rutherford, R.L.1941 "Some aspects of glaciation in cen¬ 
tral and southwestern Alberta." 

Trans. Roy. Soc. Canada, vol. 55, 
Sect, iv, pp. 115-124. 

Rutherford., R.L.1946 "Structure at Depth on the Plains 

of Alberta." Trans. C.I.M.&M., vol. 
49, pp. 191-198. 

Selwyn, A.R.C. 1873-4 "Geol. Surv. Canada, Rept. of 

Progress, 1873—74, pp. 17-61. 

Shimer, H. '¥. 1926 "Upper Paleozoic faunas of the Lake 

Minnewanka section, near Banff, Alta. 
Com. Geol. Survey Bull. No. 42, 
pp.1-84. 


Slipper, S. E. 1918 "Viking Gas Field, Structures of Area 

Canada Geol. Survey Summary Rept. 
1917, Pt, C. pp. 6-9. 




- mn 


rr/y 


’ii-yy i.\ 


■ 

■ 




. 






.. ,J i: ■ 

s - 






. .-,'r 




!. vi ' 

' £ 






■j ' 


i 





-162- 


Sloss, L. 
Laird, W« 

Tyrrell, 


Warren, P 

Warren, P 

Warren, P 

Warren, P 

Warren, P 

Wickenden 

YYiekenden 

Wickenden 

Wickenden 

Wilmarth, 




L. 1946 

M. 

r. B. 1887 


S. 1935 


S. 1935 


S. 1937a ”The significance of the Viking 

Moraine.” Royal Can. Inst., Trans. 
Vol. 21, pt. 2, p. 301-305. 

S. 1937,b ”Age of the Exshaw shale in the 
Canadian Rockies.” Am. Jour. Sci. 
5th ser vol. 53, pp. 454-457. 

S. 1942 ”The Spirifer Argentarius Fauna in 
the Canadian Rockies.” Trans. Roy. 
iSoc. Can. Sect, iv., pp 129-136. 

R.T.D.193S ”N 0 tes on Some Deep Wells in Sas¬ 
katchewan.” Trans. Roy. Soc. Can., 
Vol. 26, Sec. iv. pp.177-196. 

R.T.D.1933 ”Paleo 2 oic and Jurassic Formations 
in ells Sections in Manitoba.” 
Geol. Survey Can., Sum. Rent. 1933, 
Pt. B. pp. 158-169 


”0il and Gas Investigation Pre¬ 
liminary Chart. 25.” U.S.G.S. 

Report on a Part of Northern Al¬ 
berta, and Portions of Adjacent 
Districts of Assiniboia and Sas¬ 
katchewan.” Canada Geol. Survey 
Ann. Rep. 188b, VdL. 2 E, p.l— 

152, maps. 

”The Age of the Devonian Limestone 
at McMurray, Alberta.” Com. Field 
Nat., vol. 47, pp. 148-149. 

”The Fauna of the Lea Park Shale.” 
Trans. Roy. Can. Inst. vol. 20, 

Pt. 2, pp. 223-229. 


R.T.D.1845 ”Mesozoic Stratigraphy of the Eastern 
Plains, Manitoba and Saskatchewan.” 
Geol. Surv. Can. Mem. 239. 


n.T.D.1941 


Mary Grace 
1938 


”Cretaceous marine formations pene¬ 
trated in wells near Lloydminster, 
Sask. Trans. Roy. Can. Inst. vol. 33, 
Pt. 2, pp. 147-155. 

”Lexicon of geologic names.” u.S. 

G.S. Bull. Pt. 1,A-L, pp.1-1244. 





/:;v : 






' ■ • ... 






. 

• - 

- 


. 

: . ii;' . 


■ - 










.... 

• .. . , 

. 


) 

l 

• . - 

•. 


. 





i 















' 
















COTY 



















































































































INDEX MAP 


I iririn M.imer Martin no I 
■ i 2 Ed^erton Ohs no 3 

III • - •• t 

5 " " 2 

6 ‘rnper.Qi R.tistone no i 
7. A igonq-jin ro. 2 

8 ■■ " l 

9 8e*noam I 

10. nu nwr .ght Development no I 

II Montreal A &erto no 
'2 Imoenoi Fcbyon no I 

1 3 8e o umer t no. 2 

14 R.bston# Oils no 2 
?5 0 *v :>e no ! 

6 Aitobo no.2 
IT Royco no I 
i8H Qn»ooo Biacvtoot no I 
- 9 Ang.o Home Buffalo Coulee no . 
20 Aitooo- *a ^r.cot to 2 

2 Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee n; 2 
c.i »*rm<iicn Constli dote d ns.li 

2 3 A n g i o - Conodian Cummings io.i 
24 Verm. I ion Ccneoi doted n'o 15 
Z c t Ang.o-Canadian Vermilion no , 
2€ Comm.i t/ Serr.ces no T 

2 7 LlojAn i »t*r Cn Go. no. 2 
26 wtrrr. .He rrontnee no . 

29 .r«i on Conjc lidate o no C 

3 *. W V onn*.! I e nc. I 


LLOYDMINSTER 


VERMILION - 
AREA 

ALBERTA —SASKATCHEWAN 

SUBSURFACE ELEVATIONS 

on top of 

PALEOZOIC 


WAINWRIiGHT 


120 ° |, 6 o 


_55° 

EOWONTOV 


*{. A JtAiLf. 

LEGEND 

o. We : . 

Gas We I 

Abor done d 

-Approximate Waterwoys 

Contac 


SCALE - I INCH =* 4 MILES 

Map I — to accompany THESIS by J.N.WILLSON 


April 194'. 









Jefferson 






























































































































INDEX TO WELLS 


I irwin Milinef Morfin no I 
Z.Edger’un Oils no 3 

1 ‘ ■ •• t 

5. .2 

6lmper,o. Ribsfone no I 
7. Algonquin r.o 2 
6 "I 

9 Be»*>*o n | 

10. AGinwrighf Oevelopmen‘ no.I 
U Montreal A berto ro i 
•2 Imoerial Fopycn no I 
'3 Becumen* no 2 

14 Ritstone Ot Is no 2 

15 Osvilie no I 

16 Aitobo no 2 

17 Rcyco no I 

18 M.£h.ood BiocKfoot no l 

!3 Anglo Home Buffo Couiee no I 

20 Aitcbo- We. -ifigftt r 2 

2 Anglo - rente Buffnlo Coulee no.2 
c 2 • ermiiion Consuii d o t e <j no II 
2Y Angio - Canad.on CuTTi.ngs no : 
24 ‘<.r Amin Cc' f i. dated no 15 
5$ Anglo - Conad. on Verm,won r.o . 

Com*)un.tr Service* no 7 
27 l I s><3r.r. »t# r Ga* Co. r, 0 2 
26 verni’.afc F'oniviee no I 

2 - .*'m ion Consolidated no 5 

3 A Vonrw, » nr I 

3 . .'em de'3 j n nc ! 

3.' t' -V To** .. no . 

3.1 Community ' * r ■, o e * ,j 29 



R.5 R 4 R.3 R. 2 R 1 

R 28 R.27 R.26 

K IIO°00‘ 



INDEX MAP 

LLOYDMINSTER — VERMILION — WAI INI WRIGHT 

1 20 ” l] 6 ° ilO° eC° 

AREA 


ALBERTA —SASKATCHEWAN 

__ 530 


ISOPACH MAP 

V Ti 


OF 

\ aceiiSAaX. 


MANN V1LLE FORMATION 

\ 4<*° 


Contour Interval = 50 Feet 

legend 



Oil Well 

COS Well ^ 

Abandoned * * 

Depression Contour 


SCALE - 1 INCH ^ 4 MILES 



Map 2 — to accompany THESIS by J.N.WILLSON 

Ap i 1947 























































































































































INDEX TO WELLS 

I. Irwin Millner Martin no.I 
2.Edggrton QHs no. 3 

4. “ “ “ t 

5. " 2 

6.Imperial Ribstone no.I 

7. A:gonquin no. 2 

8 . .. .. | 

9.8ethwoin l 
lO.wainwright Development no.I 

II. Montreal Alberta no.I 
!2.lmperiol Fobyan no.I 

i3 8eoumert no. 2 
14.Ribstone Oils no.2 

15 Oxville no I 

16 Altoba no.2 
l7.Rayco no.I 

18 Highwood Blackfoot no.I 

19 Anglo-Home Buffalo Coulee no.I 

20 Altoba - Wainwright no 2 

21 Anglo-Home Buffolo Coulee no.2 
22-Vtrmilion Consolidate d no.II 
23. Anglo - Canadian Cummings no.I 
24 Vermilion Consolidated no.15 

2 5. Anglo - Conod i on Vermilion no.I 
26. community Services no. 7 

27 LloydmmsterGas Co. no. 2 
28. Vermilota-Fronkview no. I 
29 Vermilion Consolidated no.5 

3 0. N.W. MonnviI le no. I 

3 i. Greot Bend Oils no I 
32 NWTovell no. I 
33.Community Services no 29 
'Tie abo/e wells reached the Paleozoic) 
34 Martin no.2 
35 .-lock toot Ribstone no.I 

36 London Ribstone no.2 

37 3 e tnwa . r no. 2 
3?. Ed ai*c no 1 

’9 Beajment no i 
40. Ribstone Oils no. I 


LLOYDMINSTER —VERMILION — WAINWRIGHT 

AREA 

ALBERTA —SASKATCHEWAN 


SUBSURFACE 

MANNV ILLE 


STRUCTURE 

on top of 


CONTOURS 
FORMATION 


41.Baxter Lake no.l 
42 Withers - Lone Rock no.l 
43.Oil S Gas Development no.4 
44. ” " " no.2 

4 5. Alt o b o no.l 

4 6. Ro nc ho no.l 

47. A Ito b a no.3 

48. Vermilion Consolidated no.3 

49. Triangle Oil 8 Gas no.2 

50. Von L loyd no. 2 

5 1. S.A .C. no. 4 

52. Community Services no.l 

53. Triangle Oil a Gos no. I 

54. E I Lee no.l 

55. Smy t h no.l 


Contour Interval = 20 Feet 

SCALE - I INCH = 4 MILES 


5 6. Sp a r k y no.l 

57. Sparky no.3 

58. Vermilion Consolidated no.12 

59. Red Star no. I 

60. Lloydminster Oil Producers no 2 

6 1. 11 " “ no.l 

62. North Peace Syndicate no.l 

63. Connor no. 25 

64. Midfield no. I 

65. Wointown Vermilion no.l 

66. N.W. Claysmore no.l 

67. Inte national Hollingsworth no.l 

68. Zero Syndicate no I 


M ap 3 — to accompany THESIS by J.N.WILLSON 


April 1947 


TP. 4 5 


TP/ i 


























































































R. 2 R.l 














































































































































































































TP. 4 9 


















































TP. 47 



LEG END 



. + 400 


_^+ 400 


OIL WELL 
GAS WELL 
LOCATION 
DRY HOLE 

ABANDONED OIL WELL 
ABANDONED GAS WELL 

DEPRESSION CONTOUR 
CONTOURS BASED ON 
ADEQUATE LOCAL 
CONTROL. 

CONTOURS BASED ON 
REGIONAL CONTROL, 
(See Mop 3) ; LOCAL 
DATA INSUFFICIENT. 


STRUCTURE 



LLOYDMINSTER AREA 


ALBERTA — SASKATCHEWAN 

CONTOURS ON TOP OF THE MANNVILLE FORMAT 

Contour Interval = 10 Feet 
Scale - I Inch = I Mi I e 


PROFILE SECTION ALONG "A-B" 


4- 50 0 
+ 4 50 
+ 400 
+ 350 
+ 300 



+ 5 0 

4 1 ° 
t4 0 
*’ 0 

+ 1)0 


Map 4 — to accompany THESIS by J.N.WILLSON 


































































LLOYDMINST ER AREA 

ALBERTA — SASKATCHEWAN 

CONTOURS ON TOP OF THE MANNVILLE FORMATION 

Contour Interval = 10 Feet 
Scale — I Inch = IMiIe 


PROFILE SECTION ALONG "A-B" 


4 50 af 
4-4 50 
4 400 
4. 350 
4 300 



L 


Top of Monnville Formation 


op of Wainwright Sand 


4 500 
4450 
t 400 
4 350 
4300 


INDEX MAP 


49° 





April' 1947 























































Wamwright Dev. Anglo-Can.-Kfome Northwest Co. 

no | Buffalo Coulee no.I Mannville no. I 

Lsd.8of 17,45,6 W.4 Lsd.l6of 26,47,7 W.4 Lsd.lof 18,50,8 W.4 

«-14- M lies-H- 1 -18 Miles 





























































































































w 


s 


m 

T.D. 2403' 


LEGEND 

Quartz Sand 
| Salt 8 Pepper Sandstone 
|~.£-| Quartz Siltstone 

Argillaceous Siltstone 
[FEE:] Shale 
! i t -| Ironstone 
Coal 

| i I i | Limestone 
| l Dolomite 


Grain Size (mm.) 


o o 



ELEQTROLOG & LITHOLOGIC CORRELATION 

OF 

M ANN V I LLE FORMATION 

WAIN WRIGHT — VERMILION — LLOYD MINSTER 
ALBERTA a SASKATCHEWAN 

0_50_100 Feet 


Scale 


F i g. 3 — to accompany THESIS by J.N-WILLSON A£rjM947. 










t 

s 3 


• 

V ER 

MIL 1 

3N 


lL< 

'DMINS'TER 

♦ » o 1 









U 4 5 

>2 









fPTT 


2 







Jj 












iw 

AINV 

VRIG 

HT 



HILO 

1 _i. 


R.8 7 6 5 4 3 2 

INDEX MAP Scale 


28 27 26 

16 Miles 























































































































