




0X MBB1S 

mhwesmsis 

anntainnsis 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyofcontributOOcutt 







A STUDY OF THE (RETRIBUTIONS OF AIT IHDIVIDUAL 
TO THE BUILDING OF AN ALBERTA COMMUNITY BETWEEN THE 
YEARS 1909—1939, IN THE FORM OF A NOVEL ENTITLED 
MARTHA 

BY 

MARGARET NA1TCY CUTT B.A. 

DEPARTMENT.OF ENGLISH 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 

A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE UNIVERSITY OF 
ALBERTA IN PART FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS, 

UNDER THE DIRECTION OF 
PROFESSOR F.M. SALTER 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


AUGUST 1949 


























UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


e«>\ S 

i 94®) 

Or 3 / 

vM 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read and recommend to the Committee on {graduate Studies 

T* 

for acceptance, a thesis entitled, 

A STUDY OF THE CONTRIBUTION OF AN INDIVIDUAL 
TO THE BUILDING OF AN ALBERTA COMMUNITY 
BETWEEN THE YEARS 1909—1939, IN THE FORM 
OF A NOVEL ENTITLED MART II A ~ 
submitted by Margaret Nancy Cutt, B.A. in part 
fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Arts. 

PROFESSOR^ 

PROFESSOR^ 

PROFESSOR 


















J ) " OS,‘. . - 

■ - .. . 7 tv: 

■ ;,j;!3r:. + - .V'Vinv 'io'l 

ooat 




■ v: ? 

■ j- ' 








a : . 


t. A 













M of the careful soul and the troubled heart’ 


A Novel 




Margaret Nancy Cutt 
















The Sons of Mary seldom bother, for they have 
inherited that good part; 

But the Sons of Martha favour their mother 

of the careful soul and the troubled heart• 


As in the thronged and the lighted ways, so in the 
dark and the desert they stand, 

Wary and watchful all their days that their 

brethren f s days may be long in the land. 


Mot as a ladder from Earth to Heaven, not as a 
witness to any creed. 

But simple service, simply given, to his own 
kind in their common need. 


Kipling: The Sons of Martha ) 













•--- *'•**' • * • • 




. 




■£> * ■!> *? •* 


■ : -■ ' • . :•■!/, ; ' 
. ... v.."- a ■; ... c 















CONTENTS 


CHAPTER I.Anchorage.. 

CHAPTER II.Griselda. 

CHAPTER III.Half a Loaf... 

CHAPTER IV..Genesis. 

CHAPTER V.Stony Ground.. 

CHAPTER VI.. .Mixed Returns.. 

CHAPTER VII.Community.... 

CHAPTER VIII.Cut of Hand... 

CHAPTER. IX.. .A Calf Departs.... 

CHAPTER X......The Stranger............. 

CHAPTER XI..... .Forces of destruction.... 


1 

15 

40 

57 

85 

100 

121 

147 

163 

173 

184 


CHAPTER XII 


A Neutral Mother 


204 


CHAPTER XIII.. ... .The First Changes. 

CHAPTER XIV................Opposition............... 

CHAPTER XV..Defeat. .............. _ 

CHAPTER XVI................Adrift. .... 

CHAPTER XVII...The Dead Past............ 

CHAPTER XVIII..............The Living Present....... 

CHAPTER XIX....On the Sidelines.... 

CHAPTER XX.................Annie ................... 

CHAPTER XXI................Thirty-Fold. .. 

CHAPTER XXII...Depression... 

CHAPTER XXIII .... .What Is-and What Has Been 


215 

233 

262 

293 

309 

318 

341 

363 

376 

392 


412 


CHAPTER XXIV...A Spreader of Good Tidings 

......422 

CHAPTER XXV................Mystery of the Prairie... 433 

CHAPTER XXVI. .... Lull....... 442 


CHAPTER XXVII 


End of an Era 


462 



































































IV* 















































CHAPTER I 


1 


THE ANCHORAGE 

The sun went down in wisps of soft cloud, peach- 
tinted, or primrose, a spring sky, misty and blurred, the 
mountains hidden, the far-off horizon Yague. Then the 
delicate colors faded to grey, and the Yast empty land, 
dun-colored in the March twilight, enlarged into immeasurable 
distance as night came on and darkness crept up along the 
hollows of the land. Dim and far-reaching under the wide 
arch of sky, lay the rolling prairie, the little hills that 
had for centuries remained uninhabited. The drifting herds 
of buffalo, the fleet, scampering antelope, the passing 
bands of Indians — none of these had left a mark upon the 
face of the land. They passed as naturally as daylight 






CHAPTER I 


2 


fades into twilight, and darkness brightens into dawn, passed 
to make way for the ranoher and the settler..... 

Into the blackness of the night, a single light 
streamed out, the only light visible for miles. It came 
from the window of Mrs. Kerrigan f s parlor where a meeting 
of some importance was taking place. 

Eight of the nine permanent inhabitants of the 
locality crowded the small, low parlor. It was one of the 
three rooms that Jasper Kerrigan had erected four years 
previously, when in 190j>, he settled on this homestead. 

No haze of blue smoke thickened the air in the prim, tidy 
room, no interchange of casual talk rippled from person to 
person. The atmosphere of the meeting was strained and 
formal♦ 

Some of the tension was undoubtedly caused by the 
fact that the group included two representatives of the old 
ranching interests, whom the remainder, homesteaders all, 
had superseded. But the matter under discussion — the 
question of official recognition of the locality -- was 
bound to affect homesteader and rancher alike. 

The lanky host, Jasper Kerrigan, chairman of the 
meeting, was speaking. 

”...myself, I f d like to see the Post-Office called 
Grasmere after the ranch.” 























CHAPTER I 


- 3 - 


The owner of the ranch, Mr* Hampton-Reid, a hand¬ 
some, military-looking man in his fifties, struggled to his 
feet with some difficulty and spoke in crisp, educated tones* 
"I hope you will not think me discourteous if 
1 say I would prefer not to have the name of the ranch used 
for the Post-Office. However•••• " 

He paused briefly, shifting his weight from the 
leg into which a Boer bullet had crashed eight years pre¬ 
viously. His ranch foreman, Harry Wise, sitting beside him, 
extricated a cane from behind the chair and put it into 
his hand. 

"However," continued Mr* Hampton-Reid, "I should 
like to suggest an alternative. I propose that the Post- 
Office be named after the first lady to establish her home 
here: Mrs. Kerrigan." 

With a little, old-fashioned bow towards the 
lady in question, he sat down, stretching out his lame leg 
with a little sigh of relief. 

"THAT SHOULD DO IThe reflected. "TURN THEIR 
COMPLIMENT BACK TO THEMSELVES AND NO OFFENCE GIVEN 1" 

The chairman, husband of Mrs. Kerrigan, evidently 
flattered by the suggestion, nodded several times. The idea 
found favor in other quarters too. 













CHAPTER I 


4 


"Hear, hear!" squeaked Joe Griggs, a spry, leather- 
faced little fellow, younger than he looked, who divided his 
time between homesteading the quarter next to Kerrigan’s, 
and hauling supplies for the latter’s building projects. 

"That’s a real nice idea!" said Mrs. Price in her 
flat, rather high-pitched voice. 

"Suits mel" agreed her husband, a bulky man chewing 
the end of a match. 

Dan Meade, sitting well back in the corner behind 
the heater, was silent, well aware that little he said or 
did was likely to find favor with either Mrs. Kerrigan or 
Mr. Hampton-Reid. His watery blue eyes slid from face to 
face, and he bit nervously at the drooping corner of his 
ragged gingery mustache. 

Only the woman whom it was thus proposed to honor 
said nothing at all until the voices and the murmuring died 
down. Then looking steadily from face to face, she said, 
almost indifferently, 

"I never admired the name Griselda , even if it is 
my own; but I don’t want to see it as public property on 
addresses for the rest of my life!" 

"BOWLED OUT!" thought Mr. Hampton-Reid, his olive- 
branch thus unceremoniously returned to him. Aloud he said, 






















CHAPTER I 


- 5 - 


his frosty blue eyes crossing glances with the wise dark 
ones, 

"Griseldal A charming old-fashioned name!" 

f, I grew up with it in a family with good, sensible 
names I” retorted his hostess with some vigor# "So, although 
it’s very kind of you, I f ll just decline the honor of having 
the Post-Office named after me.” The words were ungracious, 
but the smile that went with them was charming. Mr. Hampton- 
Reid gazed at her with renewed interest and a certain respect. 
He had not hitherto suspected her of perception, a hint of 
humor, or of the carefully controlled intensity that he sensed 
in her attitude tonight. 

Jasper Kerrigan apparently realized that that 
argument was closed for ever. His slow, pleasant voice 
tactfully set the discussion going again. 

"Well, maybe f tain f t in order for the chairman to 
make so many suggestions, but how about calling the Post-Office 
after the first baby born here?" 

He looked hopefully towards the Price family. 

Mrs. Price was in any company a nonentity from whom the eye 
slid away, unarrested by any striking feature in coloring, 
shape or expression. All looked speculatively at the passive 
bundle of white on her lap, the small pink face and tiny 





. 









I 












CHAPTER I 


- 6 - 


curled hands. 

"Eileen Pay," said Mrs. Price proudly. 

"Damned silly names anyway!” muttered her husband. 
"Can f t call a place Eileen Fay . I wanted to call her something 
sensible like Jenny, but her mother wouldn’t hear of it!" 

Jasper Kerrigan stroked his long chin and tactfully 
skirted this ticklish domestic situation. 

"A very pretty name for a very pretty little girli" 
he pronounced, "but as you say, Price, for a town...." 

Mr. Price grunted assent, and his wife turned the 
first baby born in the district back against her so the light 
should not fall on the little face. 

"Town!” murmured Mrs. Kerrigan sardonically. 
"Post-Office — if we get it!" 

Mr. Hampton-Reid f s grey eyebrows twitched. "PATIENT 
GRISELDA, I DON’T THINK!" he mused. 

Jasper Kerrigan did not seem disconcerted by his 
wife’s tartness. 

"It’ll be a town before you know it, — store, church, 
school, elevators—" he replied cheerfully. "Let’s get on 
with naming it -- gotta have a name to suggest, now we know 
we can get a post-office." 

Two or three names were discussed and rejected, and 
Mr. Hampton-Reid moved his lame leg and sighed. Harry Wise, 


























CHAPTER I 


- 7 - 


his acidulated little foreman who had driven him over, remarked 
mockingly that the oldest inhabitants of the locality apart 
from the ranchers, were Bill Lilly and Dan Meade. Pausing 
a moment for effect, he went on maliciously, 

"So Meadeville, or—uh—Lillyburg would be O.K., 
folksI Besides, Bill Lilly an* Dan here has both had 
inteemate connection with the ranchin* an 1 homesteadin* of 
this here country!" 

The reference to Bill Lilly, the squatter, passed 
without comment, but Dan Meade, as ineffective a homesteader 
as he had been cowhand, rustler and bootlegger in the past, 
rose in his own defence, half out of his chair. 

"I dunno why this durn Post-Office has gotta be 
called after somebuddy , 11 he complained sulkily. "?/hy not call 
it—uh—er— Prairie - somethin *-er-other?" 

" Prairie Vista l" chirped Harry Wise; and Dan, who 
spent long hours in the bar-room of the Prairie Vista Hotel 
in Maverick when circumstances and funds permitted, turned 
red and faltered. Mrs. Kerrigan, an ardent upholder of 
temperance, stiffened and seemed about to speak. Mr. Hampton- 
Reid passed a hand over his neat grey mustache; Mrs. Price 
giggled nervously, and Jasper Kerrigan in a voice that shook, 
asserted himself as chairman. 


"Seems to me that Dan f s idea of calling the place 


















CHAPTER I 


- 8 - 


after—er—some natural feature of the country is a good one. 
Any suggestions?” Dan, thus vindicated, resumed his normal 
hue, leaned back in his seat behind the heater and spoke no 
more. Harry Wise too subsided into silence, and several 
names were moved, discussed, and voted on. 

"Four votes for Rolling Slopes / 1 announced Mr. 
Kerrigan after a count, "Two for Sunny Prairie , one for 
Round Hills , and one for Grassy Glen . Guess it’s Rolling 
Slopes , folks!" 

This much accomplished, the meeting adjourned. 

Mrs. Price and Mrs. Kerrigan served lunch, and Mr. Hampton- 
Reid, whose seat commanded a view of the kitchen, watched 
his hostess moving about. She was, he decided, the most 
interesting person there. Her brisk, efficient movements, 
her dark-clad, erect figure, her steady black eyes, were in 
almost painful contrast to the vague and insipid Mrs. Price. 
The rancher was puzzled. He had known this family for three 
years, had talked often with Jasper Kerrigan, and had spoken 
briefly with Mrs. Kerrigan on several occasions. Then he 
had seen only an efficient housekeeper, an ordinary, rather 
good-looking woman who maintained a tidy household, and had 
two mannerly children. 

But tonight, with that suppressed excitement 
heightening the color in her face, keeping tension high in 
















CHAPTER I 


- 9 - 


the little room, she was different. She dominated her 
surroundings, the low, crowded parlor, the rough lean-to 
kitchen, without seeming a part of them. Her dark dress, 
severe and well-cut, became her. A quaint pin of intricately 
carved concentric ovals of ivory and jet, a good, old-fashioned 
gold watch on a long gold chain were her only ornaments. 

"MID-VICTORIANI" mused the rancher. 

Mentally he transplanted her as she was, to houses 
he had known in the England of his youth. Outwardly she 
belonged there, in face and figure and dress and manner. 

And name — the quaint, old-fashioned name belonged in his 
fantasy too... Only one thing was incongruous. The woman, 
capable, energetic, and no longer young, possessed the in¬ 
tensity that is found usually in youth, sometimes In old 
age, but very rarely in middle life. He wondered about 
her background, and, before he left that evening, asked 
her outright. 

"Where do you come from, Mrs. Kerrigan?" 

"Nova Scotia," she replied without enlarging further, 
and the rancher was able to account satisfactorily for the 
faint twang in her speech, the occasional phrasing of words 
that was almost Scottish but not quite. 

He thought about her later as he drove home in the 
cool darkness. The winding trail over the lease, following 




















CHAPTER I 


10 


the tops and slopes of the little hills, was almost dry. 
Here and there in the hollows of the rolling land water 
glinted dully with the reflections of a few dim stars. A 
sudden March thaw had melted the heavy snow, and, although 
it was long after sundown there was no frost in the air. 

The faint stir of wind from the south-west was almost warm: 
it came and went intermittently as though the vast prairie 
breathed lightly in its sleep.... 

"Looks like they’re here to stay, Boss 1" said 
Harry Wise suddenly. 

"I suppose so," concurred the other. The pronoun 
could only refer to the homesteaders who for nearly two 
decades had been crowding the ranchers back and back, off 
the prairie, back into the hills. 

"Should never ? ve let ’em ini" continued Harry 
sourly. He was an American and wont to regard the lively 
days of the American North-West when ranchers held their 
own at gun-point without too many awkward questions asked 
by the law, as the Golden Age. "Handin’ this whole damn’ 
country over to the farmers ■— that’s whatl An’ they git 
all the rights there is I Now this bunch’ve got their Post- 
Office, there’ll be othersl They’re all settled in solid 
around Maverick now. An’ Joe Griggs says Kerrigan is fixin’ 












CHAPTER I 


11 


to have a store here tool" 

There was silence for a minute or two. 

"None of them others ’ud stay if it wasn’t for 
KerriganI" said Harry Wise suddenly. "Dan Meade’s got no 
guts — he’d pull out if he was left there alone. An’ Joe 
Griggs wouldn’t make it neither, an’ that guy, Price, is so 
sorry for himself that he’s ready to go right now if he 
didn’t think this store an’ Post-Office was cornin’ through!" 

"Yes," agreed Hampton-Reid, and added, "I imagine 
if the Kerrigans have made up their minds to stay, they’ll 
stay!" 

He was still thinking of what it all meant when 
he entered the big ranch-house. It was the end of an era 
so far as this locality was concerned — that little meeting 
in Griselda Kerrigan’s parlor. The Kerrigans, when they 
came, three years previously, had been the thin end of the 
wedge. The squatter, Bill Lilly, and Dan Meade, ex-cowhand, 

QUO 

ex-rustler, ex-goalbird, and now a homesteader, offered no 
threat to the ranchers. These two were but poor things, 
drifters, weaklings, who could not face life among their 
fellows and were pushed out and out to the very fringes of 
civilization, out into the wilds where the battle of life 
passed them by. But the Kerrigans were different. Jasper 
looked to the future, first the post-office, then the store. 


















CHAPTER I 


- 12 - 


Then would come the other settlers, the railway... And 
Griselda — Griselda was a fighter. She clung to her standards. 
She brought her civilization with her — in her manner, her 
speech, her dress, her house. It was all around her, and 
in her. Homesteading on the range, - she must be forty at 
least - with two children... Civilization 1 s missionary? 

Men who came alone meant little in the long run. 

They came — they went. But when women came .. Women, and 
children, and little houses on fenced plots carved out of 
the rangeland ... Women stayed and things changed. Griselda 
had stayed three years already, and that evening the rancher 
had seen the writing on the wall. 

"She’ll stick!" 


For Griselda Kerrigan, too, that little meeting 
in her cramped parlor marked the end of one era, the beginning 
of the next. It meant that her home had now a definite 
location, and was no longer a vague speck upon an uncharted 
waste of prairie. For the three years since her first coming 
to the homestead, she had, at intervals, felt utterly lost 
in the wilderness of rolling grassland. One hill was exactly 




















CHAPTER I 


- 13 - 


like another, one hollow ran imperceptibly into the next, 
rise and dip, interminable up and down, like the waves of 
the sea. Uriselda, brought up on the seacoast, felt some¬ 
times that the little house was a drifting boat, tossed on 
the undulating billows of the land. In summer there was a 
slender thread of trail, looping in and out, leading east 
to Maverick, north-west to the Grasmere Ranch. But in 
winter, the snow, covering trail and fields alike, made 
them indistinguishable from the surrounding prairie. Only 
the contours of the land remained, hill and hollow, winding 
coulees and long ridges, dazzling white in sunshine with 
deep blue shadows. Wide and empty and inimical, like waves 
threatening to engulf. 

But now the spot was named, anchored, it would 
exist henceforth as itself, as Rolling Slopes, not merely as 
a dot, un-named on a section number of an impersonal map. 
Naming the dot pushed back the wide, indifferent whole that 
was called the prairie , or the range , or the west . G-riselda 
felt a renewed confidence, an assurance that at last, after 
twenty years of wandering, she had a permanent home. It had 
seemed to her, when she came to live on the prairie, that 
permanence was above all things what she desired. Pattern, 
routine and custom were very dear to her, a part of her 
essential being, for she had grown up in a society largely 





X 


i 






L 








■, t : 




* 


. 




*» 

, 

, 

' . , . . ; u ■ v ^ M J *;c :o 

« - ■ 




< 


< . . 


. . 


■ ■ ■ ■■ t 

t . - - ■. ~ - - 

. 

















e 














CHAPTER I 


14 


built upon them. She was not entirely of the stuff of 
which pioneers are commonly reputed to be made. Only 
accident and her own angry pride had uprooted her from an 
ordered way of life. As for adventure, G-riselda detested 
the word, and felt that she had had enough of adventure 
to last her for several lifetimes* 















CHAPTER II 


- 15 - 


GRISELDA 

She was eleven when her mother died* at their uncle ’ s 
house in Halifax. 

"Don’t forget how much we owe your uncle, Griselda," 
said Mrs* Macrae. "He has been very good to us. You and 
the others must do what you can to repay him. I f m telling 
you this, Griselda, because Hector is forgetful, as boys are, 
and Jean is too young...” 

She stopped, exhausted, and began to cough, and 
Mrs. Brickley, who had been Uncle Jacob Leslie’s housekeeper 
until Mrs. Macrae and her children moved into the house, and 
who was now both nurse and housekeeper, bustled in and shooed 


















CHAPTER II 


- 16 - 


Griselda out of the sickroom. 

"Be off with you — bothering your poor mother 
and her so ill..•1 M 

It had been by Mrs. Macrae’s express desire that 
Griselda was admitted to her presence, but this fact 
Mrs. Brickley chose to ignore. Griselda went obediently 
from the room, closing the door silently, and walked sedately 
up the dark stairs like a little old woman in a dark grey 
homespun dress. These stairs were always dark, especially dark 
when the fog, as now, hung in grey droplets on the tiny 
panes of the small, high window above the landing. The grey 
light seeped through the clouded glass and showed a dim 
glint from the thick, polished banister, two brighter glints 
from Griselda T s dark eyes, very bright in her thin, sallow 
face. She frowned as she climbed slowly, thinking, thinking... 

Not long afterwards Mrs. Macrae turned her tired 
face to the wall and died, worn out by her struggles since 
her early widowhood to raise and support three children on 
a Cape Breton farm, and oppressed by the knowledge that her 
children would be, for a time at least, a burden to her 
brother. She was a proud woman, and her brother had opposed 
her marriage. 

Her pride, her sense of obligation, and the stubborn 
independence that had caused her to ruin her health before 






* 

........ j 

... 




/ 




....'■ 








- 

. 

. 

• : : • t "' ■ ■ -- - • 

■ ■ . , . . : 3Vit ' o QOtt&q 

■ 

, . ■■ - . C • - - 

• • e -. ... ■ , : -.. , i': £ 


• , 


. £ . . 0 - 












... 


. . - 





















CHAPTER II 


- 17 - 


seeking the aid Jacob Leslie could well afford to give, she 
successfully communicated to her two eldest children. Hector 
did not permit the situation to trouble him overmuch: he 
thought of it occasionally with resentment, and otherwise 
went his way placidly. Griselda, on the other hand, serious 
and thoughtful, considered that she must fill her mother’s 
place. That she had often done, ever since she could 
remember, housework, tending the poultry, taking care of Jean. 

Dry-eyed, she attended her mother’s funeral. 

Hector did not cry: neither would she. She shut a mouth that 
was too wide and thin-lipped for beauty, to a firm line, and 
the effort to keep it so gave her thin dark face an unbecoming 
hardness, an adult gravity. 

Her Uncle Jacob, who approved Hector’s stoicism on 
the occasion as an indication of manly self-control, was taken 
aback by Griselda’s attitude. He felt uncomfortably that 
here a demonstration of grief would have been more in order 
upon a mother’s death, tears and red eyes, rather than a set 
little face and a dark, burning gaze, directed, not towards 
the coffin, but towards himself1 

Griselda did not realize how uncomfortable she was 
making her excellent relative. She only knew that if she 
looked at the coffin she would cry: she looked, therefore, 
at Uncle Jacob, and frowned, and bent all her thoughts towards 























CHAPTER II 


- 18 - 


the problem that her mother had wished her to solve* It was 
not easy. What could she possibly do for Uncle Jacob that 
would in any measure repay the debt? 


She continued to wonder, year by year. Jacob Leslie 
was well-to-do, according to the standards by which the Macraes 
had lived before they came to Halifax. He had all he wanted 
in a material sense, and he was an independent man who did 
not like women fussing over him, kept his own room in order, 
and detested having his things tidied up by his well-intentioned 
niece. 

To do Uncle Jacob justice, he did not expect or 
desire repayment. In his own fashion he derived immense 
satisfaction from bringing up his sister f s children. He was 
without wife and family of his own, and here to hand was a 
ready-made family for whose achievements he would get much 
credit, and for whose shortcomings he could not be called 
to account. He was genuinely fond of little Jean, and she 
of him, and he was alternately disgusted with Hector and 
proud of him, according to whether the boy followed his own 
inclinations or those of his uncle. But Griselda was an 
utter enigma, and during six years of her life in his house, 
her uncle was rarely at his ease with her. 

She was a girl of a single mind and tenacious 



















CHAPTER II 


- 19 - 


purpose, and for five years she was inwardly engrossed with 
the same problem that her mother had bequeathed to her, never 
nearer to a solution. She never got along any better with 
Mrs# Brickley. The chief cause of friction was Mrs. Brickley’ 
insistence upon treating her as a child; a secondary one was 
the housekeeper’s habit of reminding the children how much 
they owed to their Uncle Jacob. However, Griselda seldom 
fought this battle alone. 

f, I f ll pay him back,” said Hector hotly on such 
occasions. ”1 can do it. I f ll finish school and get work 
and pay him back — every cent! 1 * 

r, That may be,” said Mrs. Brickley drily. She was 
inclined to back down in arguments with Hector — a sign of 
respect that she denied Griselda. "Boys can do such things.” 

Griselda accepted what she felt to be an implicit 

challenge. 

”I’ll pay him back tool” she cried defiantly. 

”And what will you be doing, Miss?” enquired the 
other ironically. 

Griselda — she was thirteen then -- was taken 
aback. ”1—I—I could keep house for him!” she finished 
lamely. 

No idea of ousting Mrs. Brickley had entered her 
mind: she simply uttered the first words that occurred to 

















CHAPTER II 


20 


her. Their effect on Mrs. Briekley was instantaneous. 

“Hey, diddle-diddleI“ said she, highly offended. 

“And who’s talking now? Cut your coat to suit your cloth, 
my girl! The ideal You keeping house for your uncle indeed1“ 

She never forgave Griselda for what she considered 
her scheming ways. But she showed little active enmity, 
and the household lived amicably enough. Griselda was 
not unhappy. She went to school, and for a time thought 
she might become a teacher and with her earnings help to pay 
the family debt. For a year or two she studied with avidity 
and Uncle Jacob seemed pleased with her progress. Griselda 
grew quite conceited about her learning, and Mrs. Briekley 
scoffed at it. The girl defended it hotly; it was her 
crusade. 

The housekeeper laughed. 

“Your Uncle Jacob would be just as pleased to see 
you off his hands and married, and not be an old maid for 
the rest of your daysl“ 

Griselda retired in confusion. The remark had 
tied in rather too well with the expressed ambitions of 
most of her schoolmates. A year before she would have 
brushed off the possibility with the owl-eyed gravity that 
so annoyed Mrs. Briekley, for she had always been told 
she was plain and had, until recently, seen in the looking 











. 






, 


. ... 


< i 


















CHAPTER II 


21 


glass nothing to make her think otherwise. But at sixteen 
she had gained weight and her carriage was good, and she 
had more color. Several people had remarked on the improve¬ 
ment in her looks, and Mary Belle Webster, who had never 
known what it was not to be pretty, had of late seemed 
somehow concerned over Griselda’s appearance. 

”I’m getting that pale blue l ” she had confided 
over a counter of yard goods. ’’Why don’t you get the dark 
blue, Griselda? They’ll look so well together!” 

It might have been an over-eagerness in the tone, 
or it might have been purely instinct that warned Griselda 
that her friend’s advice was not entirely disinterested. 

She demurred. 

’’Dark blue? It’s too dull -- makes me look sallow. 

Mary Belle’s cornflower eyes were reproachful. 

’’You had a dark blue coat two years ago, when I had my royal 
blue, and everyone said how nice we looked together!” 

Griselda recalled quite clearly that everyone had 
said how pretty Mary Belle looked, and had then turned to 
her and remarked politely how she had grown. 

’’That was two years ago,” she said good-humoredly, 
’’and Mrs. Brickley chose it. I think I’ll have that wine- 
colored serge...” 

”0hl Not a red dress!” pleaded Mary Belle. 
















CHAPTER II 


22 


"It’s not red, it f s wine.'* 

And in spite of Mary Belle’s laments about the 
doubtful taste of wearing a red dress, Griselda wore the 
new frock with great pleasure and tangible results• People 
complimented: they eyed her with interest and surprise, 
and Luke Herron who happened to be in Halifax at the time, 
came calling. He said he came to see Hector, and Griselda 
did not doubt it. Mary Belle said he came to see Hector, 
and by the time she had said it twice, Griselda wondered. 

For the first time she began to think there might be some¬ 
thing in Mrs. Brickley’s ideas. Certainly Uncle Jacob was 
pleased to see Luke when he came (to see Hector, of course). 

Then for the first time, Mrs. Brickley’s attitude 
became quite friendly, and in spite of herself, Griselda 
was impressed. There seemed to be something about the 
state of matrimony (for a woman) that gained the respect 
of the world. It gave a woman privileges denied her single 
sisters; it put her, when she was situated as Griselda was, 
in the happier position of being able to confer favors. 
Griselda, by this time, was determined that as soon as 
she could manage it, she was never going to be obliged to 
anyone again. If there was to be any question of favors, 
she intended to confer, not to receive. 

It was not hard for her to make up her mind to 


















CHAPTER II 


- 23 - 


marry Luke Herron# She liked him very well, and the advantage 
of such a match were so obvious. She was quite sure that 
he was going to ask her. 

Luke himself, several years her senior, had 
fostered that idea, if not in so many words, by making his 
partiality for G-riselda clear. He was^distant cousin of 
the Websters, a likeable, easy-going, good-looking lad 
who had been working for John Webster since he was fifteen. 

A few years before, Webster’s shipping firm (in which Uncle 
Jacob Leslie was a minor partner ) had been an extremely 
prosperous concern, building fast-sailing rigged ships, the 
SUSAN V,, and the MARY BELLE, and the SPRINGFLEET in the 
Webster yards at Digby, and employing these same ships in 
the Atlantic and coastal trade. 

But now in the f 80 f s, steam vessels were fast 
replacing the graceful barques and brigs and schooners, and 
the Webster yards had of late turned out nothing larger 
than fishing boats. The Webster ships, since the lumber 
trade with England had fallen off with the use of iron and 
steel in shipbuilding, made fewer Atlantic journeys, more 
along the coast to American ports, or south to the West Indies 
and Panama, where the canal was then being built. 

Luke lived at Webster’s when he was in Halifax 
for any length of time. His return from a trip was an event 






, 

. . 

' 

■ 

t - ■ •- . • - ' 1 c 

* ■ . '. . ■ 

« - , : ' V ' t •• ' ■ 

‘ 

- 


. . . - , 

' ........ 





. 


. 

. 





. 

< '■ : - .■■■■■ 


. 








. 


, . 



■* 






■ 

< 

. 






* • . '• . .. ■ . ... ©r;#i 


. 
















CHAPTER II 


24 


in the lives of the young Websters and Macraes, for he 
brought them back gifts and trinkets that had strayed from 
all corners of the globe to little shops in the ports. 

Bizarre seashells from Caribbean and Pacific waters, chains 
of tiny irridescent Hawaiian shells, or Whitby jet, or 
carved wood, a little brass box with crushed turquoise in 
the enamel lid, a walrus tusk or an ivory chessman, long 
separated from its fellows. And for a year or two, Luke 
had singled out Griselda for a gift a little different 
from the others. 

Everybody approved. Uncle Jacob liked Luke and 
was always glad to see him. Hector liked Luke, hnd had 
wanted to ship with him. But Uncle Jacob, with an eye to 
the future and a canny awareness that the days of the sailing 
ship were over, had vetoed this idea. Hector had been 
found a job on the S.S. ABEREOYLE, a dingy little tramp 
vessel that he despised. Halfway through his second voyage, 
he left the ship in Glasgow, much to Uncle Jacob’s 
displeasure. He was now somewhere in Canada, with the 
fur-traders, and they had had one letter from him, from 
Winnipeg, full of enthusiasm for his new life and its 
freedom. 

Griselda thought it was, on the whole, a pity 
that her brother had been so rash. She missed him. If 












CHAPTER II 


- 25 - 


he had stayed with the ABEREOYLE, she would have seen him 
occasionally. But on the whole she was very happy that 
year — the year she turned eighteen. 

Only Mary Belle Webster did not seem quite so 
friendly as she had been. Griselda was not unduly perturbed 
She was accustomed to these sudden changes of regard on the 
part of Mary Belle, who was both entertaining and unreliable 
She had sought out Griselda’s friendship in the beginning, 
not Griselda hers. And Mary Belle was but doubtfully 
honest at times: she had cheated in school, she was an 
inveterate borrower of homework, and she cried when A lost a 
game. But she was very pretty with her golden curls, and 
the Webster house was a cheerful place... 

Mary Belle... 

The initial advantage had been all Griselda’s. 
Luke, back from a trip, had distributed a collection of 
knick-knacks and keepsakes, forgetting no one, not even 
Mrs. Brickley. And the next day Griselda had been invited 
to Webster’s. Ten minutes after her arrival the quarrel 
began. 

Mary Belle, with her golden hair done up to 
celebrate her recent seventeenth birthday, was a dainty 
figure in pale blue ruffles. She proudly displayed a lovely 
inlaid jewel box, the gift of an aunt in New York. Beads 





































CHAPTER II 


- 26 - 


lay across the bed, pink and white coral, a chain of blue 
and green shells, a silver bangle. There was a chorus of 
admiration from the other girls present. Griselda reached 
out casually for the box as Mary Belle laid it down: it 
did not quite close, and as she lifted the lid Mary Belle 
with a gasp, snatched at something white within it. She 
missed, drew herself up, a diminutive figure of righteous 
indignation. 

"GriseldaJ Your manners! Poking into my box!" 

Griselda faced her, angry color rising in her 
dark cheeks. In her strong brown fingers she turned a 
round of ivory, a carved napkin ring. 

"Where did you get this?" she demanded, black 
brows lowering. 

"Luke...!" began Mary Belle. Her treble voice 
faltered, then gained strength. "Luke." she said flatly, 
blue eyes round and cold like those of an angry kitten. 

"I donVt believe you!" said Griselda deliberately. 
"That f s mine — Luke brought me four. He said last night 
he must have lost one and he f d look for it. You took this, 
Mary Belle!" 

Mary Belle f s delicate face paled, but she held 

her own. 

"Are you calling me a liar, in my own bedroom, 


Griselda Macrae?" 
























CHAPTER II 


- 27 - 


"I’m calling you a thiefl" returned Griselda. 

>! You heard what Luke said, didn T t you, Lily?" 

The unfortunate Lily, friend to both, and naturally 
a truthful girl, nodded dumbly. Mary Belle was scarlet and 
silent, and Griselda pursued her advantage. 

"I*m taking this away now — it’s mine!" She 
paused for a reply. There was none, and she concluded, 

"I f ll tell Luke where I found itJ" 

She turned to leave the room, tall and slim and 
vivid, the ivory ring clenched in her hand. Suddenly Mary 
Belle f s defiance broke down. 

"Don’t tell Luke]" she implored, "Don’t, don’t, 
Griselda! Please, please don’t!" 

"No?" 

Mary Belle ran around the bed, clung to her, 

"I only did it for a joke — I was going to give 
it back to you, Griselda, truly I was I" 

"Then why did you keep it hidden? You’re a thief!" 

She stepped forward, but Mary Belle thrust her 

back, 

"Don’t tell Luke, Griselda—" 

Griselda pushed her sharply aside, and the little 
figure collapsed on the floor, a sobbing heap of pale blue 
and golden curls. Lily attempted to raise her, and Griselda 
turned at the door to observe. 


"You might as well leave her there — she always 
























CHAPTER II 


- 28 - 


pretends she f s hurt when she loses — you know she does!" 

And young Griselda, her dark eyes blazing, swept 
out of the fussy, overdecorated bedroom, down the wide stairs, 
out and away, the ivory ring in her hand. The few qualms 
she felt on the way home - it was not a long walk - passed 
away when she compared the ring with the other three. They 
were certainly a set. 

To her mind, that had been the end of the incident. 
Mary Belle had taken what did not belong to her,, had been 
found out, ought to be punished. However, Griselda, somewhat 
ashamed of herself for letting the quarrel become so undignified, 
decided to forego the punishing of Mary Belle, and not to 
tell Luke after all. It was, therefore, very disconcerting 
to find Luke ill at ease with her the next time they met, 
nervous, embarrassed, and irritable. She was about to break 
an uncomfortable silence by confessing to the whole incident 
when Luke himself brought it up. 

"Griselda, ,f he said, "don’t be hard on Mary Belle 
— she — she just took that ring to tease you — she was 
going to give it back." 

"Did she tell you that?" demanded Griselda, her 
dark eyes steady. 

"Yes,” replied Luke. There was nothing subtle 
about Luke: Mary Belle had got around him somehow. 























CHAPTER II 


- 29 - 


That was the beginning of the end of the understand 
ing between Griselda and Luke. Things went all wrong after¬ 
wards. Luke was irritable, avoided Griselda, and went to 
Boston for some days. And gossip magnified the whole 
episode into something out of all proportion: Only among 
their own intimates, she realized later - silly girls who 
should have known better; fussy parents who wished to keep 
in with John Webster at all costs. 

But Griselda felt that the whole world was against 
her, that malicious whispers followed her every appearance. 

"DID YOU NOTICE THAT MARY BELLE WEBSTER HAS A 
SPRAINED ANKLE? THEY SAY GRISELDA MACRAE PUSHED HER DOWN 
THE STAIRS...." 

».TERRIBLE TEMPER 

"ALL MRS. WEBSTER DID FOR THAT GIRL...." 

"LUKE'S LEFT TOWN SO'S TO GET OUT OF IT...." 

"WONDER WHY SHE'S SO SET ON GETTIN 1 HIM IN SUCH 

A HURRY?" 

Uncle Jacob had been furious: Mary Belle Webster 
accepted her role of martyr with enthusiasm and played up 
to it. It became her blonde prettiness very well. 

"I shouldn't have done it — Griselda takes things 
so seriously...." 

Or, "I only meant it for a joke. I'm so sorry!" 







* 

: 1 



• - - 














CHAPTER II 


- 30 - 


In fact she told everyone but Griselda how sorry 
she was. The sprained ankle lasted for some time with its 
accompanying little limp and charming apology, 

"I’m sorry to be so slow... Oh, no ~ of course 
she didn’t! You mustn’t ever say that! Griselda had 
nothing to do with it! ,, 

Thus, while Griselda withdrew, proud and con¬ 
temptuous and confident that she had the right of the 
matter, Mary Belle capitalized on the wrong. How she won 
Luke over, Griselda did not learn for many years. Even then 
the full significance of Mary Belle’s tactics did not strike 
her. 

c 

Mary Belle had put into practice the very simple 
axiom/ that a repentant sinner is always more attractive 
to other people than is a righteous saint. So, she confessed 
to Luke that she had taken Griselda ? s gift. Luke was 
genuinely angry, and Mary Belle wept genuine tears, 

"I was jealous2" she sobbed. "You always liked 
Griselda best, Luke! I wanted something special too — all 
the others had a string of beads I” 

Faced by this open declaration of Mary Belle’s 
regard for him, Luke’s anger cooled rapidly. After that he 
defended her to Griselda. He was flattered: he had never 
suspected little Mary Belle of so much feeling. And he was 


















. ] 


. 

. . - • 








. 


- 






- 


; ■ ;/ -' 








C. 




























CHAPTER II 


- 51 - 


disconcerted by Griselda’s reception of his well-meant 
attempt to smooth things over. She was hard when she was 
angry — silent, and scornful and uncompromising, and her 
dark eyes looked through him with contempt. 

With heartfelt relief, Luke left the stormy 
atmosphere of this stay ashore behind him, and went to sea 
once more. Mary Belle had taken his measure quite correctly. 
She had, moreover (and this rankled with Griselda for forty 
years) taken Griselda’s. 

Griselda was completely and devastatingly miserable. 
It was not Mary Belle’s treachery that hurt her most, nor 
even Luke’s blundering incomprehension. It was the utter 
injustice of it all. Her uncle was cross with her; Mrs. 
Brickley did not hesitate to say ’I told you sol 1 ; Luke had 
gone without saying good-bye; Hector was somewhere in the 
wilds at a trading-post. And Mary Belle, who admitted 
herself to be the cause of all the trouble, sat smugly in 
the ruins of Griselda’s happiness and drank up the sympathy 
she did not merit. 

Griselda went west to join her brother at Winnipeg. 
He had written enthusiastically of the west and of his 
prospects of advancement. Uncle Jacob did not at all relish 
the idea at first. Had he foreseen that within a year of 
her departure Griselda would be the only white woman at an 
















CHAPTER II 


- 32 - 


isolated trading post in the far north-west, hundreds of 
miles beyond Winnipeg, he would certainly have refused his 
consent. But he was aware that Winnipeg was a thriving 
centre of settlement and that a railway was under construction. 
Moreover an intense and brooding Griselda cast a shadow 
upon his household and preyed upon his nerves, and he finally 
assented to her departure, stipulating only that it be 
delayed until suitable travelling companions could be found 
for the long trip through American territory and by steamer 
down the Red River to the newest of Canadian cities. 

And when the long journey was, as she thought, 
at an end, she discovered that Hector f s plans had all been 
changed, and that he had left, weeks before, for an isolated 
post, Fort Tukikume, far north of Fort Edmonton. There, 
during the summer of 1886, Griselda followed him. 

She made the difficult trip mostly by water, by 
canoe and York boat, and sometimes, as on the navigable 
Wakaw, transferred to a comfortable scow that was laden 
with supplies for the northern trading posts. She was, 
so far as she ever knew, the first white woman to make the 
journey, and it decided the whole course of her future life. 

One incident of the trip seemed to foreshadow 
her whole life in the north. A young lad, a French half- 
breed, Louis Lepine, who had been with them all the way 



. 

■ 

■ 



% 

■ ■ ' ’ t ' 

. 

■ : < ' •" : 




t ■ • • 

i ‘ " •’ 

* 

. 













, 

















CHAPTER II 


- 33 - 


from Winnipeg, slipped off the edge of a sxow and disappeared 
beneath the treacherous, muddy waters, instantly a canoe 
was circling over the spot, paddling around, following as 
nearly as possible the slow, deadly drift of the current. 

But the boy never came up: only, a hundred yards downstream, 
there floated to the surface, turning and twisting in the 
wake of the scow, a sodden moosehide gauntlet, gaily beaded. 

It rolled and twisted in the wake, and, deliberately it 
seemed, went under and was swallowed by the deep cold water. 

Griselda, who had enjoyed watching the wake of the 
boats and scow, was horrified by the accident ~ the suddenness 
of it, the cruel deliberation with which the river had cast 
up the empty glove, and kept the unfortunate boy. And she 
was shocked by the calm acceptance of her fellow-travellers. 

For fifteen or twenty minutes they paddled about in the 
canoe, seeking their comrade, then the journey was resumed. 

She expostulated with one of the men, a young trader going 
out to Fort Ohipewyan. 

"But -- aren’t you going to look for — the body?" 

"Be no use, Water’s too cold — they don’t come 
up here, you know. Not much chance for anyone in these rivers 1" 

Griselda shuddered. Was this what the north was 
like? A chill breath passed over her, a foreboding that 
she was now at the mercy of something huge and inimical that 






- . : 















CHAPTER II 


- 34 - 


had no regard for the individual. That feeling she was not 
to lose: it was often submerged for long periods, but it 
never passed away, and in the next ten years she knew how 
true a portent it was. 

During the trip, too, she met Jasper Kerrigan. 

And two years later she married him. 

The two years had made a great change in her. The 
sense of burning injustice under which she had left Uncle 
Jacob f s comfortable house had cooled somewhat. She looked 
back on the episode almost with amusement, certainly with 
detachment, and wondered how she could have been so foolish. 
Not so foolish as to set her heart on Luke, but so foolish 
as to let Mary Belle gain and keep control of the situation. 
Two years of being the only white woman, or one of the only 
two white women in an area of some thousands of square miles, 
had quite removed any doubts Griselda might have had as to 
her own personal attractions and abilities. She was a hand¬ 
some woman and she knew it: if her dark, ruddy coloring 
and snapping black eyes were not unlike those of the better 
looking native women, there was always the straight, jutting 
nose, the clean, firm, sensitive line of the mouth to supply 
a sufficient contrast. She was clever, she was practical, 
and she did not lose her head, either in emergency, or under 
the continued pressure of masculine admiration. Indeed she 




. 
























CHAPTER II 


- 35 - 


knew well enough that the novelty of her position had much 
to do with the quantity of admiration she received, and that 
very few of the men about her were such as she would bother 
with under other circumstances. Jasper Kerrigan was an 
exception: he had been reared in a strict Ontario home and 
the principles of it had stayed with him. He was slim, 
sandy in coloring, soft-spoken and clever, and his admiration 
of her seemed to differ from that of the other men. They 
admired because she was not a native, because of the contrasts 
between her and the Indian and half-breed women with whom 
they so often consorted. But Jasper seemed to admire her 
for things implicit in herself. Moreover she liked him very 
well - as much, she told herself, as she had liked Luke. 

They were married, and left Fort Tukikume. Griselda 
felt that the new life was an adventure. She was quite 
prepared to tackle the wilderness and reform it: certainly 
the need for reform was glaringly apparent. But she was 
never at any time a pioneer in the sense of accepting the 
disadvantages of pioneer life. Rather she was a missionary, 
determined to plant and foster a better v/ay of life in the 
wilderness. 


Ten years of that wilderness saw her discouraged 
and disillusioned. Twice she suffered bitter personal grief. 

















r» 





3 


Y 























CHAPTER II 


- 36 - 


She lost her first child in one of the periodical epidemics 
that decimated the natives in the squalid summer settlement 
of lodges and log huts behind the post. In 1892 her brother 
was drowned in a canoe accident on the treacherous Slave 
River. For several years the Kerrigans remained childless, 
and G-riselda expended her stored-up energy and missionary 
zeal upon the natives, seeking in work an antidote for pain 
and bitter discontent. It did not occur to her to try to 
persuade Jasper to leave the north. He had his work there, 
and she was his wife who would stay by him. 

She was naturally impatient, naturally energetic. 
The apathy of the natives, their lack of intellectual 
curiosity, their indifference to the new way of life she 
tried to implant was utterly discouraging. She saw the 
native girls she trained to keep a cabin clean and to cook, 
revert to savagery after a season of trapping in the woods 
with their own people. She saw the Indian babies that she 
doctored and saved one summer, dying in the epidemics of 
the next. An Indian child was torn to pieces by the savage 
sled dogs; a trapper went mad, another disappeared. The 
furs came in and went out by scow and river-boat, fabulous 
in value. Gold was discovered in the far north and people 
poured towards the Yukon and Alaska. The north swallowed 
them, destroyed some, engulfed others, returned a few. 

















CHAPTER II 


- 57 - 


By and large, the great volume of human effort that was 
exerted against the north returned few results. 

Griselda, who had stubbornly set herself against 
the laissez-faire attitude that alone could have enabled 
her to exist in such circumstances in reasonable peace of 
mind, worked on. An intangible ideal, a faith in a far-off 
future, were not for her. She had to see results for her 
work, and results were not to be had. Instead it seemed 
that nature itself was against man in the north, and the 
mere effort to stay alive at all was so great that all else 
was sacrificed to it. 

Griselda hardened, but did not disintegrate over 
those years of disillusionment. Never communicative, she 
did not make known to her husband the bitterness that seethed 
within her, and he, seeing her always busy, did not suspect 
the depth and violence of her growing resentment. Her second 
child was born in 1896, and then Griselda made her protest, 
solemnly and dramatically. 

f, If we don’t leave this country, Jasper, I’m going 
to leave and take the baby. I can’t lose him tool 11 

The ultimatum had cost her a struggle: she had 
been brought up in a Calvinistic precept that mankind was 
doomed to suffer. Moreover to decide betv/een her duty to 
her husband and her duty to her infant had not been easy. 





* 

« 

. 







■ 


. j : 

■ • • 


* 


























CHAPTER II 


- 38 - 


She was quite prepared for opposition. 

But Jasper had accepted her decision quite calmly, 
given peaceful assent to it, and added maddeningly in 
conclusion, 

H I been ready to leave the north for three years 
now, but I thought you wouldn’t want to go. You’ve always 
got something doing an 1 you never said but what you liked 
it here I" 

Sriselda was exasperated beyond the point of words. 
Had the man no idea of the suffering she had been through? 
or of the struggle that preceded her ultimatum? Yet he made 
arrangements for her early departure with a celerity that 
indicated he already had the matter thought out, and in 

t/me. 

shorter^ than she would have thought possible, she found 
herself established in Edmonton. 

The next few years, spent between the rapidly- 
growing cities of Edmonton and Calgary, were pleasant ones. 

By 1905, when the Province of Alberta was formed, the Kerrigans 
had two children and were fairly prosperous. Jasper still 
had not settled to one thing: his experience of the west 
and north was such that he had had a variety of opportunities 
and explored most of them. 

In spite of several moves and her resulting feeling 
of insecurity, G-riselda was happy. The bitterness of the loss 









CHAPTER II 


- 39 - 


of her first child had passed away. To her hard, practical 
mind, there was deep satisfaction in seeing the development 
of the little western cities. They represented man’s triumph 
over the dreadful, disintegrating forces of the wild. In 
them, people progressed, kept each other in line, were 
responsible for themselves and for each other. 

She would gladly have settled in either Calgary 
or Edmonton, or even in one of the little towns intermediate 
to these two cities. But the unpredictable Jasper was still 
restless, and in 1906, his wife was extremely annoyed to 
find herself aboard a ’mixed local’ en route to a prairie 


homestead 














CHAPTER III 


40 


HALE A LOAF 

Indignation burned deep within her like a hidden 
fire in peat. She could not avoid the conflict between 
her duty to Jasper that bade her follow where he led, and 
her own innermost conviction that human beings, instead of 
wandering around for twenty years, should find themselves 
a place to live and stay there. More than anything else 
at that time, she wanted a settled home, not only for 
herself, but for the children. The same old intensity and 
determination surged within her as she looked at the 
children, kneeling on the wicker-covered seats to look out 
of the window of the coach. Unconscious of the wrong they 














: ' ' ' 



















CHAPTER III 


41 


suffered in being thus torn away from their chances of an 
education, they were enjoying themselves heartily. Their 
very ignorance of what they would miss — school, opportunity 
for the future, companionship of their own age, seemed 
pitiful to their mother. Yet on the other hand, her religion, 
her marriage vows, her sense of duty, and her very real 
affection for Jasper — bade her accept the situation without 
complaint. She smouldered. 

The train jerked and bumped out into the prairies, 
stopping occasionally at little villages of a wooden platform, 
one or two or three buildings. At vast intervals along this 
newly-completed line of track, was the start of a grain 
elevator. Most often the stops were mere sidings with 
wooden ramps and whitewashed corrals for cattle loading. 
Railroad ties were flung off a flat-car at intervals: several 
times the train shunted and backed, coupling and uncoupling 
cattle cars with jolts that raised puffs of aged dust from 
the windows of the rickety coach. And once after nearly an 
hour T s run through a vast, grassy waste that was obviously 
a grazing lease, it halted to take on water from a lonely 
tower on stilts beside a flat, shallow, glittering lake. 

They lunched in the coach out of a picnic basket. 
There were few passengers aboard. Far down the car a Mounted 
Policeman’s scarlet coat made a bright spot of color. He 





. 

. . . / ••• ■ ' ' « 7 

. 

% 

■ . :: ■ “ t" 

- 

- 










, 


S 











* 






■ 










. 























• 







. 




' 













CHAPTER III 


42 


chatted with a brown-faced man in a broad-brimmed hat, who 
descended at a siding some miles out of Calgary to be met 
by another man driving a buckboard. Two Ukrainian women 
with shawls over their heads talked rapidly with gestures. 

The remaining half-dozen passengers were, to judge from 
their appearances and talk, farmers or ranch-hands. 

Past the grimy windows of the coach the empty 
land slid by. Tiny clusters of farm buildings nestled in 
little valleys that were but wrinkles on the surface of the 
prairie, or perched on hilltops looking across infinite 
space. Dwarfed by the landscape, buildings looked like 
a child’s toys, grazing animals were tiny in the distance, 
the few human figures infinitesimal. The passing of the 
train meant much to these dwellers on the prairie. They 
stood to watch it go by: children on horseback, bringing 
in the cows, a woman in her doorway, a man repairing a 
flimsy thread of fence — all stopped work to gaze, absorbed. 

Griselda felt a passionate sympathy with them. 

Of course they clung to the last glimpse of the train, 
welcomed its distant plume of smoke, its shrill whistle, 
its bumping, clanking progress. It was their link with 
the rest of the world — a peopled world, now far away. 

Ever the land slid by, mile upon mile, grassland and 
field. Pole by pole, linking the miles, the telegraph 







■ 








. 

. 



. 













CHAPTER III 


- 43 - 


followed. The singing wires, the humming rails, the few 
barbed wire fences, the winding prairie trails ... spider 
webs all upon the vast plains.... 

The train rushed past a spreading, limpid shallow 
lake — a prairie slough. Its ripples glittered in the 
sunlight, a greenish tinge framed its edge, the battered 
remains of last year’s tall grass and reeds dotted the 
surface far out from the margin. Dried cat-tails waved in 
the wind, swayed beneath the weight of a bird. The wedge- 
shaped v/ake of muskrat broke the placid surface, was lost 
in the splash of the rising of a flock of wild duck. 

Puffing, clanking, the train swayed by. The ducks 
wheeled overhead, the muskrat dived.... Griselda knew that 
as tranquility returned the ducks would settle again, the 
muskrat resume its interrupted swim, that all v/ould be 
silent save for the rustle of wind in the grasses, the varied 
cries of birds, the blending voices of the wild. Only the 
high grade of the track, the stiff file of telegraph poles, 
were new — all else in this spot was as it had been for 
centuries. 

In spite of the stuffy warmth of the coach, she 

shivered. 


Jasper was waiting on the platform at Maverick 


















CHAPTER III 


44 


for his family, and in spite of her exasperation with the 
whole situation u-riselda was glad to see him. Difficulties 
so often melted before him: he never anticipated trouble 
as she could not help doing. His thin, tanned face beamed 
as he took charge of the luggage and shepherded his family 
down the long, echoing boardwalk that ran almost parallel 
with the railroad track. Along this, the main street of 
the town, well-kept houses on lots tidy to the exact 
boundary line asserted themselves among shappy tarpaper 
shacks with littered yards and sagging roofs. The WESTERN 
EMPORIUM with its high, false front exhibited a tempting 
miscellany of goods in the big front windows: gaudy dressing 
gowns, "Indian" blankets, boots and shoes, a handful of 
cheap bead chains. HARDY f S HARDWARE: THE FARMER f S AND 
RANCHER*S STORE balanced a display of nail kegs, wrenches, 
and horsecollars against a marvellously embossed saddle 
and bridle and a whole row of ten-gallon hats. Horses 
stamped and whinnied at the long hitching-rails, buggies 
and wagons rattled along the rutted road. 

Their progress along the boardwalk towards the 
hotel and a hot meal was slow. People passing stared at 
the family procession, and Griselda was vaguely annoyed. 

The thought crossed her mind that she ought to be ?/alking 
down a well-known street, where she would know most of the 
























CHAPTER III 


- 45 - 


passers-by, and they her. Instead, she was trailing wearily 
down a bumpy boardwalk in a little town, a stranger in a 
strange land. 

Jasper nodded frequently to the men who passed 
and stared, calling some of them by name. Several he 
introduced to Oriselda, always with the obvious pride in 
her that weakened her resentment towards him. The rotund 
little Catholic priest, scurrying across from his white 
frame church, complimented her in a strong Irish accent. 

”It f s bad enough that a man like yourself with a 
good Irish name would be a heretic, but when ye bring a 
lady like this to swell the ranks of the opposition...”, 
and he indicated with a twinkle, the Protestant church 
across the road, f, ye f re adding to my difficulties immensely, 
Mr. Kerrigan!” He trotted on, and Jasper informed his 
wife that the members of the two churches lived amicably 
side by side, and that a fair degree of religious harmony 
prevailed in Maverick. 

Griselda met next the banker *s wife, and liked 
her. A gaily-dressed matron, whom Jasper introduced with 
preternatural gravity as Mrs. Scattleby, flashed her teeth 
at G-riselda, and said she was pleased to meet her, adding 
in the same breath, 

”1 guess we won't be seein f so much of you now, 


Mr. Kerrigan!” 
















CHAPTER III 


- 46 - 


After condoling with uriselda over living so far 
from town, she swished away. 

The town was larger and more flourishing than 
she had expected: she was encouraged by the fact that the 
homestead was only thirty miles west of it. There were 
two little churches, one Roman oatholic, one Protestant. 

At a corner where the boardwalk intersected with a narrow 
path, a small, greyish frame building announced itself as 
the bank. The path led across the tracks to the outskirts 
of the town where the school, a square white building with 
a faded green roof, v/as dwarfed by a new grain elevator, 
rusty-red and angular, a symbol of the new west. 

Three or four early bluebottles hummed dizzily in 
the big streaky windows of the Prairie Vista Hotel. A 
cactus plant bristled in one window, a dusty rubber plant 
occupied the other. The lobby reeked of smoke and floor- 
oil and the red-faced shirt-sleeved individual at the tall 
desk in the corner greeted Jasper with loud-voiced cordiality. 
There was the inevitable introduction, 

”...Brad Scattleby ... my wife...” 

”Hope to see you in town often, Ma f am. Like you 
to make the acquaintance of my wife. An f don f t forget we f re 
always open for meals...” 

There was the respect and admiration in his eye 
that she had become accustomed to in twenty years... 















CHAPTER III 


- 47 - 


The big square dining-room was nearly full although 
it was past two o’clock in the afternoon. A waitress beckoned 
them to a table at the back of the room and Griselda sank 
thankfully upon a chair. The children chattered excitedly 
to their father whom they had not seen for weeks. Griselda 
absently watched the girls come and go from the kitchen. 

Each pushed the red, swinging door with foot or elbow, arms 
laden with, plates of hot dinner, bowls of soup, pots of tea, 
or a huge tin tray of dirty dishes. 

"What’ll yuh have?" 

The girl was tall, dark, untidy® A single strand 
of slippery black hair had escaped its moorings and dangled 
now between her shoulder blades. The hairpin that had 
held it twisted and twirled precariously as she moved. 

"We got steak an’ onions, liver an 1 onions, liver 
an’ bacon, smoked herring, ham an’ eggs.*.” 

Their ham and eggs, pie and coffee came, served on 
coarse white dishes, plentiful, well-cooked. The room was 
full of noise, dishes rattled, voices rose and fell, chairs 
scraped on the floor. The red door into the kitchen flapped 
in and out, the glass port-hole in the top of it winked and 
vanished and winked. Blue smoke with a meaty smell eddied 
in through the door, swirled, thinned, was gone. The onions 
announced their presence, there was a waft of cabbage, of 








CHAPTER III 


- 48 - 


fish. For a moment the bespectacled, moon face of the 
Chinese cook appeared at the port-hole. 

Jasper ate with gusto. 

"Better ! n Joe T n me can cook for ourselves,' 1 he 
said cheerfully. "Be nice to get a good meal again." 

Griselda aroused herself to ask a question. 

"How are you getting on?" 

"Just fine!" replied her husband. "House all fixed 
up — that is, pretty well..." 

Griselda did not reply, and he changed the subject, 
glancing about the room. 

"Busy little town, this — sure gone ahead since 
I was here last year. Pretty well settled no?/, an T with the 
railway this close it f ll be all settled out our way too in 
a couple of years — you 1 11 seel" 

Griselda 1 s dark eyes rested upon him in ironic 
speculation. 

"I hope you 1 re right," she observed. 

After dinner they set out on the long drive to the 
homestead. The democrat rattled down the churned-up street, 
past the buggies, wagons, and saddle-ponies. They passed 
the Chinese laundryman with his barrow of bundles, his yellow- 
brown face gleaming with sweat as he pushed. A stolid 
Ruthenian woman stood in the doorway of the sectionman ? s low 












. 




. 




















. 

' 

. 















. 


- 
















v 





























CHAPTER III 


- 4 ? - 


shack on the outskirts of the town, baby in arms. Three or 
four little children played around the yard, chickens scratched 
near the threshold; a mongrel dog dashed out to yap after the 
democrat. 

Then they were driving west on the tripled-pathed 
road, running straight as a ruled line between barbed-wire 
fences, on into the hazy distance, the sun in their eyes. 

The fences ended suddenly, after a mile or two, and the road 
became a winding trail, looping over the crests of little 
rises, disappearing between them. In the next twenty miles, 
only two houses were seen, each in its patch of plowed and 
fenced land, an oasis in the waste of prairies. All around, 
the hills, soft in outline, soft in color, merged one into 
the other. Unlike the prairie at Maverick, this land was 
not flat. It rolled gently in long, swelling curves, rippled 
into a scatter of little hills, low, tawny yellowish-brown 
under withered grass, with a hint of green on the southern 
slopes and in the shallow valleys. Ear to the west lay the 
misty blue that was the wooded foothills, above it the 
jagged line of the Rockies. 

Occasionally an early gopher, tawny like the 
withered grass, scuttled across the road, sat up after they 
passed, black nose twitching curiously. Chunky white¬ 
faced cattle grazed on some of the slopes, a few little 
















_ . u ?! 


,. ....... 

; - i:e;i 


. 













> . . ■ 


. 


t. 




. s 




... 






: 

, 

* 

.. 

. 

' 




I - 






: 

J' .«: 


■ 






















CHAPTER III 


- SO - 


calves skipping about among their stolid elders. Here and 
there a little pile of bones, a torn and shrunken carcass 
bore witness to the severity of winter, the accidents of 
the range, mute warning that here too was slight hope for 
the weakling. 

It was past supper-time when the democrat rattled 
up to the door of the new, raw-looking little three-roomed 
house that was but a speck hidden among the bare hills. 

But the chimney sent forth a cheerful thread of smoke, 
and a reception committee of two was on hand. 

Joe Griggs, his brown little monkey face all 
smiles, mopped at afresh cut on his chin. He had seen 
the democrat coming over the crest of a hill far to east¬ 
ward: had at once laid down his armful of stovewood and 
scurried over to his own little shack on the other side 
of the fence to shave. Beside him, Dan Meade fingering 
stubbly chin and ragged gingery mustache, fidgeted 
uneasily. 

Jasper Kerrigan swung his little daughter to the 
ground and turned to assist his wife. She had scrambled, 
unaided, out on the other side, and was surveying her new 
home dubiously. 

"Well, here it is I" he said proudly. "How do 
you like it?" 














CHAPTER III 


- 51 - 


"I guess I»d better like it," said Griselda pointedly. 

But Jasper ignored her lack of enthusiasm. 

"Time you T ve been here a couple of days, it*11 
seem like home to us alii" he observed cheerfully. It was 
his habit thus to turn the sharp edge of her displeasure 
by a little compliment. Griselda had long ago seen through 
the device, but nonetheless it succeeded in its purpose 
because she realized that the compliment was perfectly 
genuine. 

He proceeded to introduce Dan Meade to her. 

Dan mumbled a greeting and receded into the back¬ 
ground, aware that he cut but a poor figure in his overalls 
and old cap. Griselda raked him with one comprehensive 
glance and placed him in a sort of mental dust-bin as some¬ 
thing that had never been of much account and was never 
likely to be. The type was long familiar: he was a f no-good*. 
For twenty years she had been mentally classifying those 
whom she met as either ? no-goods f or ! worthwhiles r • It was 
not hard to place Dan Meade. 

Joe, having unloaded the boxes and luggage, led 
away the horses to the little stable well in the rear of 
the house. Mr. Herrigan, laden with bags, threw open the 
door of the new home. It was unexpectedly cosy: the kitchen 
warm, the stove roaring, the kettle boiling, and a large 
















. ■ 



- 












_ 

- 

















CHAPTER III 


- 52 - 


pot of cooked potatoes steaming on the back of the stove. 

Joe had prepared supper, even to slicing the bacon ready 
for the pan and setting the teapot to warm. 

Griselda never forgot Joe’s welcome. Her previous 
acquaintance with him was slight: she knew him for a 
talkative little man who told long, dull and impossible 
yarns. Jasper had said he had a way with horses. The 
two had met in Calgary, where Joe had been hauling freight, 
had struck up their odd friendship, and filed on adjoining 
quarter-sections of land. Griselda had assumed that Joe 
was just another bit of human flotsam. But the little man’s 
thoughtfulness on this occasion touched her: it was a good 
sign for the future. Thenceforth Joe Griggs was almost a 
member of the family: he was neighbor, odd-job man, temporary 
nursemaid when the need arose. Griselda mended his shirts, 
knitted him socks, cooked many a meal that Joe shared, and 
bore with his interminable stories with a mixture of good 
nature and impatience depending on how busy she was at the 
time. 

Joe stayed to help eat the supper he had prepared. 
Dan Meade, murmuring vague excuses about cows to be milked, 
went home, it must be said, unregretted. Griselda for the 
next few years forgot about him, unless he happened to be 
directly under her eye. There came a time when she took a 















CHAPTER III 


- 53 - 


brief but lively interest in Dan, but that was as yet in the 
future. 


In the pleasant light of a sunny April morning, 
the homestead was not forbidding. Griselda thought the 
next day that the location was promising, on the edge of 
a cluster of little hills that lay to north and west. East 
and south the land sloped away in long shallow ridges over 
which the trail to Maverick wound, keeping to the crests 
and slopes and dipping only when unavoidable into the 
coulees with their soggy bottoms and tall, tangled grass. 
Spring was unmistakably in the air: a flock of crows 
flapped past with raucous cries, a jagged string of ducks 
sped into the north. Long streaks of water darkened and 
gleamed in the coulee bottom east of the house as the wind 
ruffled the glassy surface. 

Walter came running in to get string for a gopher 
snare. He was a thin, serious-faced little boy, and his 
mother, who had nursed him through a bad illness two years 
before, bade him button his jacket. Then she enquired after 
Emma. 

"She’s out with Joe, !l replied the child. '"Joe’s 
telling her a story." He looked up from the snare. "Are 
Joe’s stories true, Mother?" 



















CHAPTER III 


- 54 - 


"Depends what they’re about," said Griselda. 

"You’re lucky to have someone ’round to tell you stories 
now — there’s not much for you to do out here*" 

"No school," agreed her son cheerfully, and ran 

out again* 

"Lessons every day!" said Griselda grimly, and put 
that dictum into effect within the week. Not for three 
years, not until the store and post-office were started, 
could the children be sent to school in Maverick. And 
there was no school in the vicinity until 1913* 

During the summer of 1906, she insisted upon, and 
got a fence around the three-roomed house. It was something 
gained; a plot snatched from the surrounding prairie. She 
did her best to assert her ownership of it; planted flowers 
and a bush or two from cuttings she was given in Maverick, 
outlined flower-beds and a path with rocks* The garden 
represented something, if only the pushing back of the wild 
for a space of a few square yards. 

The little house was far too small. She visualized 
another, a tall, white, frame house with a verandah and a 
neat hedge, and said as much to Jasper. 

"I’ll be glad when the day comes we can build. 

This pokey little shack..." 

"It isn’t a shack!” interrupted Emma indignantly. 

<-"It’s a house — it’s our house 1" 


















CHAPTER III 


- 55 - 


Jasper laughed, and Griselda looked at her daughter 
with some interest, forgetting to reprimand her for interrupt 
ing. 

M What f s the difference between a house and a shack? 
"A shack T s got one room," said Emma promptly, 

M We f ve got three rooms. We f ve got a house 1” 

11 A very sound argument,” said her father gravely. 
"Now if you can only convince your Mother Jo” 

M We f ve got a house 1” reiterated the child. "Joe’s 
got a shackI” 

"Ear as I’m concerned/ 1 replied Griselda, "a house 
has a brick chimney, an 1 a shack has a tin pipe and a stove 
that won’t draw half the time I” 

When she recalled the little argument afterwards, 
it seemed to typify the essential difference between her 
own outlook and that with which her children were growing 
up. They accepted the homestead for what it was: she was 
always trying to change it. 

She did not get her house for five years. In that 
interval the shack acquired a fourth room, a lean-to on the 
south that became the kitchen and relieved somewhat the 
congestion within. There were even times when it was not 
hard for Griseldato call it a house. At other times she 
hated it, considering it but the current instalment of that 





- 




. 

: 






l 

■ 



. 






i 

■■ 








.... ... -. . 5 


. .... : . - 




. V • ■' 

; H- 


• - . . 

. 


. 




. . 


* 


. . ...... 








■ 

..... .. : . :. r '■ « • . J X f .:oz 




































CHAPTER III 


- 56 - 


isolation in which so much of her life had been passed 
— the isolation that she would, given the least opportunity, 
change and destroy. 












CHAPTER IV 


- 57 - 


GENESIS 

In spite of Jasper’s optimism regarding the 
certainty of immediate settlement, few neighbors arrived 
in the locality in the next three years, 

"It must be lonely for you, Mrs. Kerrigan,” 
remarked the Maverick postmaster, a heavy man with a face 
like a sheep. 

"I’m not often lonely,” said Griselda sedately. 
The words were prompted largely by her innate dislike of 
being pitied, but they were true enough. She had found 
the prairie far less lonely than the bush. A thirty-mile 
drive to Maverick in fine weather was something to look 
forward to; she had friends there who occasionally drove 







. 


. 


, 


. 


. 

< 

. 

- 













' 












CHAPTER IV 


- j>8 - 


out to visit her. The rest of the time was well occupied. 
The children had their lessons, there was the garden to 
plant and weed and harvest, poultry to tend, cows to milk, 
the daily routine of meals and household. 

The isolation she had dreaded did not press 
heavily. Few days went by that she was not aware of others 
who were not members of the family. A thread of smoke to 
the north might be from Dan Meade*s shack, or from Bill 
Lilly*s, squatters both. Once in a while an Indian passed, 
slumped on his pony, or an Indian wagon with a whole family 
in it, coming to or from the reserve some miles to the 
north. 

Sometimes the Indians stopped to visit or to camp 
overnight. Stolid and imperturbable, they sat around the 
little kitchen, filling it with the odor of moosehide and 
smoke, watching curiously the incomprehensible haste of the 
white woman as she went about her tasks. G-riselda bore with 
them patiently, fed them, and aired the house thoroughly 
after their departure. 

They were, she thought, a better type of Indian 
than those she had known in the northern bush, but Indians 
were Indians, and fundamentally all alike. She could not 
talk with them, or find in them, admirable and romantic 
qualities: privately she considered them deplorably lazy 











CHAPTER IV 


- 59 - 


and dirty. 

Jasper, however, tolerated the periodic descents 
of Johnny Antelope, George Tanbark, Crow-feather, and others 
of the tribe accompanied by various members of the families, 
with great good-humor. He could speak a little of their 
language, and he was proficient in the language of signs 
that is common to most of the tribes. Moreover he had 
business dealings with them. The Indians came every spring 
with loads of poplar poles and willow posts for the Grasmere 
Ranch, and to pay their respects to Mr. Hampton-Reid, who 
had known some of their great chiefs of former years. For 
several years, Jasper Kerrigan too, bought poles and posts 
from the reserve, and each spring the same scene was enacted. 

As soon as the snow left the ground in spring, 
Jasper would begin to look for the Indians, and since they 
never arrived as early as he thought they should, he com¬ 
plained. 

wf Bout time Old Johnny showed up with that load 
of polesJ Don’t want to repair the corral after spring 
work starts." 

"You should have thought of it earlier," Griselda 
replied. "You know what the Indians are like better ! n most 
people] And you could have got^posts in Maverick last fall, 
or any time this winter/" 















CHAPTER IV 


- 60 - 


But grumble as he might, Jasper continued to buy 
his posts and poles from the tardy Indians. The transaction 
appealed to his sense of the picturesque, and he could not 
shake off his liking for the actual business of trading with 
the natives. 

And finally, one morning the long-expected wagon¬ 
load of poles would rattle over the crest of the trail from 
the direction of the Grasmere Ranch. Usually the first- 
comer was Johnny Antelope, who, with his fat wife, Maria, 
completely filled the board seat of the wagon from side to 
side. Johnny, blanket across his shoulders, over his 
leather coat, a broad-brimmed hat crowning his head, would 
descend slowly and ponderously from the wagon. He was a 
middle-aged man now, but his braided hair was as black as 
the crow f s wing, his leathery face scarcely wrinkled. 

He was said to be a pure-blooded Blackfoot: his high, 
aquiline features and coal-black eyes, the enormous dignity 
that wrapped his stout figure about like a regal robe, 
supported his claim to a high descent. A seamed and jagged 
scar ran from the corner of his right eye to the nostril, 
a memento of the old, troubled days of the North-West, now 
two decades behind. Johnny Antelope had, in his youth, 
hunted the buffalo, and seen this staple of his people 
disappear, and their bleached bones carted away by the white 










CHAPTER IV 


- 61 - 


men. He had taken part in the forbidden tribal dances, had 
lived through the starvation winters of the early » 80 ! s, and 
had known well the great chiefs of the time of rebellion, 

Long Lodge, Sparrow Hawk, Heavy Shield, Piapot, and the 
others. Concerning his own part in the later Riel Rebellion, 
Johnny Antelope was reticient: there was reason to believe 
that he had only thrown in his lot with the white man when 
completely convinced that there was no chance of driving 
him from the north-west. And now that the last brief flare-up 
of independence among his people had long since cooled to 
ashes, Johnny Antelope sold poles to the ranchers and 
settlers. 

Descending from his wagon, he would greet Jasper 
ceremoniously in sign language and in Blackfoot, and would 
then enter upon his business negotiations in English. His 
understanding of English was excellent, although he spoke 
it no more than was necessary. Jasper presented him with 
tobacco, and the two men smoked amicably together. But 
the poles had to be unloaded. Johnny Antelope did not help 
with this task: he obviously saw no need to hurry with it. 

”I f ll get Joe to unload them,” Jasper had remarked to 
his wife on the first occasion that poles Yrere bought, 
seeing the squaw begin the work alone. But Johnny Antelope 
interposed at this unnecessary expenditure of labor. 
















... . . ^ 








< • ' • - - : 

■ 




. 




■ 

. 






. 




. 

* 

... . ■ : j :.. 3 c 

. 

% 

. . . •. * ' . 

. 

■ 

* 

. 

. 

. 

• ... :. 
























CHAPTER IV 


- 62 - 


"Soon finish,” he assured in his organ-deep tones. 
'•Maria good worker I” 

Stolid, unhurried, and regal, he selected a nail- 
keg from one of several against the barn-wall, and sat down, 
the smoke rising in a thin blue cloud about his head. His 
wise, scornful eyes watched tolerantly while Joe and Jasper 
assisted the industrious Maria to unload the wagon. Then 
they all adjourned to the kitchen for tea and lunch, and 
even when drinking out of his saucer, Johnny Antelope, 
descendant of chiefs, lost not one jot of his dignity. 


The Indians were in the vicinity every spring and 
summer, but there were other passers-by who came at any 
season. There were Mounted Police on patrol: in severe 
winters they travelled miles to check on the welfare of the 
few settlers in this sparsely-inhabited country. And 
there were always riders from the ranch with cattle, or 
Harry Wise, the ranch foreman, or, at greater intervals, 

Mr. Hampton-Reid, the ovmer. 

Twice a year there was a big roundup of cattle on 
the lease, early in the summer for the branding, again in 
the fall for driving out to the foothills to winter in 
shelter. At intervals, small bunches of cattle were shipped 
from Maverick. Bawling, tossing their ugly white heads, 

















CHAPTER IV 


- 6? - 


they jostled each other along the trail past Kerrigan’s 
house. Stragglers attempting to snatch the odd bite of 
grass were rudely hustled up with their fellows by the 
attendant riders. At a foot-pace they passed, dust rising 
under their hooves, and Griselda, watched them out of sight 
for the pleasure of seeing something alive and moving on 
the .still surface of the open land. They dropped into 
the coulee bottom, climbed up the ridge, followed along 
its crest for a quarter of a mile, and disappeared in the 
hollows to the east. Cattle and riders, silhouetted against 
the sky, fragments of an older west... 

Early in the summer, Mr* Hampton-Reid usually 
called at the house with a courteous, stiffly-worded 
invitation for Griselda and the children to attend the 
branding. The first year G-riselda went, but the noise and 
dust, the bawling of frightened animals, the odor of singeing 
hair and burnt flesh that followed the withdrawal of the 
red-hot iron with its HI brand from the fire, repelled 
her. She did not go again. The children went every year, 
and loved it. At first Griselda worried about them, for 
the branding scene was, to her eyes, one of utter confusion. 
But no one ever got hurt so far as she knew: each man knew 
his work, his place at a given moment. Organization there 
certainly was, and she became reconciled to seeing the 
















CHAPTER IV 


- 64 - 


children jog off on horseback for at least two days of the 
branding. 

They returned each evening, dirty, tired and 
excited. They had eaten flapjacks and bacon with the men 
in the chuck wagon: there had invariably been a dozen hair¬ 
breadth escapes. Slim, one of the cowboys, had given Emma 
a pair of polished steer’s horns mounted on a board. Next 
year Mr. Hampton-Reid’s nephew was coming from England to 
spend the summer... 

The personnel of the Grasmere Ranch might regard 
homesteaders with resentment, but the hard feelings did not 
extend to the children. The polished steer’s horns made 
an admirable hatrack near the kitchen door. And Mr. Hampton- 
Re id ’ s nephew came from England and stayed several months 
at the ranch. He was a slim, fair, quiet boy who struck 
up a friendship with Walter soon after his arrival, much 
to the exasperation of Emma, no longer her brother’s 
companion on long rides about the country. 


So passed two years at the homestead. The pace 
of life was slow and regular; time was marked off by the 
changing seasons, the varying cycle of occupations. There 
was spring work and branding and summer-fallowing and haying 
and harvest, all between April and September. Then there 













CHAPTER IV 


- 65 - 


was the hauling to Maverick, and the bringing of coal and 
supplies for the winter, and that might last on into the 
cold weather. Winter was lonely, shut-in, and long, with 
spells of bitter cold, mercifully broken by the warm 
Chinooks. 

February was the worst month of all: shortest in 
point of days, it dragged interminably at the tail of the 
winter. March might bring the spring. Very often it did 
not, but there was always the chance. 

1908 stood out in the memory of settlers and ranch¬ 
men: it was the year of the crime-wave, of rustlers and 
bandits and mysterious comings and goings of unexplained 
and often disreputable individuals throughout the province. 
Maverick had its share of these doings, and when the police 
came seeking Steve Acker and Dan Meade, Griselda knew with 
irritation that the adventure she detested had rubbed 
shoulders with her, and, that she was still very far from 
the safety and convention of civilized living. 

She had been the first to see Steve Acker, the 
first in the neighborhood to speak with him. He was at 
the front gate when she noticed him, slipping from the back 
of a b®ig black horse. He left^horses standing and came up 
the walk, back to the morning sun, his face in shadow. 

“How-do, Ma f am? M he said. 

Griselda, dazzled for the moment by the sun in 








CHAPTER IV 


- 66 - 


her eyes, returned the greeting. 

'•I f m•. • ,f The man hesitated, and Criselda could 
see that he was looking about the kitchen, over her shoulder. 

He had a big, fleshy face with absurdly small features. 

His little eyes were close-set. Long, flat cheeks ran down 
to the jaw-bones, were puffed out, like a fat baby f s, under 
his eyes. His nose was small and snubby, and his mouth smiled 
a continual, unmeaning smile in the corner of which glinted 
a gold tooth. It glinted now, as the man looked past her, 
into the kitchen. Then he looked at her. 

"I f m lookin 1 for my quarter," he said smoothly as 
if he had found out something he wanted to know. He named 
a section number near Dan Meade f s homestead, and Griselda 
assured him he would have three or four miles to go to 
reach it. She indicated the direction, and the man turned 
his head only very slightly to look, glancing back immediately, 
familiarly, to her face. 

Resentment chilled into fear, at his next words. 

"You all alone here, Ma f am?" 

"Nol" said G-riselda boldly. The tone rang true: 
the man believed her. He looked doubtfully around the 
kitchen once more. The gun was on its rack over the wash- 
stand, and she dared not glance at it. She stepped back 
into the kitchen, crossed deliberately to the stove and 
looked into a pot there. Her hand closed thankfully around 














CHAPTER IV 


- 67 - 


the big pepper-pot: she dared not reach for the poker. If 
the man noted anything, he gave no sign. 

Suddenly the excited voices of the children came 
from the stable, and the dog bounded across the yard, 
barking gruffly. 

"Well,” observed the sinister stranger, ”1 better 
be moseyin* along. So long, Ma f am. l f ll be seein 1 you 
agin, I hope." 

He scrambled back on his big black horse, and 
leading its mate, jogged slowly away to the north. G-riselda 
sat down on the nearest chair, as near to hysterics as she 
had ever been in her life. 

Jasper made light of the episode when she recounted 
it, but she noticed that either he or Joe made a point of 
calling in at the house several times a day when they worked 
in the fields, even when it was inconvenient to do so. And 
for some months they did not both leave at once when there 
was a trip, long or short, to be made. 

Steve Acker did not appear at Kerrigan 1 s again. 

He kept very much to himself, living with Dan Meade for 
the brief time he spent at Rolling Slopes, and doing nothing 
on his quarter. Dan turned sulky during his guest ? s visit, 
spending as much time as possible in Maverick and away from 
the homestead. 

That was the summer that young Dick Hampton-Reid 












CHAPTER IV 


- 68 - 


spent on the ranch. He and Walter were delighted by the 
rumors of hold-ups, the rustling, the searches, and the 
unexpected arrival of red-coated Mounted Police at various 
times. And one evening he burst into Griselda’s kitchen 
with a message of some importance. 

"Uncle says to tell Mr. Kerrigan that the police¬ 
man^ here and they f re going to make a search tomorrow 
morning early, and if Mr. Kerrigan wants to come to identify 
his calves if they find them..,’* 

The Grasmere Ranch had lost cattle: so had several 
of the settlers, including Jasper Kerrigan. Ranchers and 
homesteaders were for once in perfect accord, 

Walter went back with Dick to spend the night at 
the ranch: Jasper met the search-party at daylight the next 
morning, and the whole posse, including the policeman, 

Harry Wise, Mr. Hampton-Reid, Mr. Kerrigan, and the two boys, 
inconspicuously in the rear, proceeded to investigate Dan 
Meade’s manure pile, haystacks, and stable. 

Dan Meade, drifter and vagabond, had been in the 
locality for at least ten years. He had originally come 
west to work on one of the big ranches in the south of the 
province as cowhand. Dan certainly knew the ins and outs 
of the cattle business on the shady side, for he had twice 
in the past been implicated in rustling. The second occasion 





. 

. 



























CHAPTER IV 


- 69 - 


had netted him a brief prison term — brief, because Dan 
was but small fry. Following his release, he went east 
for a year, drifting back to Maverick about the turn of the 
century. Like Bill Lilly, his nearest neighbor, he had 
squatted on the borders of the Grasmere Lease, and only 
when in 1904 there seemed likelihood of his being pushed 
out by legitimate settlement, did he file on a homestead. 

Dan had a few head of cattle which he ran on the open range 
to the east: very often they were mixed up with the Grasmere 
herd, and Harry Wise was chronically suspicious that Dan 
augmented his scanty numbers with animals from the ranch. 

To date, he had not been able to catch him in the act. 

However, since the spring of 1908, there had been 
evidence of rustling in the vicinity of Maverick, as, 
indeed, in other parts of the province. It was a small- 
scale rustling, compared to that with which the American 
film industry was later to make the world familiar. A cow 
or two disappeared from a farm: a few calves from a grazing 
lease, a steer from a distant pasture... If, as in the case 
of the Happy Valley rustlers, the thief had herds of his 
own, the unmarked animals speedily became a part of them. 

The alternative, sufficiently remunerative to make it 
popular, was to sell the meat of the newly butchered 
animals to buyers who would not ask too many questions. 

In some localities where railroads were being laid, this 













CHAPTER IV 


- 70 - 


was easy. And there were too the meat-hungry Indians, many 
of whom did not stay within the borders of the reserves. 

Dan Meade and Steve Acker were suspected of dealing 
with the Indians, Shortly after sunrise on the day of the 
search, the party invaded Dan’s premises. Futile, ginger- 
whiskered Dan was aroused from sleep and subjected to lively 
questioning, and Harry Wise and the two boys were bidden to 
turn up the manure pile. The incriminating head, hoofs, 
and hide of one of the Grasmere Ranch yearlings was dis¬ 
covered therein, the hide bearing the telltale HI brand. 

Immediately a snag arose in the smooth course of 
proceedings. Harry Wise knew when the animal had disappeared 
— and Dan Meade had a perfect alibi for several days 
preceding and following that date. He had, in fact, spent 
them in Maverick, in the bar-room of the Prairie Vista Hotel, 
and he had left his saddle horse at home. It seemed that 
Dan was not in this instance guilty, and subsequent investiga¬ 
tion confirmed his innocence. 

"When did you last see Steve Acker?” demanded the 

policeman. 

Dan’s look of futile bewilderment deepened to 
something else: to one of trapped terror. Not since before 
he went to Maverick, he admitted. Under pressure he told a 
strange story of his terrorization by the mysterious Steve, 
who smiled, and toyed with his revolver, and suggested, still 











CHAPTER IV 


- 71 - 


smiling, that Dan make himself scarce for a few weeks. Dan 

had gone, as bidden, and, as bidden, kept his mouth shut 
* ■ 

about his unprepossessing visitor. And in his absence, 

Steve Acker had not been idle. He had rushed a few calves 
and made a deal with some Indians. He had sold his black 
horses, the perfectly matched pair that Griselda had seen 
on the day of Steve T s first coming, to Andy Price, for spot 
cash. Price had not seen Steve since, and inquiries made 
of Hill Lilly, the cantankerous, bearded little squatter 
who lived in a tarpaper shack just within the borders of 
the Grasmere Lease, were equally unproductive. Bill Lilly 
was deaf and grumpy and suspicious, and he gave it as his 
opinion that Steve had good reasons for leaving the country 
suddenly. Bill Lilly himself was not an object of suspicion 
so far as rustling was concerned. He had squatted in the same 
spot for ten years, and so far as was known, took no interest 
in cattle, or in anything else. People considered him a 
little crazy and left him alone, and he, in turn, completely 
ignored his neighbors. 

Steve Acker had gone as mysteriously as he came; 
the prairie had swallowed him up, and, since it was a year 
of unusual activity and many rumours, the brief chill of fear 
that he cast around him, was almost forgotten. Other 
transients came and went: would-be homesteaders spying out 
the land, men seeking work for a brief season, riders with 










' 
















' ' ' t 


















* 

■ 






. 




- 

































CHAPTER IV 


- 72 - 


cattle, seeking range in the foothills. 

Then one day, in the Maverick Post-Office, Griselda 
found herself looking at the police poster offering a reward 
for information that would lead to the arrest of Steve Acker, 
alias Allgood, wanted in Canada on charges of robbery and 
murder... It was dated some weeks previously: it had 
evidently followed Steve Acker closely on his arrival in 
the locality. 

That was the last word on Steve. The earliest 
settlers at Rolling Slopes remembered him well enough: 
Griselda, whom he had frightened; Dan Meade, whose already 
damaged reputation suffered further by his brief association 
with him; Andy Price, who found himself with a stolen team 
of horses that had cost him three hundred and fifty dollars. 
His only consolation was that he had not paid the original 
price asked: his flesh crawled whenever he thought of his 
blunt refusal to meet the desperado f s first-named sum of 
four hundred dollars. 

But the Prices, even within a few weeks of their 
coming, seemed to have bad luck all around. They lost a 
good cow, probably to the rustlers. Their nearest neighbors 
were Dan Meade and Bill Lilly, and had included Steve Acker. 
Steve was mercifully gone, but the remaining two were quite 
hopeless as neighbors. 


. • • . 









CHAPTER IV 


- 73 - 


It was ironic that Bill Lilly should have picked 
one of the few real beauty spots the bare country provided 
for his dwelling place. He lived in the pleasantest part 
of the big coulee. This deep, winding depression in the 
rolling land had doubtless been in prehistoric times the 
bed of a river. It was the most interesting feature of the 
country thereabouts and still had a running stream at the 
bottom of it in rainy seasons and during the spring thaw® 
Further west, in the Grasmere Lease, the stream was fed by 
springs and never dried up. Just on the edge of the grazing 
land, where the road allowance of the future was staked out, 
the creek widened into a swampy hollow. In wet seasons, a 
good sized slough, in dry, a trampled and grassy expanse of 
little hummocks, this marsh so wasted the stream that it 
continued eastwards as a meagre trickle, dry by midsummer. 

The eastern end of the marsh was a tangle of willow, 
and saskatoon, and on the dry slopes above them the grey 
wolf-willow, wild roses, and buckbrush flourished. Half- 
hidden in the willows, even when the branches were bare, 
completely out of sight in the season of leaf, Bill Lilly’s 
tarpaper shack stood just above the water-line of the slough. 
Mosquitoes, it seemed, annoyed the hermit less than did his 
fellow-man. He had squatted there for some years, declining 
to file on a quarter of land, as his fellow-squatter, Dan 
Meade had done. Possibly Mr. Hampton-Reid sympathized with 

















CHAPTER IV 


- 74 - 


Bill as a kindred spirit, a recluse, if a less civilized 
one. At all events, he did nothing to eject the squatter, 
and Bill Lilly -- Old Bill, as he soon came to be known, 
seemed to feel grateful for the favor. He took it upon 
himself to watch and repair some miles of the fence that 
was being built to separate ranchland from farmland, and 
to warn trespassers off his corner of the lease. 

When the Post-Office came to Rolling Slopes, Old 
Bill was relieved of the necessity of riding into Maverick 
every month to collect and cash his remittance. The Post 
Office and store was less than three miles south of his 
shack: he did not replace his old pony when it died, but 
walked over for his supplies every two or three weeks. 

Then he retired into his shabby little hut, emerging only 
to make his patrol of the fences, until it was time for the 
next trip. 

But between the Prices and the Kerrigans there 
existed from the beginning a tacit alliance. Both families 
had children, and these alone constituted a very real bond 
between them. The presence of the Kerrigans encouraged the 
Prices to remain on their lonely homestead, and their arrival 
bolstered Griselda ! s sinking faith in the possibility of 
ultimate settlement of Rolling Slopes. 

Mrs. Price was a good-natured, uninteresting woman, 
usually flustered about her children and her housekeeping. 













CHAPTER IV 


- 75 - 


She had for Griselda an apparently boundless admiration and 
a genuine affection. Griselda returned the affection in 
lesser measure, slightly tinged with contempt, for she could 
not understand the other woman f s inefficiency, and she was 
by nature an undemonstrative woman. 

"I don’t know what I’d do if you weren’t here, 
G-riselda,” said Mrs. Price frequently. ”It f s such a comfort 
to know there’s someone here to depend on!” And she v/ouid 
quite often continue, 

”Could you let me have four or five pounds of sugar 
for a week or two* I forgot to order when Andy wait to 
Maverick.” 

G-riselda would produce the sugar without comment, 
while Mrs. Price prattled on, delighted over the prospect of 
the post-office and store. 

’•When do you expect to open the store? My, won’t 
it be nice to have such a little way to go for things? I 
guess you’ 11 be busy, too, Griselda, with the store and the 
house and the kids and all!” 

”The children are going to school in Maverick,” 
said Griselda, when this subject came up for the dozenth time, 
late in the spmmer of 190?. 

Mrs. Price was astonished. ’’School!” she gasped. 
’’But you’ve been teaching them for years, an’ Walter is old 













CHAPTER IV 


- 76 - 


enough to be real handy ’round the place now!" 

"It’s time they learned something more’n I can give 
’em,' 1 replied Griselda. "I don’t count on them spending all 
their lives herel" 

"Maverick1 Goodness I Won’t that be awful expensive, 
keeping two kids there all year ’round, and books an’ clothes 
on top of that?" 

Griselda was exasperated, "We’ve been here over 
three years, and there’s still no chance of a school. Needs 
six children of school age first, and ?/e’ve only got four 
between us,.." 


Mrs. Price, sensing accusation in her friend’s tone, 
tried to justify herself, 

"In two years, Jackie’ll be old enough, an’ Bert 
the year after, and here’s Eileen coming alongI" 

"By that time, Waiter’ll be sixteen," retorted 
Griselda, "If he’s going to get an education, it’s got to 
be soonI And Emma is that lazy I can’t make her learn!" 

Mrs. Price was sympathetic. "Doris ain’t good 
at school neither," she said, "She’s just like me -- can’t 
do arithmetic an’ I never could! I dunno as girls should 
be educated — Andy says not — says he doesn’t want a 
daughter getting ideas about things she’s got no business 
in, like this vote for women stuff, Andy says a woman has 
enough to do with a house and children without meddling in 













CHAPTER IV 


- 77 - 


elections. That’s the men’s business. n 

Griselda suppressed her opinion of Mr. Price’s 
educational theories, and made a direct and startling attack. 

"Why don’t you send Doris to school in Maverick too?" 

"Andy—" began Mrs. Price. "Andy wouldn’t like it!" 
she concluded timorously, feeling herself trapped between 
her stubborn husband and her inexorable friend. "B’sides, 

I can use Doris at home — I’m busy enough as it is with the 
kids an’ the milking an’ the garden..." 

"Some day," pronounced Griselda, borrowing her 
husband’s argument, "This place is going to be all settled. 

And then people who can hardly read and write won’t show up 
very well, and Doris won’t thank you for not giving her a 
chance J" 

"Andy says education is wasted on a woman!" Mrs. 

Price wavered visibly, then she capitulated. 

"Well... Yon talk to Andy, Griselda! He says you’re 
such a good manager an’ all. An’ maybe if Jasper said 
something...." 

Mr. Andy Price was still of the opinion that education 
was wasted upon women, even after his neighbors had done 
their utmost. But he was vulnerable to continued pressure 
and a judicious application of flattery, and in the fall of 
1910 Doris Price went to school in Maverick. Griselda made 


the arrangements 












CHAPTER IV 


- 78 - 


11 We 1 re paying for Emma to live at Horricks’ — no 
reason why Doris shouldn f t sleep with her. And you can take 
in butter and eggs to help pay her board. 11 

This arrangement deprived the Kerrigans of the 
opportunity to pay part of Emma’s board in kind, but G-riselda 
did not begrudge the extra drain on their cash. Three 
children were getting an education instead of two, and that, 
she felt was something to throw into a scale that had for 
three years been heavily weighted in favor of the wilderness. 
In those years they had moved out to the edge of the range, 
settled, built the shack (house), and managed to hold their 
own and little more. 

The expected settlement had not come: of all their 
neighbors, only Joe Griggs could be counted upon to throw 
his inconsiderable weight behind constructive effort. The 
Prices were followers and without initiative; Bill Lilly and 
Dan Meade did not count and never would. Steve Acker had 
been a predator, a destructive force. The ranch held aloof, 
Mr. Hampton-Reid distant and ironically courteous, Harry 
Wise openly sarcastic about homesteaders and their doings. 

He had a habit of turning up when things went wrong. 

M Bit of frost last night, huh? O’ course, us 
cattlemen always figgered you couldn’t grow much grain here!” 
But when in the fall of 1909, the four local farmers, 





: 






. 

c ' ' ' .. • to $ 1W 

/ 

: - y. •- . . ■: :.:D ' 















CHAPTER IV 


- 79 - 


Kerrigan, Price, Joe G-riggs, and Dan Meade, had enough of 
a harvest to make it worth while for a steam threshing outfit 
to come out from Maverick to do their crops, Harry Wise was 
silent. The next year, he spoke once more. 

”What d’ye figger she T 11 thresh? Only fifteen? 
Yeah... if you could depend on rain in July, this country 
might grow igrainj Looks like you f ll hev to go back to the 
ol T coffee-grinder this fall don’t it?” 

After this disrespectful reference to the little 
hand threshing mill that Jasper and Joe Griggs had set up 
in the fall of 1907, Harry Wise rode on, a veritable Job’s 
comforter. In his wide-brimmed hat, he looked on foot like 
an animated mushroom of large size. 

It had, thought Griselda, been discouraging for 
those first years. No settlement, no school, no neighbors 
worth counting. A few cattle their only source of income 
while the land was being broken: when they did get a crop, 
there were the serious problems of harvesting and hauling. 

But then, at last, in six months, a giant step ahead. At 
last they had a post-office, a store, and three children at 
school. Tangible progress. Griselda was not ill-pleased 
with the situation at the end of 1910. She noted, however, 
that the progress had all been made inside a few months, and 
thought with irritation of the three years preceding. Mentally 












CHAPTER IV 


- 80 - 


she dubbed them wasted, forgetting that she had enjoyed them 
as they came. She looked forward to the future with renewed 
eagerness, rested and soothed in spirit by the very years 
she condemning as wasted. The resentment with which she 
had first come to the homestead had passed in its turn: 
she was on better terms with Jasper than she had been for 
years, sharing fully for the first time, his enthusiasm for 
the future of this untouched land. She was not given to 
analyzing her own feelings, or to tracing them back to their 
sources, and it would have been hard for her to tell when 
the softening of her heart towards her husband had set in. 

There was a picnic that she always remembered, out 
on the lease, in the summer of 1907*.® The empty, silent 
land. The ranch-house hidden by the bend in the creek, the 
homestead by the hills to eastward. Everywhere the rolls of 
the earth, the odd, rounded boulders, the deep, winding 
coulee, told of an age older than man. Near at hand the 
whitened skeleton of an animal testified to the passing of 
another age. But man had left no sign of his occupation 
upon this circle of earth, bounded by the rim of the sky. 

This land was empty, vast, and lonely. It frightened her: 
she had an impulse to call to the children to be silent, 
le^st some other power should suddenly strike.. 

Suddenly Jasper had said, 

”Ten years! Let’s say ten years from now!” 


11 What for?” 



















• .. .ii 












CHAPTER IV 


- 81 - 


"We 1 !! be going east to tell 'em about it all - - 
what kind of place we have here, and the crops we grow and 
the cattle we raise 1 In ten years we’ll be as far ahead as 
lots of their places are, after a hundred years!" 

Griselda was profoundly grateful to him for his 
optimistic vision at that precise moment. Gone was the terror 
and the emptiness that had oppressed her — she could almost 
see the neat prairie town that was to be. With a smile, she 
embellished his prophecy, 

"Jasper Kerrigan, the Mayor, going on a trip to his 
old home townI" 

By 1911 Jasper’s hopes seemed likely to be realized. 
Settlers crowded in, bachelor homesteaders of a very different 
type to Dan Meade, families. Elmer Jackson, with a flock of 
dark-eyed children and his French-Canadian wife settled near 
Price’s farm. Olson, a Minnesota Swede, likewise with a large 
family, took up land south of the store, and nearby, two 
American families, Fred Burton and his son Henry, Oliver Harris 
with his family. Fred Burton remained for only two years and 
a half, but young Henry took over his father’s land and managed 
both homesteads successfully. 

Within a year, the need for a school had grown 
desperate. Griselda was active in agitating for it: indeed 
she welcomed the chance to do so. The question of the future 
of her own children was becoming pressing, and she felt 














CHAPTER IV 


- 82 - 


herself responsible for that forlorn newcomer, Ches Meade, 
into the bargain. He had no one but Dan Meade to look out 
for him. 












CHAPTER V 


- 83 - 


STONY GROUND 

Ches, the nephew of Dan Meade, had arrived in 
1912. The circumstances of his past were obscure: he had 
apparently been brought up in an orphanage in Ontario, and 
was now to share Dan f s shack for an indefinite period of 
time. 

Dan announced that his nephew was coming about a 
year in advance, a statement that his neighbors received with 
scepticism. Griselda alone thought it worth taking seriously 
and she cornered Dan on his next visit to the store. 

"Is it true your nephew is coming to live here, 

Dan?" 


Dan fidgeted and admitted that it was 

































. 


< • . .. ... e 

». 






. 












.. : J . t .: -J' 




- 


. 

. 




* . . . .. tz t 




. 


. -t=j'. ..: : a.; 


























CHAPTER V 


- 84 - 


"How old is he?" 

Dan thought the boy was eleven or twelve. "Born 
just after I came back west," he added inadvertently, and 
immediately sank into pitiful confusion. Griselda drew 
her own conclusions, mentally put another black mark against 
Dan*s score, and made him add his name to the list of those 
who were petitioning for a school to be built. Dan, awed 
and uneasy, complied, although he disapproved of school taxes. 
G-riselda seized the opportunity to deliver a lecture on the 
unsuitability of Dan ! s habits for a man who would shortly 
be a guardian of youth. Her victim listened meekly and 
promised he would try to do better in future. Griselda 
made a determined effort to help him do better: she was 
hampered by his determination to combat the demon liquor 
only upon its own stamping-ground — the bar-room of the 
Prairie Vista Hotel — and countered by forbidding the men 
of her household to transport Dan to Maverick. Certainly 
she cut down the number of his trips, but she could not keep 
him at home altogether. The only permanent result of her 
generalship was that Dan manifested even greater reluctance 
to meet her face to face. 

In the spring of 1912, Ches Meade did arrive. 
Someone in Ontario had consigned him, like any other small 
parcel of freight, to Calgary: he had made the long trip on 







CHAPTER V 


- 85 - 


a C.P.R. train loaded with Central European immigrants. Only 
the conscientiousness of over-worked trainmen had prevented 
him from getting lost en route: only the efforts of the Calgary 
police brought him into contact with his uncle, on arrival. 

For Dan, having travelled from Maverick to Calgary to meet 
Ches, had drifted into the Alberta Hotel. 

Joe Griggs, mailcarrier for Rolling Slopes, 
brought Dan and Ches back from Maverick. Concerning Dan, 
he had received specific instructions before leaving the 
store. 

’’Now don’t you bring Dan Meade back!” said Griselda 
firmly. ’’He’s been away four days this time, and I don’t 
see why other people should haul him back’n forth when all 
he does is soak in that bar-room!” 

Joe looked uncomfortable. On these occasions he 
was torn two ways. His admiration for Griselda was enormous, 
and he did not for a moment question that she was quite 
right in her stand. But he was by nature obliging; he would 
have preferred’to oblige both Griselda and Dan, but there 
was no way to do it. Moreover, it seemed certain that Dan 
would be waiting in Maverick to beg a ride. 

Dan was. He v/andered unsteadily into the Maverick 
Post-Office just after Joe arrived there, followed by a silent, 
wide-eyed boy. 










CHAPTER V 


- 86 - 


The postmaster turned a long, sheep-like face 
towards them. 

”H’lo, Dan I Lookin’ for Joe here?" 

"Thash what I thought,” replied Dan solemnly. 

"Catch a ride with you, Joe?” 

Joe Griggs hesitated, his crinkled little brown 
face a study in indecision. He stuttered with embarrassment. 

”1-1-1-, er- it’s like this, Dan....” 

”01d lady ashk you not to, Joe?” Dan was hurt, 
and the soft-hearted Joe hastened to appease him. 

"Well, you see, Dan....” But the harsh fact that 
Mrs. Kerrigan had expressly required him not to transport Dan 
back and forth from Maverick could not find utterance. His 
voice trailed off. 

”Jush thought I f d ashk,” said Dan with dignity 
only slightly marred by a hiccup. ”B’sides I got m’nephew 
here — Can’t ashk the kid t’walk thirty milesh!” 

"OhI” said Joe with relief. "Oh, I see — yes, 
yes, that’s all right, Dan — that’s all right 1 Mrs. Kerrigan 
’ud never speak to me again if I let a kid in for a walk like 
that. She wouldn’t mind a bit, Dan, since he’s along...” 

Dan was proof against personal offence; 

”Thash all ri’, Joe,” he said generously. ”Jush 
wnted a ride home for the boyshakeJ What time you leavin’ 










CHAPTER V 


- 8? - 


-t’night, Joe?" 

"Not goin’ t f night," said Joe, "T’morrer ■— early. 

"Thash all ri,’ Joe," replied Dan* "Be at the 
Perairie Vishta, Joe — call f T r us, Joe?" 

He wobbled out, closing the door with some emphasis 
in Ches’s face. The boy stood, looking about uncertainly. 

"You better come with me," said Joe kindly, and 
Ches, mutely acquiescent, leaned against the wall, listening 
idly. 

"So ol T Dan did have a nephew1" 

"Seems that way." assented Joe. 

"Well, well! Always thought Dan had no relations - 
seems t f me he. told me that one time.* Mighta been mistaken 
though., he did go back east ’bout 1900 after that little 
affair... Bag o’ mail for Rolling Slopes — few parcels from 
Eaton’s for you folks out there." 

"Any registered or special?" asked Joe. 

"Nope — less’n it’s old Bill’s money order as 
usual... Oh, here’s a few posted locally — couple for Mrs. 
Kerrigan. That one’s about the W.C.T.U. — my ol’ woman 
got one just like it. An’ this one here — I dunno — could 
be Mrs. Adams’ handwriting... An’ I gotta package for Mr. 
Hampton-Reid — come from overseas addressed to Maverick. 

"Must be somebuddy he don’t write to often,” 
observed Joe. "We’ve had our post-office at Rolling Slopes 













CHAPTER V 


- 88 - 


for three years." 

"Photographs..." The postmaster turned the parcel 
over, examining the stamps. 

"Never seen stamps like that," muttered Joe. 

"Looks Chinese or something!" 

"Not Chinese!" said the sheep-faced man authori¬ 
tatively. "These Chinks in town get letters an 1 the stamps 
ain’t like these." 

"He gets lots of mail," murmured Joe. "Been here 
for more ’n twenty-five years they say." 

"Photographs!" repeated the other absently, rapping 
the flat package. "Yeah — he’s quite an old-timer, Mr. Hampton- 
Reid. Gets mail from all over the world — least he usta 
when it all came here." 

"He sure don’t like the farmers cornin’ in." 

The postmaster became aggressive. "Well -- that’s 
progress. That’s what this country needs, is progress! 

Ranches never got nowhere, an’ now the paper says twelve- 
thousand immigrants arrived in Canada last week. Last 
week, mind you! That’s what I call progress — people cornin’ 
in an’ opening up the country an’ raising wheat. Look at 
the wheat we been shipping since this country opened up!" 

"I s’pose," murmured Joe doubtfully. "Now out 
our way, let me see -- back in ’ 07 , or was it ? 06 ..." 

"Yes!" The postmaster cut him off sharply with a 












CHAPTER V 


- 89 - 


brisk return to business. "Now see here, Joe — I’ll give 
you this big bag in the morning, an T fix up another with 
this local stuff. You come 1 round to the house in the morning 
an f I’ll turn it over to you." 

Thus dismissed, Joe Griggs ambled off to attend 
to his horses, the iron grey Percherons, Lady and Mike, that 
were his great pride. Ches accompanied him, the everlasting 
stream of Joe’s anecdotes passing over his consciousness 
like water purling over pebbles. He was not grateful to 
Joe: he followed because he had been bidden to do so, and 
because nothing else to do occurred to him at the moment. 
Obediently he tagged behind, his freckled face, all round 
blue eyes and prominent nose, deceptively alert, his fair 
hair curling out around the cap that was several sizes too 
big and rested upon his prominent ears. He looked appealing 
and innocent and pathetic: he did as he was told without 
argument and spoke little, Joe noted the tear-stains upon 
the boy’s cheeks and the fact that Dan was in the later 
stages of one of his drinking bouts, and drew his own 
conclusions. He was favorably impressed with Ches, 

About noon the next day, Lady and Mike drew up 
in front of the store at Rolling Slopes. Now in 1912 there 
was a little store with a high, false front, boldly lettered, 
JASPER KERRIGAN: GROCERIES, DRY GOODS, HARDWARE. At one 














CHAPTER V 


- 90 - 


side of the store a lean-to held barrels of kerosene, pails 
of axle-grease, and unidentified boxes, bags and buckets. 
Behind the store, slightly to the left, stood a neat frame 
house that might have been lifted bodily from some village 
in the Maritimes or the New England States. This was Griselda 
house that only last year had replaced the f shack T of her 
first five years in Rolling Slopes. It was a two-story, 
box-like building with windows placed two and two in mathe¬ 
matical precision along its visible side and end. White 
with a green roof and trimmings and a brick chimney, it had 
an air almost of prim defiance. Certainly its startling 
cleanliness, its neat yard and straight walk and foot-high 
hedge rendered the nearby buildings a sorry sight by contrast. 

Near Rolling Slopes the winding, narrow trail 
from Maverick had become a road, straight as a ruled line, 
confined between posts and barbed wire. Traces of the old 
looping trail were still visible here and there in the fields 
where it was not obliterated by cultivation. Some of the 
fenced fields were still unbroken, their grassy acres running 
into the wide lease of which they had, five years previously, 
been a part. Others were under stubble or summerfallow, or 
last year’s breaking, ridged with narrow furrows. 

The store door banged as Joe’s wagon rattled up, 

"Well, Joe ■— back in good time! Who’s this?” 













CHAPTER V 


- 91 - 


"Dan's nephew -- Ches Meade,” explained Joe. 

”Hm-m-m...” commented Mr. Kerrigan. He scrutinized 
Ches with benevolent grey eyes, and turned back to Joe. 

”Got the plowshares, Joe? Andy Price has been 
in grouching again!” 

Joe dragged out a handful of bills and papers and 
entered upon a complicated explanation. Mr. Kerrigan nodded 
from time to time. 

"Well!” said a crisp female voice from behind them. 
"It's high time you arrived, Joe G-riggs! You men can waste 
more time on a trip to town, and.... Is that Dan Meade?” 

The question was purely rhetorical. Dan, groping 
about for his belongings, was in plain sight. G-riselda's 
erect figure stiffened and her dark eyes snapped. She drew 
breath to speak, but her husband gestured silently towards 
Ches, who had dodged behind the wagon. 

”OhI” said Griselda in a softer tone. ”So you're 
Dan f s nephe?/?” 

”'S Ches,” volunteered Dan weakly. "M'nephev/.,.” 

”1 see!” Her tone was pessimistic in the extreme, 
but her next speech, addressed to Ches, was kindly. 

•'Well, young man, I suppose you're hungry?” 

”Yes'm.” 

"Come along in and get some dinner... You too, Joe-- 
hurry now an 5 get those horses av/ayi” Her eye met that of her 













CHAPTER V 


- 92 - 


husband and there seemed a brief, unspoken communication 
between them. f, 0h... very well!" said G-riselda in a resigned 
tones. "DanI Hurry up, now — I can T t keep dinner on the 
table all day] 

She led the way down the board walk with short, 
energetic steps, her gingham skirts swishing. Behind her in 
single file followed Ches, Mr. ilerrigan, and the apologetic 
Dan. 

Inside the white house the woodwork glittered with 
varnish and the floors with wax. Dinner, served at the long 
kitchen table, was excellent. G-riselda watched Ches devour 
two helpings of everything from mashed potatoes to apple pie, 
and pity rose in her heart. She looked down the table to 
Dan, very much on his best behavior. 

"When did your brother die? Dan." 

Dan immediately had difficulty with his forkful 
of food: he raised it, lowered it, raised it, and finally 
set it down. 

"Er — oh, quite a while ago..." he mumbled. 

"I suppose Ches was too young to come out here then?" 

f !Yes, er — that is —* yes..." 

"And no mother," murmured Griselda, looking at the 
orphan. He met her gaze blandly, with a singular lack of 
self-consciousness and embarrassment. 










CHAPTER V 


- 93 - 


’•Well, you’ll have to do what you can for him, Dan. 
she concluded. Dan, as ever, looked so utterly inadequate 
that forebodings crept into Griselda’s mind. She bade Ches 
keep his elbows in, and he obeyed with commendable alacrity. 

"A person could do a lot with him," she reflected, 
and the corollary of that thought was so depressing that 
Dan instantly loomed as an ogre. She determined to do what 
she could for Ches herself, and in lieu of anything better 
at the moment, gave him the last wedge of pie to finish off. 

He devoured it with a speed that indicated that in addition 
to his other troubles, he v/as undernourished. Griselda sighed 

For his own part, Ches was quite well satisfied 
with the course of events. The only thing that really dis¬ 
turbed him was the steady, expressionless regard of Emma 
Kerrigan, a chunky, black-eyed, red-cheeked little girl of 
his own age. While she helped her mother with the serving 
and ate her own dinner, she watched him: when he set out with 
Dan for the shack, she v/as still watching from the step in 
front of the store. 


Griselda wasted no time in attempting to establish 
an influence for good over Ches Meade. She invited him down 
to play with the children, and Walter, somewhat annoyed at 
sixteen, at being constituted guardian to a boy of twelve, 













CHAPTER V 


- 94 - 


soon found that an afternoon with Ches was not a simple affair. 

He tried to explain Ches to his mother, who made 
frequent enquiries about the boy. 

"For a little kid, he*s awful — oh, I dunno — 

sharp ...." 

f, What do you mean?" demanded Griselda. 

11 Oh — I dunno --he likes to do things without 
anybody seein* him, even when it ? s awright to do *em. An* 
he*s always watchin* you an* pretends he isn’t..." 

The explanation faltered and broke down® It had 
been longer than was usual with the taciturn Walter. He 
sat looking puzzled, and Griselda could get no more out of 
him than a vauge statement that Ches was always getting 
things all mixed up, and he, Walter, couldn*t see why... 

Her own interest heightened by Walter*s bewilder¬ 
ment and by Emma*s declared hostility to the newcomer, 

Griselda watched Ches closely. In the presence of grown-ups, 
he was silent, watchful, usually obedient. He was, she 
decided, a prying child -- he peeped into cupboards and 
drawers, and watched her from a distance. But that might 
have been natural in a boy brought up without respect to 
privacy of any kind. 

Then one day she saw him do something disturbing. 

He and Walter came in for a drink and eyed hungrily the neat 













CHAPTER V 


- 95 - 


rows of cookies cooling on the table. 

V/alter took a couple, and bade his companion 
do the same. 

"Won’t your mother be mad ?" enquired the visitor 
returning the dipper to the pail. 

"She don’t mind, long as we don’t take too many, 
replied Walter. He went out, and Ches helped himself to 
cookies. Griselda could see him from the next room: she was 
shocked to see him hastily rearrange the rows of cookies to 
conceal the fact that any had been taken unless a deliberate 
count was made. Then he slipped out, closing the screen 
door very softly behind him. 

The little incident was the first of several. 

Ches lied, smoothly, easily, and not always out of necessity 
Griselda was in a quandary. She had fostered a friendship 
between Ches and Walter, convinced that it v/ould benefit 
the younger boy. Instead, Walter, who had up to that time, 
remained out of mischief, found himself involved in one 
escapade after another. As the elder, he bore the brunt 
of the blame, and Griselda was annoyed with him for getting 
himself involved, when he ought to have been setting a good 
example to Ches. She had not yet discovered that even the 
slightest degree of intimacy with Ches complicated the lives 
of others. The knowledge of that fact was to grow slowly, 























CHAPTER V 


- 96 - 


over many years* Walter, on the other hand, had discovered 
it already, to his own cost. But he had also found Ches 
interesting, and the interest outweighed the discomfort. 

He had not analyzed the secret of why Ches was interesting, 
which was very simple. Ches lived by no moral system 
whatsoever: he himself was his own law and order. Thus 
his ideas had often a refreshing novelty to Walter, who 
had to date lived a highly ordered life. ’Walter did not 
often go against his own scruples, but Ches had one 
argument that occasionally prevailed over his friend f s 
judgment. 

"Did your mother say you couldn*t do it?" Or, 

"Who said we weren T t to do that?” 

If no authority could be cited, Ches asserted 
that none existed. Such was the line of reasoning that led 
the boys to trespass upon Old Bill f s corner of the lease. 
They had been warned against provoking the hermit, but 
usually in words that specified that Old Bill was the thing 
to avoid. 

"Don 1 1 you go bothering Old Bill I” 

"Stay away from Old Bill!” 

Ches interpreted this warning quite literally; 
he probably had good reason to avoid the irascible hermit. 
But he suggested to Walter, when the July heat had dried up 





















CHAPTER V 


- 97 - 


the trickle of water in the coulee bottom south of Dan’s 
shack, that they go swimming in the creek in the lease. 

They would not go near Old Bill at all: they would wait 
for him to go to the store first. 

They did, and after a brief inspection of the 
hermit’s shack which stood among the willows with many 
years’ accumulation of tin cans scattered about it, they 
pushed on up the creek. The shack had been locked, and a 
peep through its dirty little barred window told them 
little they did not kno?; about the owner. They found an 
ideal swimming pool, deliciously warmed by the sun, enjoyed 
their swim, and left the lease by a devious route that 
would, they were convinced, keep them out of sight of Old 
Bill. 

They did not get back to the pool again for a 
week or two, and on this second jaunt Old Bill caught them. 

They did not see him until he emerged from the 
bushes on the south side of the bank about fifty yards 
downstream. He stopped and made a movement as if to bring 
the rifle about. With a gasp and a gurgle, Ghes floundered 
towards the north bank, and Walter was with him in a moment. 
They grabbed their clothes and fled, pausing only at the 
top of the coulee to scramble into their overalls. Behind 
them the irascible hermit shouted furiously, and, as the 
boys pelted off across the prairie to safety, they heard 





































CHAPTER V 


- 98 - 


the crack of his gun among the bushes. 

They discussed the matter on the way home, and, 
while Ches was all for keeping quiet about it, Walter thought 
they should complain. He told his a^prents and received the 
reprimand he had expected for his share in the escapade. 

Then Mr. Kerrigan took Old Bill to task about the shooting. 

When the accusation was made, the hermit seemed 
deafer than usual: he listened scowling until the third 
repetition, and promptly denied having fired his rifle at 
all. He admitted having seen the boys in the lease, and 
added that they had no business there. 

"Folks oughta keep their damn 1 kids to home I” 
he concluded v^ith a resentful glare in the direction of the 
offender. Jasper Kerrigan, somewhat annoyed at this turn 
of the conversation, reiterated that nobody needed to carry 
about a loaded gun all the time. For some reason, this 
argument enraged the hermit even more. He snarled inarticu¬ 
lately, and repeated his last word on the subject with one 
addition, 

"Folks oughta keep their damn 1 kids to home — 
kids an 1 wimmen — lettin f em run f round the country! fl 

Jasper peremptorily recalled him to the subject 
on hand, and the recluse glared at him malignantly from his 
little yellowish-brown eyes. The very things that rendered 


















CHAPTER V 


99 - 


his figure insignificant in the distance were striking close 
at hand. His grizzled beard obscured his features, his 
heavy brows jutted, his matted hair hung down dirty and 
unkempt. In his faded shirt and tattered overalls, he 
might have been some gnome of the hillside who had strayed 
into the habitation of man. 

He reiterated that he had not fired at the boys, 

s hff e*hve ain't- tie ? f den ' t- S AveA fe An/s; / 

and since no harm had been done, Jasper pressed the matter 
no further. It had one interesting sequel. Ches Meade, when 
questioned about it, denied that he had been present at all, 
and Walter in disgust, promptly dropped him as a companion. 

Griselda was secretly relieved. Both Old Bill 
and Ches were utter enigmas to her. She reflected with 
satisfaction that they would have a school within the year, 
and that the hand of authority would soon capture the elusive 
Ches and fasten him in a desk for a few hours each day to 
study the fundamentals of knowledge and truth. There was a 
possibility that some of it might stick. Not for some years 
did she realize that with the coming of Ches Meade to Rolling 
Slopes her difficulties had increased ten-fold. 









CHAPTER VI 


100 


MIXED RETURNS 

In 1913 the long-awaited school was built, crowning 
the slope of a long hill in a patch of unfenced land on which 
the cattle still ran at large. Gone were the days of un¬ 
limited freedom for the younger generation at Rolling Slopes, 
and most parents ( with one or two exceptions, like Mr. Price, 
who felt that education beyond the bare rudiments was dan¬ 
gerous) rejoiced. True, a school meant school taxes, loudly 
deplored by certain bachelor homesteaders, but on the whole, 
the school was a welcome addition to a growing community. 

In its first year, the school had twenty-six 
pupils aged from five to sixteen. Fifteen of them were in 
Grade One. The other eleven had never had uninterrupted 
schooling, their standing being typified by the Jacksons, 













CHAPTER VI 


101 


with one year, the Olsons and Doris Price with two, Tom and 
Betty Harris with three, and Emma Kerrigan, who was almost 
up to standard, thanks to her mother f s teaching and three 
years in Maverick. 

The first teacher of Rolling Slopes School was 
Kir. Hackett, a tall, thin, cut-and-dried Irishman. Under his 
erratic guidance, the students learned but little. Mr. Hackett 
taught by rote, sitting up at his desk on its shallow plat¬ 
form, and calling up the classes one by one to recite their 
lessons. Behind the backs of the reciting class, their fellows 
did much as they liked. Once in every hour Mr. Hackett made 
his tour of the room, stalking like Nemesis down the aisles, 
peering over shoulders, lifting up copybooks to see what 
progress was being made. Ahead of his bony form surged a 
great wave of industrious activity: reading lessons were 
murmurously conned, fractions jotted down and reduced to 
least common denominator, lists of dates, imports and cities 
hastily committed to memory. Behind him, the unnatural in¬ 
dustry ebbed, surreptitious games of noughts and crosses 
were resumed, notes written and passed, and the drowsy hum 
of a restless but restrained crowd of children once more 

filled air. 

t\ 

During his tour of the room, Mr. Hackett ! s favorite 
form of minor punishment invariably fell half-a-dozen times, 
upon the just and the unjust alike. The bony knuckles of his 


















CHAPTER VI 


- 102 


second and third fingers would catch automatically the tender 
lobe of an aisleward ear, administering a combined pinch and 
twist# For misdemeanours among the older children, he strapped 
frequently and painfully. Little fidgety ones were called up 
to his table in front of the room and bidden to sit under it 
for half-an-hour — a social form of pillorying which most 
of them enjoyed heartily. 

Mr# Hackett fitted in very well with his students’ 
preconceived ideas of a schoolmaster: they disliked him, but 
there was a zest in contravening his rules, and much enjoyable 
competition in thinking up new forms of deviltry to harass 
him# By common consent, they did not tell all that went on 
at school in their homes, and the parents of the community, 
who had come from widely separated spots on the globe, had 
no single standard of education. Most of them were so re¬ 
lieved to get a school in the district at all that the eccen¬ 
tricities of Mr. Hackett passed without comment or criticism. 

Once again, after an apparently unproductive in¬ 
terval, Griselda was able to see results for her efforts. 
Within a few months, Rolling Slopes had gained a school (which 
meant likewise a community center and a Sunday School), and 
a small, but enthusiastic Women’s Club. There was as usual 
a fly in the ointment: Mr. Hackett was a deep disappointment 
to her. He was, it is true, teaching Walter two high school 
subjects, but he was a dead loss as a community worker. 









CHAPTER VI 


- 105 - 


He could not even referee a ball game; he had declined to 
teach Sunday School; he boarded with the Kerrigans and was 
extemely fussy about his meals. With dyspeptic distaste he 
would reject the flakiest pastry, the most appetizing dishes, 
and murmur with a martyred air, 

M No thank you, Mrs. Kerrigan, no indeed! But if 
I could have another slice of bread — a little on the stale 
side — and perhaps toasted...?" 

Nor had Griselda forgiven Mr. Hackett for his tacit 
support of Glenn Pierson on an occasion when she had returned, 
later than usual, from a Women’s Club meeting. It had been a 
good meeting, well attended, and friendly. Mrs. Redding, the 
one woman who created difficulties, had been absent, and the 
afternoon passed pleasantly. Griselda got back at six, to 
find that Jasper had been detained in Maverick, and that the 
store was full of people sitting around waiting for the mail 
and supplies. Joe and Walter were waiting on them, and Emma 
had supper nearly ready. Griselda returned to the store, won¬ 
dering if it would not be possible to close up, for there was 
every chance that Jasper would not come until the next day. 

She spoke to several of the men, and paused for a 
word with Walter behind the counter. 

"You ladies just finished your meeting?" demanded 
Oliver Harris. 

"’bout time," said another man jokingly. "If I’d 











CHAPTER VI 


-104 


been waiting at home for my old woman to get me supper, I*d 
f ve given her it good!" 

'•well, now she*s waiting for you to come an f eat!" 
returned Griselda, in the same spirit, "and’ X*ll bet that 
she v/aits ten times for your one!" 

"Might be so at that," admitted the man with a grin 

"Aw, women oughta stay at home, an* lucky to have 
a home," said G-lenn Pierson truculently. He was a loud-voiced, 
bullying man whom Griselda disliked: his faded, frightened 
little wife did not join the Club because "Glenn doesn*t like 
it." He looked challengingly around him, insolently towards 
Griselda, and concluded, 

"Women got no business to be gadding about all the 
time — too much of that nowadays. Oughta stay home, even if 
you gotta keep *em barefoot and the time — or pregnant!" 

"Oh — hold yer trap I" Albert Horner, a bachelor 
homesteader from north of the store, pushed forward to the 
counter. "Walter, 1*11 take that stuff now an 1 come back 
tomorrow for the mail." 

"Barefoot or pregnant IThat *s the way to keep *em 
home!" Glenn Pierson, not to be put down, stood there grinning 

Then Mr. Hackett disgraced himself for ever in Griselda* eyes. 

"Ha!" said Mr. Hackett. He did not sound particu¬ 
larly amused, but then he never did. After his one brief ex¬ 
plosion, Mr. Hackett left the store. Griselda was furious, 














CHAPTER VI 


-105 - 


less at G-lenn Pierson than at Mr. Hackett, but she controlled 
her voice and spoke firmly. 

”It’s past closing time. I don’t expect Jasper 
home tonight. You’d better close up, Joe — supper’s ready.” 

She swished out the back door and the men dis¬ 
persed, Pierson grumbling loudly. 

"Thinks she can lead the community ’round by the 
nose — Hell, somebody oughta show her different....!” 

Griselda was able to pass over the hostility of 
Pierson, whom she had long since dismissed as ignorant and 
classified in her list of ’no-goods’. But she could not for¬ 
give Mr. Hackett who had thus allied himself with the forces 
of barbarity. 

Mr. Hackett remained quite unconscious of his 
crime. In fact, if he had seemed to applaud Glenn Pierson’s 
coarse remark, it was not because he sympathized with Pierson, 
or resented Griselda. Mr. Hackett felt he had reason to dis¬ 
trust women, and was, in his Rolling Slopes period, a misog- 
yn 

^mist. 

In Ontario, where he had lived and taught since 
leaving his native Ireland, Mr. Hackett had courted for a 
decade a lady of discreet age, mildy pleasing appearance, 
and modest means. As she was the devoted daughter of an 
invalid mother, Mr. Hackett waited until the latter’s death 
to declare himself. His lady love asked for a little more 

















. . 


- 











* 




















CHAPTER VI 


- 106 - 


time to make up her mind. She went on a trip in the interim, 
and two months later she wrote to Mr. Haokett, declining 
his proposal with appropriate sentiments and stating that 
she was about to be married to the captain of a Great Lakes 
freighter. 

Mr. Hackett, seriously chagrined, left his com¬ 
fortable school and the knowing smiles of his fellow towns¬ 
men, and, like many another disappointed lover, went to the 
wilds. 

His story was, of course, unknown at Rolling 

^ 5 0^ 

Slopes, where he was looked u$ an eccentric, cranky, middle- 
aged bachelor who existed solely to instruct the young. 

Had it been known, it would have gained him no more sympathy 
than did his dyspepsia. 

At the end of the term, Mr. Hackett was not in¬ 
vited to remain for another year. Unregretting and unre¬ 
gretted he left, to be succeeded the next year by a young 
lady, who for the few months she remained was a satisfactory 
inmate of Griselda f s household and a conscientious member 
of the Women T s Institute. 

The objectionable Pierson departed quite volun¬ 
tarily in 1915. He had never bothered Griselda very much: 
his opposition was of the kind that she took for granted 
would arise from disreputable sub-strata that Rolling Slopes, 
like every other community, possessed. Bluster and ignorance 
















CHAPTER VI 


- 107 ~ 


were the weapons of this opposition and Griselda did not fear 
them. The Piersons and the Dan Meades she knew she could deal 
with in short order. 

But in proportion as the community grew, she dis¬ 
covered another type of opposition for which she was not 
prepared. It came from among those she had regarded as her 
supporters, those she unhesitatingly classed as ’worthwhile’, 
in contrast to the ’no-goods’. There was no question of prin¬ 
ciple involved: these people like herself, looked forward to 
progress, upheld decency and honesty, godliness and cleanli¬ 
ness. But in working with them, she felt from time to time, 
a hidden friction, a veiled resentment for which she could 
find no cause. She did not realize that the cause lay partly 
within her: that she had little talent for putting herself 
in another person’s place, and looking at matters through 
another’s eyes. Her life had been spent to date, largely 
apart from other women, and of women she had little under¬ 
standing. Men she could usually manage: they liked her, 
unless they had reason to feel that her dark, level gaze 
was critical. And with young people and children she was as 
a rule popular, for she spoke to them as though they were 
adults, a fact which overweighed the tinge of authority in 
her tone. 

In spite of this feeling that something in her 
relations with others was not quite right, Griselda enjoyed 










CHAPTER VI 


- 108 - 


these years. She was busy, and employment was necessary to 
her happiness. The store prospered, and she came in for a 
little money under the terms of Uncle Jacob Leslie’s will. 

Part of it she invested in the business, the rest in insur¬ 
ance. She thought briefly and regretfully that she had never 
repaid Uncle Jacob as her mother had wished, and that how it 
was too late. The regrets did not linger, for there was too 
much to think of at Rolling Slopes. 

The outbreak of the war in 1914 gave her a few 
anxious months. Walter tried twice to enlist, but was each 
time rejected as unfit. He returned, very subdued, to Rolling 
Slopes and took up his work with the farm and the store. 

Others in the district, mostly bachelors like Albert Horner 
and Dave Wilkie, went overseas. Their going made little 
real difference to the community. Other families came in, 
and the district became closely settled. Even to the west, 
on the other side of the long, wedge-shaped southern tip of 
the rangeland, there were scattered homesteads. 

Most of the time, the war seemed far-off, unreal, 
even impossible. Griselda had come to love the rolling land: 
beneath its network of roads and fences, it seemed tamer, 
smaller, less terrifying. Houses and farm buildings scattered 
over it reduced the effect of distance: the fields were varied 
by crop, fallow, and pasture, so that the deadly sameness of 
the prairie was no longer there to intimidate and depress. 














CHAPTER VI 


- 109 - 


Only sometimes, in the twilight, as the handiwork of man 
faded into the greyness, the country ceased to be a suc¬ 
cession of fenced fields and individual farms. Then, as 
darkness fell, the prairie reasserted itself in its gigantic 
entirety. Save for the spots of light twinkling here and 
there, it seemed that man was not upon its vast surface: 
that with the coming of dusk, his discipline over the land 
had ceased. 

Griselda’s moments of doubt were few and far 
between, for she was busy and happy. At the bottom of her 
heart, she was deeply thankful that Walter was not over¬ 
seas. Since her son was spared, she felt she ov/ed something 
in return, and this feeling transformed itself into energetic 
support of Red Cross war work. Many members of the Women’s 
Club supported her loyally: a few Germans and two or three 
Americans were antagonistic or indifferent. There was even 
a time, after three successful years, when the club was in 
danger of splitting over this very issue. It hung on, however, 
until 1917, when the entry of America into the war brought 
about a reversal of the attitude of the American members. 

In the same year, Doris Price and Emma Kerrigan were old 
enough to join, and Griselda began to feel that its future 
was assured. 

It was her wont when things went awry in the club, 
to console herself with the thought that in the Sunday School 





< ■■■■■■■ • < 

t 

. : - 

i 

.. ... 

< 

* 


. . . . ' • - ~ • - - - ' - • 

: 

: 

t ■. . •- i : < ' ' 

t . . . - - . 

..... - ' •: ... ' . ? t , 

{ ■: . ; . 

■ 

. 














CHAPTER VI 


no 


at least, all went well. The 3unday School had flourished 
since its start in 1913* Mr. Hackett had given it a brief 
setback by his refusal to take a class, and for a summer 
a man capable of dealing with the boys had been sought in 
vain. Henry Burton had started the class, but since joined 
the army. Walter Kerrigan could not keep order, and finally 
his father filled the breach. Jasper proved an excellent 
Sunday School teacher in most respects: the only one of his 
pupils he could really consider a failure was Ches Meade. 

Ches f defection was a serious disappointment to 
Griselda too. She had been sure that Sunday School would 
help to solve the problem of Ches, whom, considering his 
tender years, she had been determined to rescue from the 
f no-good f strata, where by environment and heredity he be¬ 
longed, and transplant firmly among the worthwhiles. But her 
own childhood had been harsh and serious, and she had little 
understanding of the newer, freer youth that was growing up 
around her. Occasionally she noted with disapproval the 
frivolities that appeared to engross them: but she had ab¬ 
solutely no conception of the undercurrents that seethed 
and boiled among these juvenile minds when they were dealing 
only with each other. Indeed the whole chain of events leading 
to Ches Meade f s forswearing of Sabbath School for ever was 
probably iaooiaprehessible to most adult mind©. 

It began on a pleasant sunny May morning in 1913* 

























CHAPTER VI 


- Ill 


Ches almost gave up Sunday School in favor of a ramble down 
the coulee, when he recollected that there had been a rumor 
of a picnic to come. Hastily he donned his cleanest shirt, 
and arrived at the school well in advance of the Price»s 
buggy, five minutes before the Kerrigan*s. Having thought¬ 
fully scrambled a few books about from desk to desk, not 
omitting to include his own in the mixup, he was sitting 
quietly in his seat when the Kerrigans entered. 

Jasper took his place in the porch to ensure that 
the flock came indoors at once, and did not loiter to play 
hopscotch in the yard. Emma was not with her parents: she 
had spent the weekend with Doris Price, her inseparable 
friend. The two girls affected identical styles in dress 
and hair-do whenever it was possible: on this occasion, the 
big ribbon bow tying up a loop of braids at the nape of the 
neck was far more becoming to the rosy-cheeked Emma than 
the thin-faced Doris. 

Mrs. Kerrigan, with a frown at her daughter, 
turned to test the organ, pumping smartly on one pedal at 
a time and listening critically to be sure that no wandering 
field mouse had established quarters within. Under cover of 
the organ, the girls resumed their surreptitious attacks 
on Ches. Usually they tolerated him with superior scorn, 
but today they were furious. Ches was mildly surprised. 

“They’re still mad about yesterday/ 1 he thought, 


“Girls are funny... J ” 










CHAPTER VI 


- 112 


He was quite right when he assigned the reason 
for Emma’s and Dori’s un-Sunday-like mood to the events of 
the preceding day# 

Price’s homestead lay two miles east and a mile 
south of Dan’s, and the farm buildings stood a short distance 
back from the edge of the big coulee. Ches, left to his own 
devices during Dan’s absence, had made himself a generous 
lunch of bread and hard-boiled eggs, and set out to spend 
the Saturday afternoon down the coulee. Coming opposite 
Price’s farm, he was attracted by the sound of laughter and 
shouting in the yard. 

The younger Prices had been joined in their game 
by their older sister and her bosom friend, Emma Kerrigan. 

At the moment they were engaged in that classic favorite. 

King of the Castle. 

"I’m the King of the Castle!" chanted Jackie Price. 

"An’ you’re the dirty rascal!" as he repelled 
the attackers, running one at a time from below to dislodge 
him. 

Jackie’s eminence was the top of the old manure 
pile, the accumulation of seven years, outside the wide doors 
of the Price stable and cowbarn. Only on the stable side, 
where it abutted on the rapidly-growing new manure-pile, did 
it partake of the traditional nature of dung-heaps. On the 
other three sides, the old manure pile was dry, sun-baked, 




' 

■ ... - ■ ' .. 




. * 




- 






t 


«, ' 

. • 



« : ’ • 


: .. c > 





* 



- 






. 




. 

f; 


i 










• 



tS 




» 





■: t -■ 




* 








, : ■ ‘ * 


■ 


* 





, 


r r 














CHAPTER VI 


- 113 - 


and leached into an inoffensive blackish mound, dry and 
scattered at the base, sufficiently high in the middle to 
make it an ideal site for King of the Castle, 

Normally Emma and Doris would have despised this 
particularly childish game played in such deplorable sur¬ 
roundings, But it was summer, and they were bored. They joined 
in with zest, their superiority in age and weight offset by 
the awkward length of their skirts, well below the knee. 

Ches’s appearance at the top of the coulee was 
hailed with glee by the little boys with whom he allied him¬ 
self as a matter of course. 

"I’m the King of the Castle, 

An f you’re the dirty rascalJ" 

Ches gained the peak of the old manure pile almost 
at once. Then the girls, most unfairly, combined to storm the 
castle. Ches sidestepped the rush, and, unable to stop herself 
in time, the lighter Doris went flying down the slope to land 
in the ’new’ manure pile. Solid Emma, a trifle in the rear, 
tried to stop, stumbled, and rolled down, on top of her friend 
It was unfortunate that, at that precise moment, Pete, the 
Pricers hired man, should have thrown out of the barn a gen¬ 
erous forkful. Atempting to rise, the bemired damsels got the 
full benefit of this new shower. It did not turn their atten¬ 
tion from the original sinner. 

"He pushed me I Ches pushed me!" sobbed Doris, 



















CHAPTER VI 


- 114 - 


"You did it on purpose I" raged Emma, shaking out 
the skirts of her dress. It was her new dress: she had been 
permitted to take it on this weekend visit on the under¬ 
standing that she wore it only to Sunday School. 

"Well, Well] Weill" was Pete’s verbal contribution 
to the argument. He then wisely withdrew, feeling no doubt 
that one scapegoat was sufficient. 

The scapegoat likewise withdrew, and with his 
allies, Jackie and Bert, got a ride to the store with Mr. 
Price who did not take a serious view of the episode. At 
the store, they told all with some glee, being of the one 
opinion that for the girls to make such a fuss about a 
little manure was absurd. 

Thus Mrs. Kerrigan, knowing her daughter’s vanity 
about clothes, was not surprised to see Emma at Sunday School 
in her everyday school dress. Ches, who had already dismissed 
the episode from his mind, was innocently surprised at the 
hostility of his schoolmates. 

Into this seething cauldron of juvenile emotion, 
the Sunday School teachers hopefully poured the day’s lesson. 
So far as Doris and Emma were concerned, the hour of reli¬ 
gious instruction but left them the more embittered. Ready 
and willing to impart to their elders the information that 
Ches was the viper in the bosom, they found no ear inclined 
their way. Instead, they received cold looks and an acid 











t 







$ 
















CHAPTER VI 


- 115 - 


rebuke from Mrs. Kerrigan for whispering. 

Tom Harris and ohes, sitting together, exchanged 
a secret and gratified glance when Mr. Kerrigan got up and 
opened the window. They were firmly convinced that had he 
done so any earlier his wife would have closed it again. 

For Jasper Kerrigan, model husband, pioneer, storekeeper, 
postmaster, and community leader, chewed tobacco. Quietly 
and unassumingly, never objectionably. Nevertheless the 
ends of his lovely white silvery mustache were faintly 
yellowed, uriselda, whom most of her neighbors wrongly 
suspected of ruling Jasper with a rod of iron, deplored the 
habit, never more so than on Sunday School mornings. Jasper 
did not take his chew to church with him, for the Lord 
exacted his attendance at Church, and Jasper was a sincerely 
religious man. But so far as he was concerned, Sunday School 
was purely voluntary and he chewed surreptitiously at Sunday 
School. But as standard Alberta school equipment was never 
known to include a cuspidor, the open window was a necessity. 
Griselda sighed as the sash slid up. 

Jasper assigned the memory verses for the next 7/eek. 

«.WHAT THING-S SOEVER YE DESIRE, WHEN YE PRAY 

BELIEVE THAT YE RECEIVE THEM, AND YE SHALL HAVE THEM...” 

He finished the verses and embarked upon a para¬ 
phrase, turning occasionally to the open window, outside 






















UHAPTER VI 


- 116 - 


in the schoolyard a meadowlark fluted shrilly: the pleasant 
draught from the open window caused the dust particles to 
dance in the sunbeams slanting in from the high ventilators 
at the other side of the room. Inside the room one person 
at least was struggling with a new thought, and for the first 
time in his short life, seriously applying his mind to 
religion. 

Ghes wanted a pony of his own. He wanted to 
break it himself, train it, and name it. Dan had long ago 
promised him his own horse, but the actual presentation 
was deferred on the excuse that he should wait until he was 
bigger and then get a good animal. To this proposal Ghes 
was quite agreeable, but now he was nearly fourteen. 

WHATSOEVER THINGS YE DESIRE... BELIEVE...AND YE 
SHALL HAVE THEM... 

It sounded all right. Ghes was shy of broaching 
the subject in class but he waylaid Mr. Kerrigan afterwards. 

"Does that mean.♦. anything ?" 

The storekeeper, a little touched by this sign of 
interest in a far from promising quarter, was reassuring. 

He wondered what idea the boy had and was both cautious and 
hopeful. 

"Well...Yes, I guess it might, Ghes. Anything that 
it’s right an* proper for us to have, an ! doesn T t hurt other 
people. Of course we have to do our best to get it for 


















CHAPTER VI 


- 117 - 




ourselves an’ work for what we want too..." 

Ches thought the matter over as he jogged home 
on swaybacked old Doc, and it was on his mind while he soberly 
settled down to clean the shack that afternoon. Then he went 
out to the barn and selected a corner for a single stall. 

His was, after a devious fashion, a one-track mind. Upon it 
ideas which did not coincide with his own made small impression. 
But, so far as he could see, his desire for his own pony was 
all right with Mr. Kerrigan, in spite of the fact that the 
latter knew nothing about it. It seemed moreover to find 
support in Holy Writ, which hitherto had been quite incompre¬ 
hensible to Ches, sliding off the surface of his mind without 
making the least impression. 

Ches put in a month’s attendance at school and 
Sunday School and in July got himself a job. G-riselda was 
pleasantly surprised, feeling that at last Ches was getting 
some sense. 

That summer the great struggle in Europe was well 
under way. A few homesteads at Rolling Slopes lay idle, or 
were farmed by renters, including those of big Dave ’Wilkie, 
the long-jawed Yorkshireman, and Albert Horner, whose little 
house, a mile north of Dan Meade’s shack, had never been 
finished. Albert’s reunion with his Maude had taken place 
in England, in wartime, and not in Canada, as they had planned 
three years before. The Grasmere Ranch was short-handed, and 


















CHAPTER VI 


- 118 - 


farmers talked of a possible shortage of faim labor. 

The summer passed, a good year with July moisture. 
The grain waved on the slopes of the little hills, the low 
land slough bottoms were rank with coarse grass, the road¬ 
sides green knee high. The season was the homesteader *s 
dream come true, and Jasper reminded his wife of his prophecy, 
years before, 

"In ten years we f ll go east.... Remember how I 
always said this country T ud fill up. They said it wouldn f t 
grow grain, an f look at it I" 

He paused for a moment. 

"When the railway comes through here..." 

But the railway was not to come for another ten 
years, and in the meantime the grain was hauled to Maverick 
(where the number of grain elevators had grown to four). 

Sixty miles by wagon was the round trip, and the loaded, 
creaking wagons lumbered up the little hills, down the slopes, 
heavy with grain to be sent overseas to feed nations at war. 
The return trip, unless made with a load of the winter f s 
coal, was less slov/; the empty wagon bumped and rattled 
over the winding trail, for there was still unfenced, 
unoccupied land between Rolling Slopes and Maverick. 

In the sharp, clear autumn air the grassy range 
was tawny and russet and the wild-rose bushes a ruddy flame 
where frost had touched but not yet withered them. Empty 









CHAPTER VI 


- 119 - 


fields were golden with stubble or dotted with stooks awaiting 
late threshing. Straw-stacks stood out against the blue 
sky. Occasionally the prairie chicken whirred away from 
the road. Wild ducks passed quacking and the hoarse cawing 
of the crows disturbed the calm. 

Ches Meade hauled grain that fall like many another 
boy of his age. He had worked for nearly four months for 
Bennett, a prosperous farmer. His wages amounted to more 
than enough to buy the pony. He drove Bennett to Maverick 
to board the train for Calgary, and entrusted the man with 
the important commission of buying the pony. Then Ches 
himself would go up in a week or two and ride it back. 

But Dan Meade, his own harvest completed, went 
to Calgary that same week. The two men met, and Bennett, 
carelessly or unwittingly, passed the job of negotiating 
for the pony over to Dan. And that was the end of the 
matter for that year. Dan was apologetic when he sobered 
up, almost pitifully contrite. Bit by bit he paid the 
money back. But Ches never forgave him,.and never called 
him ’Uncle f again. 

He stopped going to Sunday School too, and when 
questioned by Mrs. Kerrigan, was sullen and impertinent. 
Griselda was disappointed: she had sincerely hoped that 
at last the problem of Ches Meade was solved, between 
school, Sunday School, and a good job over the summer. 
















CHAPTER VI 


120 


/l 

But Ches was.impervious to Sunday School and openly scornful 

n 

of those who attended. He continued to go to school however 
for another year and a half, and, as the biggest boy in 
the class, provided a problem to tax the ingenuity and 
patience of any teacher. 






























CHAPTER VII 


121 


COMMUNITY 

By 1916, the Rolling Slopes schoolhouse had 
lost its look of pristine newness: the green roof was 
fading in the sun, and two cracks had appeared in one of 
the high ventilators. The three ash-piles in the yard were 
of fair size, and the fence showed traces of depredations 
on the part of the rangeland cattle* This school, like 
many of its kind, scattered across the prairies, was 
beginning to look a little tired, a little apologetic* 

And well it might. At the moment it no longer 
represented to the community the blessings and privileges 
of free education for their young. It was instead a storm 
centre, the knotty core of a serious problem. As Oliver 













: .. 

. ■ ■ 

. 

■ 

* •• • ' , ; 





. 








l 


■ 





















CHAPTER VII 


122 


Harris, the chairman of the School Board, had just remarked, 
it was "a damned nuisance.” 

Unusual for mid-July, a buggy and horse and two 
saddle ponies were standing outside the school. In the door¬ 
way of the inoffensive little building, the Board was holding 
a meeting. Two of its members had had a rendezvous on the 
spot to look over the school property: the third had chanced 
to pass by. 

"’Tain’t a school — it’s a gol-darned matrimonial 
agency!" said Oliver Harris morosely. He scratched a match 
down his overalled leg. "Dratted girls...I” 

"Miss Pringle was a good teacher," said Jasper 
Kerrigan reprovingly. "An* so was Miss Amesworth. ’Course 
Miss Herrick couldn’t keep order, but she was a real nice 
little thing. I did think that Miss Black mighta stayed 
for another term, but..." 

He glanced down at the letter in his hand which 
informed the board that their fourth teacher in the last 
two years was resigning. 

"Must be the warI" he murmured sadly. 

The third member, Olaf Olson, ever slow of speech, 
said nothing, although his companions paused to give him 
opportunity to express his opinion upon the subject of 
matrimony versus school-teaching. Olaf had eight children 
and his keen interest in both sides of the matter was taken 






















CHAPTER VII 


- 123 - 


for granted. 

"Well,” summed up Jasper Kerrigan, "sheis gone!" 

His gaze and those of his fellows wandered out 
to the horizon, as if following the form of the lost Miss 
Black into the tender blue haze. 

"We’d better start lookin T around," said Oliver 
Harris glumly. "It f s your turn, Jasper. I got the last 
one •" 

Jasper silently recalled the last-minute plea of 

his wife. 

"Now, Jasper, do try an f hold out for somebody 
that f 11 be company for me, seeing as how I’ll have to board 
herl I get so sick of those silly young girls! An’ someone 
with a good stiff hand over those young-uns — that Ches Meade!. 

"Wish we could get a man!" he murmured, knowing 
what the response would be. 

"Iss no men!" Olaf, with a family of girls, was 
already anticipating a labor shortage at harvest time. 

"Aw — you 1 re crazy, man! There’s a war on!" 

Jasper shifted his chew of tobacco. 

"Well — how about an older woman, or a married 

one?" 

"Oughta be at home takin’ care of their families!" 
said Oliver Harris, who had decide views on female suffrage. 























CHAPTER VII 


124 - 


"There f s married women that ! s good teachers an* 
got husbands at the front an* no family," said Jasper. 

"Yahi " 

"By golly, that's sol Put an ad in the Calgary 
paper, Jasper1 An* next one of us to go to town can look 
around." 

The matter thus settled, the Board meeting passed 
on to other things. 

Rolling Slopes awaited the reopening of school 
with some interest. The casualty rate among unmarried female 
teachers had to date been one hundred percent, and public 
opinion deplored the fact that matrimony, an admirable 
institution, contributed so lavishly to the filling of the 
classroom rather than to improving the quantity of instruction 
available therein. 

Mrs. MacGillis, who had been Miss Tweedie for 
thirty-eight years and Mrs. MacGillis for three, arrived at 
Rolling Slopes in September. She was sturdy, Scottish, 
energetic and able, and under her hand education thrived 
as never before and seldom afterwards at Rolling Slopes. 

At the time of Mrs. MacGillis*s arrival, Griselda 
was beginning to feel her self-imposed community duties 
weighing a little heavily upon her. She was the accepted 
leader in such matters, and she was beginning to wish she 


_ 


















CHAPTER VII 


125 " 


had a dependable helper. She had lived apart too long to 
make friends of her own age: her interests lay more among 
the younger people, and she welcomed the arrival of 
Mrs. MacGillis with high hopes. Three months later she 
thought with surprise that that had been the warmest moment 
of their acquaintance. For acquaintance it remained, never 
developing into friendship in spite of the many likenesses 
between them and their respect for each other. Like two 
circles, they could touch only at one point — the community. 
Here and here alone, Griselda and Mrs. MacGillis were in 
perfect agreement. The war work thrived that year in spite 
of the apathy of many club members. And Mrs. MacGillis 
was a most admirable teacher. 

The school girls learned to sew, knit, and crochet. 
Mrs. MacGillis gave some of them, who possessed a parlor 
organ at home, music lessons. She taught in the Sunday 
School, and in the year and a half of her stay, she instilled 
the habit of industry into a number of her pupils. 

It looked for a time as if she might even make 
something of Ches Meade. Warnings about him, she had received 
in plenty before he put in a belated appearance at school. 

Mrs. MacGillis listened until she caught the drift of the 
conversation, and then put an end to it bluntly. 

“That may be very true,” she said drily, “but 
ye will have to let me make up my mind for myself I n 



























CHAPTER VII 


- 126 - 


When Ches appeared at school, she disciplined 
him within an inch of his life. Only his hope of taking 
an important part in the Christmas Concert kept him at 
school after his first day with Mrs. MacGillis. 

In Western Canadian rural schools, the Christmas 
Concert was far more than a neat rounding-off of the 
school term. It was the hall-mark of the teacher’s ability, 
the measuring stick by which the community gauged the quality 
of the instruction imparted. Every one went to the annual 
concert in his own district and to as many others as time 
and distance permitted. Then the performances were carefully 
compared as to quality and quantity, and the teachers ranked 
in their order of merit. 

Mrs. MacGillis, a veteran teacher with a fund of 
experience to draw from, entered this contest well equipped. 
She had, moreover, thirty-five pupils of well-assorted ages 
to work with. 

In the middle of November, she planned her concert. 
By judicious use of that stage device known a s tableau , she 
was able to get her whole school on the stage at once in six 
items: four songs and two tableaux. Every child in the school 
thus appeared in at least eight items: no mean feat in itself. 
The first tableau was religious, the second patriotic — 
a nice balance of the two themes prevalent in the public mind 
at that period. 
























CHAPTER VII 


- 127 - 


Play-books were eagerly passed around from hand 
to hand and the parts copied out. Words to the songs and 
carols were written on the blackboard at recess by Mrs. 
MacGillis, or by willing helpers whose handwritings were 
decipherable. It is only just to add that there were, by 
the middle of November, more of the latter in the school by 
far than there had been at the beginning of September. 
Recitations were assigned, all the way from six-year old 
Oscar Olson f s 

When I was a little boy, just so high 
My mother used to spank me and make me cry I 
Now I’m a big boy, Mother doesn’t do it— 

Daddy takes the broomstick and goes right to iti 

to his big sister’s placid rendering of 

’Twas the night before Christmas and all through 

the house...• • 

with one slight improvement of the poet’s wording in the 
forty-third line. 

Having successfully squelched Ches, she meditated 
upon her victory and appraised it for what it was worth. 
After the middle of November Ches found himself in a new 
position — almost that of deputy to Mrs. MacGillis. The 
reserve of mutual distrust broke down between them, and he 
improvised and shifted stage fittings and impromptu scenery, 
heard the stumbling rehearsals of the younger children, 
came early and stayed late. He revealed a latent mechanical 
talent and considerable ability in acting. For two nights 







- 


. - 

. 

; ' " • ,j ■ . ■ ■ ;;;/: • : : tj \v :-.0 .16 Tit ...' 1v'/ 

...'. . . .. • . '• .. < - ■ 

t 

' 

. 


: • ; ' . * . . " . ; . • ■ '! rrs 







j 






. 



















CHAPTER VII 


- 128 - 


while the north wind wailed and whistled in the tin stove¬ 
pipe and Dan tossed and snored on his cot, Ches worked 
late, memorizing his own lengthy parts in the program. 

About two o f clock he blew out the dim flame of the coaloil 
lamp and went to bed, stiff, tired, and word-perfect in his 
parts. 

The improved state of affairs lasted for six weeks 
and Mrs. MacGillis began to wonder if she had solved the 
problem of Ches Meade. 

The day of the concert arrived, dull and cold and 
bleak. A few sad snowflakes shivered down, dancing uncertainly 
in the chilly wind that moaned in the eaves of the little 
school and stirred the paper decorations before the cracked 
ventilator. Inside the building the class were adding the 
last touches to the decorations. 

"Suppose it blizzards? It f s awful dark outside1” 
Laura Olson draped a long red streamer across the window and 
Doris Price carefully tacked it down with a cluster of card¬ 
board holly leaves at each end. 

”0h, I hope not!” said Doris anxiously. "What’ll 
we do if it storms?” 

The corners of fat Oscar Olson’s mouth turned down 
at the notion, but his round blue eyes grew cheerful again 
as the big boys scoffed at the possibility. 

"Who cares about a little snow?” muttered Tom Harris. 






. 






. . 




V 




' 

< 

. ... ■ 

. 

* 

* 






. I - 




























CHAPTER VII 


- 129 - 


"Maybe it f ll clear by eight o’clock. Dan said 
it wouldn’t storm today." Ches descended from his perch 
on the cloakroom partitions where he had been stringing a 
green-and-red paper chain to best advantage. 

Mrs. MacGillis, supervising the practice of a 
drill on the little platform at the front, while Emma 
Kerrigan played the organ, reflected that it should be as 
good a concert as any to found elsewhere. 

By eight o’clock the stars glittered overhead, 
twinkled dully towards the horizon, and the wind had dropped. 
Sounds made several miles away could be distinctly heard.... 
the gruff bark of Olson’s big dog... the creaking and groaning 
of a wooden gate in the ranch corral... A horse whinnied 
shrilly in a field to the left. Griselda, sitting in the 
back of the sleigh, looked out over the prairie, stretching 
away into infinity. The horizon was invisible, the land 
was vast, but not dead, no longer lonely. Lights twinkled 
out there to the south, to the east: they drove between 
the fences that represented man’s dominion over the earth. 

"Cold?" asked Jasper. 

"No." 

It was not the cold that troubled her: she hardly 
felt it through the thick robes. Nor was it any sense of 
being impotent against the stern wilderness. It was simply 
and solely — Emma. 














CHAPTER VII 


- 130 - 


Emma, who should have been sitting with her mother 
in the sleigh, was not there. She was coming later — driving 
over with Henry Burton, who was. home on leave from the Army, 
who had been to the Kerrigans to supper a few nights before. 

Griselda was perturbed.. Emma was still at school, 
for Mrs# MacGillis taught ten grades among her thirty-five 
students. Emma was, however, seventeen, and for the first 
time, that fact stood out clearly to her mother, who had 
hitherto seen her as a schoolgirl, a little daughter who 
would one day be grown up, but not yet. 

Behind them the bells of the cutter jingled 
merrily. Joe, who was driving at the moment, pulled over, 
and Henry and Emma swept by with a shout, a peal of laughter. 
The heavy sleigh dragged through a drift that the cutter 
had floated over, and Walter commented unfeelingly, 

”Just as well Emma went with Henry! We’d stick 
for sure with her holding down the back of the sleigh!” 

Jasper and Joe laughed. Emma’s weight was a 
standing family joke. But Griselda frowned in the dark, 
annoyed that they should jest about the child who had just 
loomed as her mother’s major worry. 

Griselda was ambitious for Emma. She had once 
dreamed of seeing Walter in a profession, but the years had 
crept by, the difficulties of education had been too great, 















CHAPTER VII 


- 131 - 


and the business needed him* She was reconciled to Walter’s 
future lying in Rolling Slopes. But for Emma she had planned 
ahead. Money was not scarce now, and with another year of 
high school Emma would be able to start specialized training. 
Griselda favored Normal School for her daughter. Emma herself 
thought she would like a business course: her father thought 
she would look well in a nurse’s uniform if she was going 
to work at all. His whole attitude was lukewarm on the 
question of Emma’s leaving home. Griselda knew quite well 
that when Emma made up her mind, her father would support 
her solidly. 

She remembered her own years of isolation after 
her marriage, and resolved anew that Emma would see something 
of the world before she married. 

M She is not going to get married too youngl I 
won’t have her stuck out on a farm for life before she’s 
twenty! M 

The sleigh stopped before the school and they all 
got out. Mrs. MacGillis bore a box of necessaries for the 
concert, Griselda carried in her pail of sandwiches, Jasper 
brought the lamps, and Joe fetched up the rear with the 
copper washboiler for the coffee. 

Ches Meade, making up the fire, greeted them 
politely. The schoolroom was in darkness for a moment or 













. ; 


. 








•• - 


,. *j 








. • 
















CHAPTER VII 


- 132 - 


two, save for the ruddy glow from the coals• The lamps 
when lit revealed the sparkling tree squeezed in beside 
the organ, the red and green paper decorations, and Henry 
Burton and Emma talking decorously at the front of the 
stage. The girl spoke to Mrs. MacGillis and then turned 
away to arrange her music on the organ. Henry*s brown face 
was bland and good-natured as ever: he met Griselda’s eye 
without confusion and greeted her respectfully. Griselda 
was short with him. But her brooding was quickly interrupted. 

Sleighs were arriving outside: voices called 
back and forth. Mrs. Olson entered, surrounded by her 
children, all rosy from the cold air. She spent a busy few 
minutes straightening rumpled sleeves and skirts and combing 
the flowing golden manes of her flock. Upon these gala 
occasions, the little girls appeared with their blonde hair 
loose and flowing, tied back with stiff little pink and blue 
bows, the envy of all their schoolmates with plain braids, 
or dark, lank locks. 

The Harrises came next, and Tom, scrubbed and 
polished till highlights glinted from his hair, his face, 
and his new boots, creaked importantly up to Ches to confer 
upon some item of stage management. Then both boys, extremely 
conscious of their own importance, vanished behind the stage 
curtain. Younger members of the school had perforce to sit, 




















CHAPTER VII 


- 133 - 


wriggling with excitement, in their appointed places on the 
front benches, and wait there until bidden to go behind the 
scenes. 

Griselda looked at her grey flannelette bed-sheets 
that had for three years served as stage curtains. Half her 
mind made a mental note that the Women’s Institute might 
be asked to contribute a set of stage curtains for school 
and community use. The other half observed with irritation 
that Henry Burton was being very active in helping Mrs. 

Mac Gillis and Emma move the organ. 

In the cloakroom, the audience congregated, talk¬ 
ing and laughing, seemingly reluctant to enter the school. 
Lunches were unpacked; Jasper Kerrigan set the big washboiler 
of coffee on top of the heater, and Griselda measured out 
the coffee and tied it in a sugar sack. All around, the 
chatter rose and fell. 

"....does seem too bad. I’ve been thinking maybe 
the Red Cross group should send some more parcels overseas.•• M 
"....three pairs of socks knitted I’ll bring down.” 
"....an’ I said to her, ’Gloria’, I said, ’You’re 
cuttin’ off your nose to spite your face, that’s what..J" 

"....braied up tight and vet . When iss dry, I comb 
it oudt... Iss real pretty and curly then..." 

"....sit in those little narrow seats? It can’t 


be donej" 















CHAPTER VII 


- 134 - 


“...•smell that hair oil of his half-a-mile down 

the roadJ” 

“....kids said the Dragon has a face just like 
Kaiser Bill — mustaches and alll I sure want to see itl“ 

The few strangers present were recent arrivals 
in neighboring communities. The Prescotts, who had settled 
west of the lease during the summer, were present with their 
sixteen-year old daughter, Mabel. She was a peach-tinted 
blonde, whose long, dark-green, rabbit-lined coat set off 
to perfection her exquisite coloring, her slightly vapid 
beauty. Well aware of the fact, she did not for some time 
remove the coat, but unbuttoned it so that her slim white 
neck and golden crown of hair rose dazzlingly from the dark 
cloth, the furry softness. 

At a quarter to nine the chairman of the school 
board mounted the edge of the platform in front of the 
curtain. Behind him, waves and billows in the grey flannelette 
of Mrs. Kerrigan’s sheets indicated intense activity upon 
the stage. Progress from front to back of the crowded school 
was now impossible, since boards were laid along the seats, 
crossing the aisles to make extra accommodation. A row of 
young lads from outside the district perched on the cloakroom 
partition at the back, and men stood in the doorways and along 
the windows at the side of the room. 

Simultaneously with Mr. Harris’s first word, a 
baby at the back burst into loud wails. Undiscouraged, the 


















■ 

I 










* 










. 



• 





{' 



. 



: • .. 






. 




. 




£ 

. 












* 

















t : ■ * - ' ^I| 

* . 

..’ : C . 












* 




: 





, . 


, . .: : . ..... . 

■ 






■ • 5 . 


/ 'J . 




* 








. 

























CHAPTER VII 


- 135 - 


chairman raised a voice that could, under normal weather con¬ 
ditions, be heard for a quarter of a mile all aroung him, and 
proceeded to welcome his neighbors and all strangers present 
to the entertainment# 

,, ##» an f we f re glad to see so many here tonight 
an 1 hope you f 11 all enjoy... Oughi” 

Mr# Harris descended abruptly from the edge of 
the stage rubbing his ribs. A bench moved behind the grey sheets 
^caught him neatly: he stepped back undaunted and concluded his 
speech at a pitch that easily quelled the subdued ripple of 
laughter raised by his abrupt descent. Then, as he stepped 
down, the curtain drew back, disclosing the whole school upon 
the stage for 0 Canada . The program was under way# 

Carols there were in plenty, and the Manger Scene 
as a tableau. The Three Kings of Orient were splendidly garbed 
in bright blankets and snowy turbans# The shepherds, with a 
little help from behind the scenes, rendered their carol, 

"While Shepherds Watched their Flocks", and then stood back 
uncomfortably close to the organ to make room for the other 
comers. The angels, glittering in cheesecloth and tinsel, 
wobbled on their bench along the back of the stage, and among 
them Griselda could see little Eileen Price - Eileen Fay, 
who was now eight# Most of the angels came from the lower 
grades of the school and the bench was necessary to give 
them appropriate height. 











< 








' 


* 








■ 

: : ■ ■ ' ' ■ £ 4 
' c ‘ 

c •• : 

* 

, 

* 

* . . . : i; 












t ■ ,| :q . ;v 

* 



* 



■ • 


















CHAPTER VII 


- 136 - 


The tableau was followed by a recitation of some 
length, concerning the troubles of a pair of twins. 

"And when I died, the neighbors came 
And buried Brother JohnI" 

The reciter, whose efforts had been obscured by 
noises from behind the curtain, the shuffle of feet, the 
scraping of furniture, all punctuated by "sh-h-hl" in a 
sibilant whisper at intervals, stepped down with a relief 
shared by the audience. 

"And now," announced Mr. Harris, ,f We have the 
pleasure of seeing a play — The Time Machine , presented 
by the senior pupils." 

The curtain drew jerkily back to reveal a tea- 
party, sipping and recking and gossiping. Laura Olson, 
serene and plump, her long fair hair done up in a neat bun, 
beamed over her tea-cup. Her long plaid skirt, lapping over 
several inches at the waist band, and her billowy lace 
blouse obviously belonged to her mother f s wardrobe, and a 
pince-nez sat oddly upon her freckled snub nose. Theresa 
Jackson’s long dark plaits were crossed over her head, and 
she peered over the edges of steel-rimmed glasses with a 
witch-like air of intentness perfectly in keeping with her 
role of a small-town busybody. Doris Price, the third member 
of the trio, be-plumed, be-jewelled, with a fine fur neckpiece 

and muff, obviously represented a lady of rank and fashion. 

V 

Uon this restful scene, to the intense delight of 




* 

; ..::... - fjr..' 

t 

- t 



or;.;:a;-,, j 
















CHAPTER VII 


- 137 - 


the Grade I and II row, there came Ches Meade. Ridiculously 
long and thin in rusty black, he wore an ancient top hat 
and carried a malacca cane. With elegant precision of accent, 
and deferential little bows, he informed the three tea drinkers 
that he had overheard their wishes to be once more young, and 
would carry them back to their childhood if they so wished. 

But they were sceptical: she of the pince-nez surveyed him 
with scorn and commented audibly and disparagingly upon his 
offer. He would not be discouraged. 

"Ladies,” he implored, "try it for yourselves... 
no charge. Only try it, and you will seel" 

Finally she of the nodding ostrich plumes con¬ 
descended to try the Time Machine : she swished elegantly 
across the stage, and at the entrance to the Time Machine 
(which looked very like a clothes-cupboard with an enormous 
dial upon the door) she expressed aloud her wish to be once 
more the happy little Lady Henrietta Eugenia de Montmorenci, 
playing on the lawns of her ancestral castle. The door of 
the Time Machine closed creakily behind her: the hands of 
the door were adjusted by the Professor to ten: he pulled 
a lever. Behind the scenes arose an ominous clanking and 
rattling, and fine hollow groans (contributed by Tom Harris), 
Then the door of the Time Machine flew open, and out on the 
stage there catapulted a grimy, pig-tailed little urchin, 
who scrambled to her feet and demanded, 
















CHAPTER YII 


138 - 


"Say, what do youse think youse doin’? I’ll tell 
my paw what you done to me, sure as my name’s Katie Klanigan..J 

A shriek of delight burst from the front row. 

Several of them turned around to see if their elders were 
enjoying the performance too. The audience’s response was 
entirely satisfactory, and when, at the end, the Professor, 
the worker of magic, allowed himself to be shut in the time 
machine while the vindictive ladies whirled the dial hands 
back to zero twice over, and nothing whatsoever emerged from 
the box when it was opened, the applause was loud and genuine. 

Towards eleven o’clock, the concert drew to a close. 
The final carol rang out with less enthusiasm than the first: 
the last recitation lagged a little. St. George and the Dragon 
appeared in their tableau, and the resemblance between the 
Dragon and the Kaiser could not be denied. 

With the ending of the last item, there was a 
jingle of sleigh bells outside the windows, then at the door* 

A slightly cracked falsetto voice was raised in the cloakrrom. 

’’Merry Christmas I • •. ” 

’’Santa ClausJ The weary front row revived, began 
to push and squirm until quieted by Mrs. MacGillis’ stern 
look. When she turned away to draw the hamper of gifts out 
from under the tree, several of the bolder little boys seated 
themselves on the edge of the platform as near to the tree 
as they could get. Ches and Tom, exchanging knowing looks, 














CHAPTER YII 


- 139 - 


drew back a little so as not to seem to believe in this hoary 
superstition. 

"Jackson’s sleigh bells?*' muttered Tom as the good 
saint made his appearance, pushed forward by willing hands, 
and shaking a string of bells that ought by rights to have 
remained with the reindeer. 

Ches nodded. He was eyeing Santa Claus sharply, 
a covert grin on his sharp face. 

One would have said that the good Saint had lost 

weight since he was fitted for his scarlet suit. It hung 

oddly on his narrow, slope-shouldered figure, and was belted 

in closely around a paunchy middle with a wide, shiny, patent¬ 
-¬ 
leather belt that had somehow been broken or put at one time, 

and was now joined with a bit of amateur lacing at the back. 

Keeping one hand at his whiskers, Santa Claus began 
to talk, groping in the hamper with his free hand. 

"Well, wellj Have you all been good children this 
year, boys and girls? Now, let’s see — who’s this nice pre¬ 
sent for? Anna...Anna Olsonl" 

A twitter of voices broke out, and Anna, blushing 
deeply, came forward. 

"Well, well...! So this is Anna!" 

The parcel changed hands, and Anna wriggled back 
to her mates. 

"Now here’s one for a little boy.. .Maurice Jackson 























CHAPTER VII 


- 140 


Under cover of the hubbub, Ches whispered to Tom, 
"What ! s he keep his hand up like that for?" 

"Guess the beards goin* to come unstuck or some¬ 
thing 1" 

Tom was right. Not only the beard, but the whole 

mask was in danger of falling off and revealing to naive 

youthful believers in Santa Claus the leathery little monkey 

face of Joe Griggs, mail-carrier and part-time odd-job man 

and clerk around the store. At the moment, Joe, inspired by 

the fear of exposure, was making an excellent job of Santa 

ih»- 

Claus, and the contents of^hamper dwindled fast. 

"Tom Harris!" 

Tom returned with his package and both boys bent 
over its contents. A sturdy pocket knife, with a fine variety 
of blades, and a corkscrew and a small screwdriver embedded 
in its solid frame...Ches was so engrossed that he nearly 
missed his own name. 

"Ches Meade 1" 

But the soft, flat package proved to be mittens, 
substantial grey woollen ones. Ches needed a pair badly, as 
Griselda T s sharp eyes had noted, and these fitted well. 
Nevertheless, his spirits fell a little. 

Santa Claus came to the bottom of the hamper, and, 


still holding on to his whiskers, began to grope about hu Mi D 


















CHAPTER VII 


141 


in the boughs of the laden tree. Most of the adults present 
had put a parcel, or several parcels on the tree* The children 
were not the only ones to receive* 

"Emma Kerrigan!” 

The long flat box, when Emma opened it, held a 
pair of pale-blue kid gloves* Griselda snorted when her daugh¬ 
ter held them out for inspection* 

"Fine thing to wear here, miles from nowhere! I 
thought Henry had more sensei" 

Emma looked hurt, but Griselda hardened her heart* 
"Mabel Prescott!" 

Mabel, thus introduced by name to her new neighbors 
for the first time, moved languidly forward. Her abundant 
fair hair and brilliant coloring received glances and audible 
comments of approval from most of the men. The women were not 
quite so sure. 

"Now there’s a good-lookin’ gal for you, Walterl” 
said Jasper to his son, who blushed furiously. 

"She don’t hurt herself to move quickly!” murmured 
Griselda at the opposite side of the room. For some reason, 
Mabel had brought Mary Belle Webster to her mind. 

Santa Claus, nearly at the end of his task, fumbled 
around in pursuit of several small, elusive parcels, disen¬ 
tangling meanwhile his whiskers from the wiry spruce boughs. 
Ches, on the pretext of helping him, drew near, and hidden 























CHAPTER VII 


142 - 


from the audience, gave a sly tug at the shoelace that held 
together the two halves of the wide patent-leather belt at 
the back* The knot loosened -- the halves of the belt, slowly, 
inexorably, began to part. Ches handed the last of the parcels 
to Joe, who thanked him effusively and, in his role of Santa, 
promised to remember him next year. Ches withdrew to a safe 
distance, and began working his way towards the source of 
supply of the lunch that the ladies in the cloakroom were 
preparing to serve. 

Then it happened. The over-taxed belt gave way, 
and Santa f s misfit costume parted in the middle. The bril¬ 
liant ticking of a fat pillow came into view — the rusty 
brown pin-stripe of Joe Grigg f s best suit. Joe, in horror, 
clutched at the slipping red-flannel trousers with both hands, 
and the mask slid from its moorings and dangled rakishly 
under his left ear. A moment f s silence...a burst of laughter 
... an irrepressible Indian whoop from Tom Harris. Ches 
echoed the whoop with variations of his own, and added in 
his high tenor voice, 

M Oh-h-.... Joe-e-e-e... • 1 ,f 

The unfortunate Joe glanced wildly around. He had 
no idea of how he had come to be in such a predicament, and 
suspected it was his own fault and that he had forever let 
down the dignity of the Christmas saint. On inspiration, he 
spoke suddenly in his own mild, flat voice, rendered a little 















t 




c 









.. . : 
















CHAPTER VII 


- 143 - 


shrill by excitement. 

"Well, folks, guess you all seen what happened. 

You see, it was this way...." 

It was the invariable beginning of Joe’s fantastic 
yarns: "You see, it was this way...." 

"•••Santa Claus, he’s a little behind schedule, 
you see. An’ so he says to me, ’Joe’, he says, ’I gotta 
couple of calls to make at a—a—an orphanage in...er— 
in Chicago, an’ a-a children’s hospital in England, an’ here 
I am good an’ late already an’ this concert of yours ain’t 
over till eleven o’clock. Now, Joe,’ he says, ’you’re an 
old friend of mine, an’ I want to ask you a favor..." 

He paused, but the attention of his audience was 

assured. 

"’Joe,’ he says, ’will you wear these old duds 
o’ mine an’ take my place at Rolling Slopes tonight? I’d 
like to be there an’ I don’t want to disappoint nobody, 
but those kids are pretty lucky — they got their fathers 
an’ mothers an’ their own homes, an’ plenty to eat. I wanta 
go myself to that orphanage an’ that hospital where the kids 
are pretty lonely an’ sick an’ unhappy.’ So-o..." concluded 
Joe grandly, "I told Santa Clause that I’d be real glad to 
do him a favor an’ wear his old duds, even if they don’t 
fit so good’s they might, cause I knew none o’ the kids in 
this school’d mind." 





















CHAPTER VII 


144 - 


The conclusion of Joe’s most successful fantasy 
was nearly lost in a burst of laughter and applause, and 
Joe scrambled out of the scarlet costume and hung it on the 
organ* Smiling sheepishly, he pushed his way to the back of 
the room where Griselda pressed upon him a brimming cup 
of coffee and her hearty congratulations* 

Ches Meade, taken aback by the swing of public 
sentiment in favor of Joe, helped himself to a double 
portion of an airy layer-cake and squeezed into a spo©t near 
the cloakroom door where he could help himself from every 
plate that was passed out. In spite of the failure of his 
Joke on Joe, his disappointment over the mittens, he was at 
this moment perfectly happy. 

On the other side of the partition, Griselda, 
pouring coffee, was not enjoying herself* Usually this kind 
of gathering, with the whole community, young and old, 
present, and everybody in holiday mood, delighted her* 

Tonight her personal affairs weighed heavily upon her: she 
could scarcely be polite to Henry Burton. He seemed, moreover, 
to go out of his way to be very polite to her. 

"Turning the girl’s silly headj" thought Griselda 
crossly, noting Emma’s obvious pride in her uniformed escort. 

The Prescotts, the newcomers from the other side 
of the lease, came up and were introduced. Mrs. Prescott 






















CHAPTER VII 


- 14^ 


and her married daughter were tall, blonde, handsome women: 
the sixteen-year old Mabel was quite as pretty at close 
quarters as she had appeared at a distance. A flicker of 
expression crossed her blue eyes as Henry and Emma approached, 
and Griselda promptly made introductions with a shadowy hope 
forming in her mind. She invited the Prescotts to dinner 
the next Sunday, extended the invitation to Henry Burton, 
and hoped that his enthusiastic acceptance might not be 
entirely on account of Emma. 


Once lunch was over, some of the families with 
small children left. Mrs. Olson, having tied on numerous 
scarves and seen to it that her flock all had their own 
overshoes, picked up her roly-poly youngest. 

"Laura! Vhere iss the cake-pan and the cream 
jar? Nefer mind the box - - ve leave it. ...Vhere iss Oscar?” 

"Oscar!" 

"Oscar!” echoed the little sisters, to whomf) their 
only brother’s wanderings were a source of constant vexation. 
Oscar was finally located at the front of the room, searching 
for a piece of brown paper to wrap up his bright tin train, 
and dragged protesting to the door, where his father waited 
with the sleigh. 

The Jacksons went, and others with many miles to 
drive. Inside the school willing hands lifted the planks 






















* 

- 






















CHAPTER VII 


- 146 - 


and piled up the desks at the sides of the room. On the 
platform a hastily-assembled orchestra grouped itself and 
began tuning up# 

"Want to stay for the dance?" demanded Jasper. 

The question was purely routine: Griselda usually stayed 
for a couple of hours at least, for she still enjoyed dancing# 
But tonight she had no heart for it, and, to her husband’s 
surprise, demanded to be taken home. Mrs. MacGillis 
likewise elected to leave, and only Walter and Joe Griggs 
remained, to come home later with Emma and Henry. 

As she waited near the door, Griselda looked 
back into the schoolroom with a curious sense of being alone. 
She was going home without her children. They were within 
the group beyond the partition and she was leaving them 
there. A square dance set formed up as she watched: Henry 
and Emma, the married Prescott girl and her husband, Doris 
Price and a strange man. The fourth couple joined them 
after a minute or two: Walter, and Mabel Prescott. 

Joe Griggs, perched on a bench, began to call. 

"Honor your partner 
Corners address••• 

All join hands an’ circle to the left..." 

Outside the door the sleigh bells jingled. Griselda 
climbed in, pulled the heavy robes over her knees, very 
conscious that she had come without Emma, that she was leaving 
without Emma, and that Emma was seventeen. 















■ • .. ' : : y : ^ 





















CHAPTER VIII 


- 147 


OUT OF HAND 

The Christmas Concert of 1916 remained in 
Criselda’s mind as the end of a comfortable period of 
tangible achievement on which she later looked back with 
regret that it had not lasted. For the next two or three 
years her complacency suffered and her carefully devised 
plans went subtly awry. 

She had, the night of the concert, invited the 
Prescotts to dinner during the Christmas holiday. They were 
admirable people who would obviously be an addition of the 
right kind to the community. Oriselda set herself to draw 
Mrs. Prescott out, and within an hour was possessed of the 
whole family history. They were Ontario people who had 


























CHAPTER VIII 


- 148 - 


settled in their youth in Manitoba, where the girls had been 
born and gone to school. Then the eldest daughter had 
married and her husband decided to homestead in Alberta. 

The older couple had moved to be near them. 

Griselda was genuinely surprised at the carefree 
manner in which the other woman related her momentous 
decision. 

"Didn’t you mind leaving your home?” she asked 

curiously. 

"Yes," admitted Mrs. Prescott. M I did — we had 
a nice place, only two miles from town. But I don’t now — 
it’s worth it, to be near the girls, that is, Isabel at 
least. And maybe Mabel won’t go far when she marries.” 

”1 don’t suppose she’ll be long,” said Griselda 
politely. She liked Mabel the least of this family. But 
if Mabel could catch the attention of Henry Burton at this 
moment, Griselda would glady bear with her... 

Mrs. Prescott’s mind seemed to be travelling the 

same path. 

f, That’s a nice young fellow you have here todayl” 
she remarked. ”1 suppose he and your daughter...?” 

”0h, no I” said Griselda hastily. ”We’ve knov/n 
him for years — he’s a family friend. And she’s far too 
young. We want her to finish school and go to Normal School 
before she thinks of settling down.” 



















CHAPTER VIII 


- 149 


Mrs. Prescott smiled. "I wouldn f t be too sure! 
she said. "I thought Isabel was going to train for a nurse— 
and look at her now — not twenty and two years married!" 

A burst of laughter came from the kitchen, where 
the young people were playing games. Griselda was uneasy, 
and when she went out there half an hour later and discovered 
the round game split up into couples, she felt as if she 
had been slapped with a wet towel. Emma and Henry were 
playing chequers by the window, and Walter and Mabel Prescott 
were talking in low tones over a long string of dominoes. 

A whole new field of possibilities opened up in 
Griselda f s mind and she reproached herself for her blindness. 
Not to have seen that Walter might find Mabel’s blonde beauty 
appealing! Anxious to discover if any damage had done, 
she queried her children later. 

"How did you like Mabel?" 

Walter was silent, which might have meant much 
or little. But Emma replied frankly, 

"She’s nice, I guess. She doesn’t say much. Henry 
says she’s dull." 

There was nothing to be done about Walter’s silence, 
but Griselda punished her daughter for her unwelcome speech. 

"When does Henry go back to camp?" she enquired 

coldly. 


Emma wilted immediately 

















t 




. 


. . 

e 



t ' 

. 

: 











- 
























- 




. 

/ 









































CHAPTER VIII 


- 150 - 


"Wednesday," she replied, and Griselda reflected 
with satisfaction that'this problem at least was settled. 

By the time he got back, Emma would be safely away and would 
have forgotten all about him. 

But Henry Burton never went overseas. He contracted 
gun-deafness at Petewawa and was discharged from the army 
within a few months. Three weeks after his return, Emma 
announced that they were engaged. Jasper Kerrigan was 
pleased, Griselda bitterly disappointed. She could not 
hide her feeling from Emma. 

"Seems to me we’ve wasted a lot of time and trouble 
on educating you, when you’re going to get married like this I" 

Emma had developed a new and irritating poise. 

It was impossible to ruffle her now, and her impervious good 
humor at this point prevented a serious rupture between the 
two. 

"Oh," she said lightly, "I can’t be bothered, 
putting all my time on other people’s kids I I’m not like 
you, Mother, always fussing over other people and the school 
and the club and the church. If I’d been you, I’d have 
thought Daddy was the most important thing in my life!" 

Griselda looked at her sharply, but there was no 
reason to suspect criticism in the remark. It had been made as 
rn^faet: they were different in outlook and purpose, and Emma 
was stating it in her own words. 





















CHAPTER VIII 


- 151 - 


"All I want," concluded Emma, "is my own home. 
Other people can do as they like — I T m not interested!" 

"All right," said Griselda shortly. "I guess 
you know what you want I" 

The words, as ever when she was deeply moved, 
were ungracious. Emma seemed to feel them as such, for the 
rosy tan deepened on her round cheeks. But she said no 
more, and her mother too was silent, her thoughts weaving 
in and out ...Memories, plans, emotions... She had been 
reluctant to settle here, because of the children... The 
children had elected to spend the rest of their lives 
here. She had worked long and hard to establish at Rolling 
Slopes the school, the Sunday School, the Ladies Aid, the 
club... Emma dismissed them lightly: "fussing over other 

y e /- 7h i b ho<f b*i-n ! 

people". ^Emma’s children would not know what it was to 
grow up without proper schooling would not run wild on the 
unfenced prairie... 

I don’t suppose they’ll appreciate it, either! 
mused Griselda. Seems to me the only ones who do, are the 
ones who go to all the trouble, and these young ones we do it 
for don’t thank us! Unbidden the thought crept in that this 
same younger generation who lightly dismissed the work and 
worry of their elders, had much in common with the apathetic 
Indians of the north, who took what was given them, accepted 
what was done for them, and returned no thanks, showed no 



































CHAPTER VIII 


- 152 - 


results... 

Aloud she said, 

"Time you get half-a-dozen kids running around, 
you f 11 be glad to do a little work towards keeping up the 
school and the Sunday School, my girl!" 

"Mother1 11 Emma was crimson with indignation, and 
her mother concluded with a flicker of amusement, 

"You’re getting married, aren’t you? Got to take 
everything into consideration, don’t you? No wedding till 
you turn eighteen!" 

The status quo was restored: once more they were 
mother and daughter, and Emma with her dark head bent over 
her sewing had ceased to be the Voice of an apathetic and 
unimproved society. Yet as the months passed, Griselda’s 
disappointment did not lessen. Emma had succumbed so easily, 
had so soon been absorbed at the general level of the district. 
She would be one of the farmers’ wives, was delighted at the 
prospect of being just that and no more. Even if she had 
taken a year away from the district and then come back to 
marry Henry Burton, it would have mended matters. Griselda 
had no objection to Henry as a son-in-law. But she had 
counted upon Emma as an ally for the future, perhaps upon 
handing over the leadership of community work to Emma at 
some distant time. It would have been to an Emma whose 
superior education rendered her suitable. Little Emma 
Kerrigan who had grown up and married at Rolling Slopes would 







e 

“ 

A 

; 

' 

, .1 : ■■■ . m 

. 

: 

" t ■ 

' 

, 

, ■ • ■ 

, 

* 

■ 

* 

I 

* 

. :'. . ■ :. • ;; .o„. 
























CHAPTER VIII 


- 153 - 


not be capable of such leadership, would not have the prestige 
to carry it off. Griselda had had that prestige: she was 
older than most of the women coming in; she had been there 
longer; as the storekeeper^ wife, she had influence; she 
was not tied down to her home by the care of small children. 
She had had — still had — every advantage to enable her 
to take the lead in Rolling Slopes. 

But she was not getting any younger, and the amount 
of work to be done in the community was increasing. She 
was thankful for Mrs* MacGillis, thankful that no problems 
of emotion, either like or dislike, colored their sensible 
working partnership. 

Mrs. MacGillis herself early in the year, had 
had trouble at the school. Ches Meade, once the Christmas 
Concert was over, ceased to take an interest in education. 

But, having nothing better to do, he continued to come to 
school, apparently with the sole intention of disturbing 
the peace. He was sufficiently clever that she had difficulty 
in identifying him as the disruptive element, the setter of 
the fashion of a new epidemic of profanity, the inspiration 
for the mischief of the little boys. Mrs. MacGillis 
thought the situation over and decided that Ches must go. 

His love of the limelight, of the applause he did not merit 
was ingrained: he had no intention of working for the 


attention he craved 


























CHAPTER VIII 


- 154 - 


In January, Ches was expelled from Rolling Slopes 
School, A majority of the school-board favored the decision, 
Olaf Olson with an approving grunt, Mr. Harris with an emphatic 
"By gollyI That f s the stuff — should’ve done it 
long ago. Boy’s no goodI 

Jasper Kerrigan agreed that it was up to the 
teacher in such matters, and probably Ches would be the 
better for a job. Ches himself, the centre of attention for 
some days, was proud of his achievement: he was an object of 
interest to a number of people, and an object of awe to his 
former schoolmates. 

Several people, including Mrs. Kerrigan, spoke to 
Dan about Ches. They implied, more or less openly, that if 
anybody really needed an education, it was his nephew, 
considering his natural handicaps. And Dan, after the third 
conversation (if conversation is the right term to describe 
an interview in which one person does nearly all the talking 
and the other the greater part of the listening] found himself 
a little irritated by the whole matter. The impulse to go 
and see the teacher himself crossed his foggy mind as he 
came jogging down the road on his old pony one day, and saw 
that the children were just out of school. 

The February Chinook had cleared the land of snow 
for a couple of days, and the air was of April warmth. Just 























CHAPTER VIII 


- 155 - 


fifteen minutes previously the bell to dismiss the children 
had rung, and orderly files had marched to the cloakroom 
doors, there to break and scatter noisily. A minute or two 
of clatter in the cloakroom, a stampede to the door, a 
constant hubbub in the yard as horses (saddled in readiness 
at recess) were mounted, and buggies hitched up. Small 
brothers and sisters, struggling crimson-faced with scarves 
and overshoes, were exhorted to make haste, and Mrs. Mac- 
Gillis herself bundled the little ones into their garments 
and inspected them to be sure everyone had his own mittens. 
With a startling whoop and clatter of hoofs, Tom Harris and 
his friends were off, out of the gate and away. A minute 
later, wheels rattling on the frozen earth, the buggies 
bowled away down the hill. 

For nearly half a mile, almost to the gate leading 
out of the lease land on to the road, the mad race continued. 
Then, their feeling of freedom restored, the children sobered 
down, split into two groups, and went their ways, north or 
south. Once out of the lease they were all too likely to 
come under the watchful eye of parents who disapproved of 
buggy races, wheel to wheel, in which contestants aimed to 
edge each other out of the trail, somewhat in the fashion 
of BEN HUR’S chariot race, or of horse-racing with flying 
lariats swinging. So these excitements were restricted to 
the larger freedom of the rangeland whose kindly slopes 




. 























CHAPTER VIII 


- 136 - 


and hollows concealed so much, whose only discordant feature 
was the schoolhouse, perched aloft on the hill, fenced in 
by barbed wire. 

Dan Meade, jogging along the trail, met the noisy 
crowd. The children were instantly c^ious, and those in 
the lead slowed down to wait for the others. Chattering 
and speculating, the group went on together. 

"Betcha Old Dan f s goin T to see the teacher.” 

”Betcha he’s goin’ to make her take Ches backI” 

"Aw... Ches don’t wanta come back!" 

"I hope he doesn’t come back!" said Laura Olson. 
She tossed her head and her thick fair plaits, fastened 
at the end with a serviceable shoelace, glinted the white- 
gold of ripe barley in the sun. 

"Aw...just because he usta dip your braids in 
the inkwell...I" 

"He’s mean...J" 

"We ain’t had nearly so much fun since Ches quit." 

"He didn’t quit — he was expelled!" 

"I bet 01’ Dan makes Mrs. MacGillis taXe Ches 

back!" 

"Well, I bet he doesn’t!" 

They lingered a moment or two at the gate, but as 
there was no sign of Dan’s immediate return, the group 
dispersed. 
















CHAPTER VIII 


- 137 - 


Dan Meade reached the schoolyard, which he was 
wont to enter twice a year, on the occasions of the Christmas 
Concert and the closing picnic* He dismounted, and leading 
his gaunt, shabby old horse, approached the schoolhouse door. 
Just as he raised a hand to knock, the door flew open and a 
sturdy arm in a polka-dotted sleeve waved a duster under his 
nose. There were a couple of vigorous snaps, the air for 
several feet around filled rapidly with chalk dust, and Dan 
sneezed tremendously. Mrs. MacGillis pushed the door wide 
open and stood squarely on the step, stolid, uncompromising. 

Her steel-rimmed spectacles glinted purposefully beneath a 
stifflyrolled brown pompadour, and under her gimlet eye Dan 
immediately regretted the impulse that had led him to this 
interview. But it was too late to withdraw. 

"Ye wanted to see me about Ches? u said Mrs. Mac¬ 
Gillis authoritatively. 

Dan, looking helplessly to left and right, and 
finding no succour, mumbled that he had just been passing 

and•.• 

"I won’t have Ches back in the schoolJ M said Mrs. 
MacGillis as her visitor came to an uneasy stop. "He’s no 
interest in learning.” 

She paused to give Dan a chance to reply, but he 
stood there, bedraggled and drooping to the last gingery 
hair in his lank mustache, and said not a word. Mrs. MacGillis 

























CHAPTER VIII 


- 158 - 


began to realize how unworthy of her steel was this opponent. 

It f s worse than mischief1" she continued accusingly. 
"He won’t learn anything] And he’s an idler and a bad 
influence on the younger children. What that boy needs is 
a job where he’ll be supervised and kept out of mischief and 
made to finish his work." 

Dan was still wordless, and Mrs. MacGillis concluded 

grandly, 

"I’m responsible for seeing that these children 
learn something and form good habits. And Cheshas to go. 
Good-afternoon, Mr. Meade!" 

The door closed emphatically, and Dan found 
himself staring at the inhospitable wood. Hastily, with 
furtive looks behind him, he mounted, and the moth-eaten 
pony shambled off, urged to a stumbling canter once he passed 
the gate. Dan was in more of a mental turmoil than his 
feeble powers of concentration could stand. He recalled 
fragments of the lop-sided conversation and shook his head. 

"What a wurnman]" he muttered, with something very 
like consternation in his watery blue eyes. He really had 
not intended to protest Ches’s expulsion from school: he was 
not sufficiently interested to do that. Moreover Ches himself 
didn’t mind the new state of affairs too much. Dan regretted 
the vagrant impulse that had led him up the school trail. 









ft ' . 

- 









- 

. 

. . 


* 


- 



* 

M 

» 


. 


1 


■ t - 



? 





. 

■ 


. 


* 

, 



. 






. 










« 


. - ■ . 

* 

... • ■ : 

- 




. 


















CHAPTER VIII 


- 159 - 


Henceforth he regarded Ches with commiseration when school 
was mentioned, and mumbled to himself and to those who would 
listen, 

"What a wummanl' 1 

Ches idled about the store, his gangling presence 
an affront to both Mrs. MacGillis and Griselda. The teacher 
observed with irritation his utter lack of any feeling of 
guilt: he might, to judge from his own attitude, have been 
graduated cum laude. His expulsion had deepened Griselda*s 
sense of failure. She had, for several years, planned an 
ambitious future for her own children, and the rescue of 
Ches Meade from the morass of Dan f s influence. Nothing, 
she felt, had been accomplished. 

She made one more effort on Ches’s behalf. If 
education had failed to benefit the boy, there still remained 
work* There was no opening for Ches around Rolling Slopes 
and his friendship with a drifting German-American named 
Conrad Busch seemed likely to lead him into trouble. Busch, 
who claimed to be a cousin of a German farmer living on the 
other side of the lease, had been around Rolling Slopes all 
winter. He worked here and there, stayed with a German 
family in the neighborhood, and hunted coyotes with a pack 
of four, lean, long-legged hounds. 

Conrad was pro-German and made his sympathies 
very evident by scoffing openly at the farm lads who spoke 















CHAPTER VIII 


- 160 - 


of joining the army when they were eighteen. Ches himself 
had an idea of joining up. 

"Y/hat d’ye want to join up for?" said Conrad 
derisively. "’Tain’t your business who gets killed — where 
does that get ’em?" 

"Aw.— you’re an American..." began Ches, and 
Conrad laughed. 

"That’s right. I’m an American — they can’t take 

me I ” 

"Henry’s an American," said Mr. Kerrigan. 

"He’s back here, ain’t he? An’ I’m here — what’s 

the diff?" 

It was plain that Conrad was no good influence 
on Ches Meade, and when Griselda met Mr. Hampton-Reid in 
Maverick one day, and he mentioned that the ranch was short- 
handed, she thought she saw opportunity to dispose of Ches 
with advantage to all around. She told the rancher the 
situation and he listened with attention. 

"I’ve heard of this Conrad Busch... I can’t promise 
anything, Mrs. Kerrigan, but I’ll see what I can do." 

A week or two later Ches and Conrad went hunting 
on the Grasmere Lease and put up a coyote not far from the 
ranch. The intended victim led the hounds down the creek 
bed and through the corrals, where they promptly got into 




























CHAPTER VIII 


- l6l - 


a fight with the ranch dogs while the wily coyote skimmed 
into safety over the lease. Harry Wise, attempting to 
disentangle the dogs, was bitten, and Mr. Hampton-Reid came 
upon the scene just as his infuriated foreman was threaten¬ 
ing to shoot the intruding hounds. With some difficulty 
he restored peace all around, and mindful of his promise to 
Griselda, invited Ches and Conrad in to warm up. 

The results of this interview were two. Conrad 
Busch left Rolling Slopes hurriedly, his departure accelerated 
by the Mounted Police, who had, it was said, acted upon a 
hint from Mr. Hampton-Reid. And Ches Meade got a job at the 
ranch. 

®He had expected the work to mean "cow-punching" in 
its most romanticized form. It was disappointing to find 
himself carrying wood and water for Lee, the Chinese cook, 
cleaning out stables, filling water troughs, milking a cow. 

In other words, he was but a farm-hand on a ranch, the lowest 
of the low. Harry Wise supervised him with an all-seeing eye: 
his sharp voice rasped across Ches’s daydreams like a cross¬ 
cut saw. It soon palled on Ches: the will to work was not 
there. He attempted to score off Harry Wise and the grumbling 
old Chinaman, Lee Wong, by practical jokes which failed 
miserably. By April he was back, loafing around the store. 










« 

. 

. 

. 

' 

. 








* 







t t ■ 

< 








■ 

: 




. • 


. o . . IL ; 




* 






















CHAPTER VIII 


- 162 - 


G-riselda decided that it was no use to bother 
further with Ches. Environment and Heredity had placed 
him among the f no-goods f , and there he was not only content, 
but determined to remain. 















CHAPTER IX 


- 163 - 


A CALF DEPARTS 

The next March, that of 1918 , ushered in the 
fourth wartime spring* In those four years had come to the 
prairie communities an increased consciousness of the great 
struggle. Two or three young men from nearby settlements 
had been killed, and Robert Wallace, whose land lay just 
north and east of Dan Meade T s would never return. Early in 
1918 that quarter and the one adjoining it on the east were 
taken up by Engvald Nordstaad, a big, hard-working Norwegian, 
who had come to Canada by way of the Dakotas. He was joined 
that summer by his wife, Minna, and their son, Eric, was 
born in the middle of a bitter cold spell in December. 

The Norstaads had kept to themselves a good deal, 
perhaps because Minna’s English was still very broken. But 
















CHAPTER IX 


- 164 - 


after the bitter night when Griselda was awakened at one 
in the morning by Nordstaad’s persistent and imperative 
knocking on the front door, and galvanized into wakefulness 
by his urgent request, 

r, Could Mrs. Kerrigan come to Minna? The baby..." 
the Norwegian family rapidly became part of the community, 
liked and respected. 

Griselda was more conscious of the war than ever 
before. Albert Horner and Dave Wilkie were still away, and 
men were still joining up. The great explosion that had 
devastated the port of Halifax in 1917 had come very near 
destroying members of her own family. Her sister Jean had 
escaped by the merest of accidents: Uncle Jacob’s old 
house was gone: all the old street was flattened... 

Griselda could not quite take it all in. She had not seen 
Jean for thirty years. Still less could she imagine Mary 
Belle Webster — no, it was Herron —* dead. Spoilt, petted, 
dainty, petite Mary Belle with her golden hair and her gay, 
tinkling voice, had died dreadfully, under the tons of brick 
and stone and plaster that had been the old Webster house 
with high, pillared doorway and broad staircase. The thought 
sickened Griselda. Mary Belle was still so clear to her 
— clearer than Jean, or gentle Lily, who had also survived 
the tragedy. 



















CHAPTER IX 


- 165 - 


She could not think of Mary Belle as a grown woman, 
the mother of two children: a son who was lost at sea in 
1915, a daughter who had married in Boston* Mary Belle’s 
children were older than her own, might have been her own... 
She, Griselda, might have died there in the crash and flame 
that had overwhelmed hundreds., if she had stayed, if she 
had married Luke. How would Luke get on without Mary Belle? 
Without his son? 

Griselda mused over the tragedy during the year 
which followed it. She recollected the life she had left 
thirty years before, all that had happened since then, all 
that was happening now. Gladly she turned from these 
depressing thoughts when they intruded, to Rolling Slopes 
where the spring came on as usual. Something of a labor 
shortage threatened, and Jasper employed Ches Meade for 
a few days work around the farm. Ches hinted that he himself 
had always yearned to work in the store, but Jasper was 
adamant: 

”Any time a clerk’s needed here, I’ve got five— 
my wife, Emma, Walter, Joe, and me. It’s a farm hand I want, 
Ches.” 

So, while Joe nursed a poisoned hand, Ches worked 
around the farm with Walter, preparing for spring work. 
Griselda was unusually busy with the preparation of Emma’s 







... 




. 




:\vl . 

: 

, 

xi ; . v'O;' /...• : ‘ i.:: ■■■'.-■ • '• •• 1 

: 




* 


i:/. ... : 


. 


- 


..• ■ 5 








_'t .i:'.: 1 . ... , .... 

. . 

* 


• . •... .. . i:Lt 


















« 













. ; . ; Li ■ •/. 





























CHAPTER IX 


- 166 - 


trousseau and household goods, four men to cook for, and 
the school teacher to board. 

Mrs. MacGillis, Ches’s old antagonist, had 
resigned the Christmas before. Her husband was being 
invalided home and Mrs. MacGillis had been offered a school 
in the city. Rolling Slopes school was taken over by 
Miss Mamie Treight. 

On a Saturday morning, the Kerrigans were at 
breakfast. The long kitchen table was well supplied with 
food, and around it sat in order Mr. Kerrigan, Walter, Joe, 
Ches, Miss Treight, Emma, and G-riselda. 

The day was bright and sunny, and Mr. Kerrigan 
opined that spring had come to stay. The lanky Walter 
concurred in this opinion, Ches likewise. Griselda, less 
optimistic, set a laden platter of hot cakes on the table 
and reminded the company of other springs that had seen the 
snow falling at the end of April. 

r, I don’t trust the weather1" she concluded briskly, 
and Joe Griggs, her staunch admirer, supported her theme. 

"Well, now — back in New Hampshire in 1904 — 
yeah, 1904 — we had an ice-storm..." 

"Aw - put a sock in it, Joel" advised Ches rudely. 

"Help yourself to hot-cakes, Joel" interrupted 
Mrs. Kerrigan. "Mamie, you’re not eatingl Shall I make 
you some toast?" 






























. 












CHAPTER IX 


- 167 - 


"No thank you,” replied the boarder. Her round 
blue eyes seemed about to fill with tears: her babyish 
mouth drooped sadly. She excused herself and, plump 
shoulders sagging, went back to her room to write to 
Sergeant Wesley Stone of a Southern Alberta regiment. 

She had not heard from him for two mails and her imagination 
was working overtime. 

Griselda shook her head. "It does beat me how 
that girl ever came to take up teaching 1 Walter, you ! ve 
got to pen up the red calf l It f s into everything — it 
started chewing on the blankets I was airing on the line 
yesterday." 

"Can f t!" said Walter, who had charge of the cattle 
around the farm. "It f s been sick — I want to watch it for 
a day or two." 

"Give it some salt — it T ll be all right I" said 
his mother briskly. Her husband and son exchanged looks of 
tolerant amusement. 

"I dunno what ails the critter," complained Mr. 

Kerrigan. 

"Give it some of that dope you soak Joe's hand 
in," advised Ches frivolously. 

"IS bad enough," mused Mr. Kerrigan, "to have 
Mamie mopin* around this place without the calves gettin* 
sick!" 























CHAPTER IX 


- 168 - 


"Now Jasper!" said his wife, but her mouth twitched 
as the boys snickered. She knew how her men folk felt. 

Mamie was a very poor exchange for Mrs. MacGillis, 
that was certain. Her heart was not in her teaching, and 
life in the country she could not bear. A school two miles 
from the boarding house, out in the bare range land, had for 
her all the terrors of the jungle* The range cattle were 
enclosed in fences, but the wire was so thin, their horns 
so long... So Mamie was driven to school each day by one 
of the Kerrigans, for she was afraid of horses and declined 
to try riding or driving. 

Breakfast over, the men went out to the yard, and 
Griselda called up the stairs, 

"Mamie! There’s hot water here if you want to 
wash out that lace." 

The last scallop on the lace had been finished 
the day before in school. Mamie looked at it now with 
pardonable admiration: an exquisite piece of work a full 
two yards long and three inches deep. Peaked and scalloped, 
it was a miracle of complicated design and intricate pattern, 
worked in the finest white crochet cotton. But having been 
done almost entirely in school hours while the children 
drowsed listlessly over their books and a subdued hum of 
inactivity filled the room, the lace was grey with dust, 


chalk and smoke 











CHAPTER IX 


- 169 - 


She tripped down the narrow stairs, a plump girl 
with an innocent, vacuous, pink-and-white face and neat brown 
hair, and washed out the lace. Ten minutes later the delicate 
scallops were looped carefully over the clothes-line and 
pinned to a tea-towel. Mamie looked with distaste out over 
the land, brownish and dun colored with no hint of green 
as yet. She disliked its vastness, the monotony of its 
coloring, the unrestricted sweep of it to a horizon that 
was miles away. The yard was littered with the debris that 
the snow had formerly covered: the paint on the fence was 
greyish and checked, and that on the house seemed grimy in 
contrast to the frosty whiteness of the lace. She did not 
notice the vivid blue of the sky, nor appreciate the brisk 
fresh wind: the warm western Chinook. 

She went back into the house, avoiding with a 
shudder of dislike the stunted red calf which had just 
pushed the gate open and entered from the barnyard. Once 
back in her room, she sniffed, blotted a tear from the 
letter, and wrote, 

11 ...our own dear little house. I just finished 
the lace; it*s really and truly lovely. If only this dreadful 
war were over...1 w 

It snowed that night and all the next morning, and 
Mamie was correspondingly depressed. 

















CHAPTER IX 


- 170 - 


"It’ll go in a day or two,” consoled Griselda. 

”It f s not cold* We f ll have a real good look around the 
yard and clean up along the fence, an’ Joe’ll go to Maverick 
for the mail*••” 

”1 wish he could go today!” sighed Mamie* ”What 
are they doing there by the barn?” 

Griselda looked over her shoulder towards the knot 
of men loafing around the barn door. She snorted indignantly. 

“That red calf died last night* Stupid little 
critter! Dan an 1 Walter decided to open him up and see what 
he died of." 

"Oh...!” Mamie turned greenish at the thought of 
the autopsy. "Do they do it often?" 

"Only once on each animal,” said Emma’s cheerful 
voice behind them. 

"Seems like every time it storms an’ we can’t have 
Sunday School those men think of something awful like that 
to do. The last time they cleaned the well," complained 
Griselda. 

Something was animating the curious group at the 
barn — the two Kerrigans, Ches Meade, Joe Griggs, another man. 

"Must be funny!" commented Emma. "I never saw 
anyone carry on so over a dead calf!" 

By and by the group broke up, still laughing. 
















CHAPTER IX 


171 - 


Walter came back to the house and began to wash his hands 
in the porch. 

"Well?" demanded his sister, "what’s the joke, 
all of you laughing like mad out there?” 

Her brother grinned and said nothing. 

"What happened to the calf?" 

"Indigestion, I guess. He had a lot of stuff 
in him — about a quarter of a ball of binder twine and some 
old rags an’ a leather strap an 1 one of Joe’s cotton gloves..." 

"No wonder he died," 

"That wasn’t all." 

"No? What else?" 

Walter looked over his shoulder. "Well... we 
washed it out in the horsetrough... Ches thought we should 
bring it back...!" 

A grinning face surmounted by a thatch of yellow 
hair and an old cap appeared in the door behind him. Ches’s 
thin freckled face was split from ear to ear by his grin. 

He winked at Emma and turned to Mamie, 

"We thought you’d like it back, Miss Treight! 

Walter was sayin’ you felt awful bad about losin’ it!" 

On the end of a stick he held forth the sodden 
remains of Mamie’s lace. 

It was the last straw. Miss Treight did not return 
after the Easter holidays. Once more the school-board of 
Rolling Slopes was hard put to it to find a teacher. They 


















CHAPTER IX 


- 172 - 


held a meeting, sitting disconsolately around the store. 

"I give upl" said Oliver Harris. M I resign — 
make a note of it, Jasper — it’s officiall Anyway, I’m goin’ 
back to Oregon after threshing this fall, an* I wouldn’t 
complete my term. Which of you gents would like my job?" 

There were no takers, and he continued in a tone 
of heavy jocularity, 

"Of course, T tain f t the remuneration that makes 
it worth while I It’s the honor of the thingI An’ yer 
life’s just one damned schoolteacher after another, ain’t 
that so?" 

No one denied that it was so. 





ij ■ 












CHAPTER X 


• 173 - 


THE STRANGER 

In the summer of 1918, Emma Kerrigan and Henry- 
Burton were married. They settled down on Henry’s homestead 
south of the store, where he had a comfortable little house, 
and were duly and noisily ’shivareed’ by the neighbors. 
Griselda did her duty faithfully by her daughter: Emma’s 
wedding was conventional and correct in every detail. Emma 
herself was in high spirits, Jasper beamed. Disappointment 
still pervaded Griselda like a cloud: she felt as if she 
were attending the wedding of a stranger. That her daughter 
should have been so unable to comprehend her feelings, or 
that, comprehending, she had deliberately turned her back 
on her mother’s wishes without giving them even a thought, 











CHAPTER X 


- 174 - 


had suddenly rendered Emma a stranger. 

Then, too, Emma had spoken slightingly of her 
mother^ community activities and the implications were painful 
to Griselda. She needed assistance: the loss of Mrs. Mac- 
Gillis had thrown the burden of work back on her, almost 
redoubled in weight. She looked around for a trustworthy 
aide. The women who were then available bickered among 
themselves, they were jealous of her, of each other, or they 
were inefficient. A stranger, reflected Griselda, would be 
the solution... 

Such a stranger there was: the difficulty lay in 
her absolute unwillingness to become a part of the district. 

In July Miss Frederika came to Rolling Slopes, an enigma from 
the first. Even Old Bill had never aroused half the curiosity 
that soon swirled about Miss Freddie. He was inarticulate, 
ever monotonously the same, had become so much a part of 
his surroundings that people lost interest in him. They 
knew precisely the pattern of his days — the patrol of the 
fences, the dire threats to youthful trespassers, the bi¬ 
monthly trek to the store... 

But Miss Freddie from her first minute at Rolling 
Slopes stood out among her neighbors as vividly as the 
scarlet poppies in Griselda^s flower-bed. Miss Freddie was 
odd, she was foreign, her manners had a polish that unnerved 
those who dealt with her. Her desire for privacy amounted to 













CHAPTER X 


- 175 - 


a mania, and she had unlimited funds. She settled on the 
quarter north of Dan Meade, coming in by automobile shortly 
after her crew of builders arrived with cook car, bunk car 
and loads of materials. Rumors about her flew fast. 

"Foreign woman..." 

"She smokes...!" 

"Drives a big car too...!" 

Within a week she called at the store, riding a 
fine sorrel horse that excited almost as much attention as 
she did herself. She wore riding clothes: under the severe 
hat a heavy mass of black hair, braided and tightly coiled, 
streaked with grey, was pinned tightly to her head. She was 
a little above medium height, slender and erect, with small 
feet and meticulously gloved hands. 

Ignoring the curious eyes and speculative murmurs 
of those in the store, she approached Jasper directly and 
spoke with him at length concerning the mail service, the 
supply of building materials available, the possibility of 
getting stuff hauled from Maverick. Jasper ventured upon 
personalities. 

"Hope you’ll like it here, Ma’am. I f d like you 
to meet my wife — she’ll see that you get acquainted with 
folks around." 

"Thank you," replied Miss Freddie courteously. 
"Some other time, perhaps. I am rather hurried today." 
















CHAPTER X 


- 176 - 


And she moved away towards the door. The brilliant 
sunlight showed her to be about forty years of age, extremely 
dark, almost swarthy in coloring, with boldly-cut aquiline 
features. A sharply-chiselled nose, a determined cleft 
chin. In old age she would be witchlike, nutcracker-profiled, 
but now she was handsome in a gypsy fashion. Or rather, she 
would have been very handsome if life and animation had 
loosened the severe lines of her mouth and brought a sparkle 
to her eyes. They were her best feature, magnificent, 
heavy-lidded, and tragic, of a dark grey that looked in some 
lights almost brown. Above them her arched black brows drew 
together in a fold as though a cloud sat upon her brow, 
overshadowed her expression, a cloud of grief rather than of 
sullenness or anger. 

And when G-riselda finally met Miss Freddie, it 
was thanks to her own efforts, not to any advances made by 
the newcomer. She was not at first offended by Miss Freddie’s 
curtness and reserve. Rather she was convinced that here was 
an ally worth having, if only she could be persuaded to take 
the part. 

Miss Freddie’s house went up slowly. But it was 
no tarpaper shack. The materials were good, the workmanship 
of the best. It had a fireplace, a tall stone chimney, many 
windows. Few people saw the interior of the house, but a 















CHAPTER X 


- 177 - 


number dropped by out of curiosity to look at the building 
of it. Sometimes they were met by Miss Freddie herself, 
sometimes by the carpenters, sometimes by Alf, They were 
rarely invited in. 

Most of Miss Freddie f s business was conducted 
through Alf. He was a rabbity-looking little Englishman 
whose flat feet kept him out of the army, who dropped his 
h f s recklessly, and who took a pessimistic view of Western 
Canada. 

”Spyce! n Alf would ejaculate. "Spycel An* 
nothin’ in it — not an ’ouse fer miles! Wot kind of w’y 
is that for blokes to live, I arsk yer?” 

But Alf was devoted to Miss Freddie . He knew no 
more about her than did the others in her employ — he too 
had been recently hired in Calgary — but he was class 
conscious, and, as he said, he ’knew a lydy when he saw one!’ 

Alf’s accent, his ignorance of Canadian ways, 
and his easily-discovered timidity made him an object of 
pleasantries which he took in good part. He was deathly 
scared of Indians, and his companions plied him with grisly 
tales of death and destruction, often concluding, 

"Can’t trust ’em, these Indians! You wanta watch 
out, Alf, when they come down to the ranch with corral poles 
next spring!” 








. 

* 

- 

. ' 










. ' - • - : ■ 






* 


( j . * 

■ 

. 

. 1 

‘ 

.. , r , v.'' o 

- 


: • 


■ 

„ 

« . f 

. 


1 


■ 


. ' ' . 


i 






• oi'> ; r .d rorf"; t ^ ■ 


m ■ 









CHAPTER X 


- 178 - 


Or: "Back where 3^ come from, they always said 

the only good Indian was a dead Indian I” 

Ches Meade varied the theme with horrible realism. 

"You wanta watch out for that scalp of yoursJ 
They say they like hair that color — sorta reddish! Shows 
up better’n the dark kind.” 

Poor Alf was stung to retaliate. 

" ’Ow about yer own ’air? Pretty light, ain’t it?" 

"Oh... 1^ keep outa the way when there’s Indians 
about. B’sides they got one yellow-haired scalp somewheres 
— one with long hair — a girl’s I guess. But no red-haired 
one as I ever heard tell, an’ heard a lot about Indians!" 

Alf grinned feebly, passing a protective hand over 
his gingery locks. "You’re chaffin’ me, Ches — Indians don’t 
go scalp-’untin’ now...” 

But his tone lacked conviction and he cast once or 
twice uneasy looks over his shoulder towards the far horizons 
whence the painted and tomahawked terror might be expected 
to fall. 

After a while he became accustomed to the teasing, 
and because he took it well, it fell off. Alf, with his 
simplicity, his admiration for those who could do things 
according to the ways of this strange land, was really a 
likable little fellow. 










... t - I sie : ; it> ■ e 

; 




* . 
















CHAPTER X 


- 179 - 


He was taciturn about his employer* He could not, 
or would not, speak of Miss Frederika. People began to resent 
her unsociability, to regard her with suspicion as odd, 
freakish, "stuck-up”, and foreign* An ugly rumor went the 
rounds that Miss Freddie was a pro-German, a spy* 

Jasper Kerrigan took a common sense view of the 


matter. 


"Doesn f t seem to me there’s much to spy on ’round 


here l " 

"Well," protested the exponent of the spy theory, 
"how about that Conrad Busch that was hangin’ around a year 
or two ago? The Mounties got after him, didn’t they?" 

"Yes," admitted Jasper, "They got after him for 
talking around that Canadians were fools to go to the war. 
’Course he was a German — anyone c’d see that, if he did 
have American citizenship. But I don’t see that makes Miss 
Freddie one — she doesn’t go anywhere, nor talk to anybody." 

Jasper’s defence of her did not squash the gossip 
that raged about Miss Freddie. No one knew anything about 
her beyond that she had arrived in Calgary, bought her land 
and stock, and engaged workmen on an unprecedented scale. 

The latter said that she paid well, and left them alone. But 
they admitted she was odd. 


"How — odd...?" 



. 


. 

* 




* 










< 

• ■ 










‘ 





. 












- 


■ 

* ■ 













: 







■ 



a 





t 








.... 










. 

. 




: $e .■: .f 













: 

* 

: : : . i ... - 

. 











CHAPTER X 


- 180 - 


Well, she was simply throwing money into the 
building, but her furniture was little better than you f d 
find in a bachelor T s shack. And she didn f t sleep much — 
she wandered about at night through the incompleted rooms, 
and walked out over the fields at dusk or dawn... She talked 
to herself, too, said one, and sometimes she cried. It was 
odd too that she always wore gloves. 

” Afraid of spoiling her hands,” said Griselda 
uncharitably. ”Ever notice how little her hands are? Never 
done a day’s work in her life, I’ll be bound!” 

For Griselda by this time had made several attempts 
to draw Miss Freddie into community activities and had been 
courteously but firmly refused. Miss Freddie preferred to 
remain aloof and said so. One thing only came out in the 
course of that summer, and Ches Meade, who had worked on 
Miss Freddie’s house, discovered that. He told it immediately 
and it added afresh to the curiosity about the stranger. 

Miss Freddie wore gloves because her hands were badly scarred 
with freshly-healed scars, perhaps of burns of recent date. 
Griselda revised her opinions somewhat after she, too, caught 
Miss Freddie without her gloves when she drove up with Jasper 
one day on business. The other woman flinched for a moment 
as if to put her hands behind her back, then recovered herself, 
and with a mechanical smile, reached for the thin leather 
gloves and drew them on. 




■ > 










: 












e 




- 








£5 i zo-n 




■ 

. 




















CHAPTER X 


- 181 - 


W I wear them all the time when people are around, 
she murmured. "The scars are so — so ugly...” 

Her face contorted but she controlled it: her 
strange eyes stared past Griselda at something invisible 
to others. Griselda was embarrassed, oppressed by the sense 
of tragedy that hung about this woman. She found herself 
at a loss for words until Miss Freddie with quick tact 
changed the subject. Griselda went home convinced that 
it was not pride or a sense of her own superiority that 
kept Miss Freddie aloof. 

"She ! s had trouble," she said to Jasper. "I 
guess we f d better leave her alone until she gets over it 
a bit." 

Miss Frederika f s house was up before the winter 
came on. The carpenters and workmen left, and she remained 
there alone save for two men, Alf and Sam, who attended to 
the animals. She had some fine stock. The big automobile 
was stored in Calgary, and, like her neighbors, Miss Freddie 
depended upon horses to take her where she wished to go. 

She went out seldom, but wrote many letters, and mail came 
for her every week, much of it from the United States, some 
from South America, some from England or France. She had 
few visitors, and as she never returned a call, they did 

not go again. 

It was the unsociable side of the community, this 



c :■ 












CHAPTER X 


- 182 - 


lying north of the store. There in the rolling leaseland 
was the ranch, inhabited at that season only by Mr. Hampton- 
Reid, Harry Wise, and Lee Y/ong. Beside the bridge, just 
inside the lease, squatted Bill Lilly. He came to the store 
twice a month for food and tobacco: his furtive little 
figure, gun in hand, prowled the hills, or plodded along 
the coulee. In season of deep snow he wore snowshoes, 
skimming over the white world with uncanny ease. The local 
lads in their rabbit hunts gave the old man a wide berth. 

Then, east of Old Bill’s tarpaper shack there 
was Dan Meade’s, with Dan and Ches. North of them again 
was Miss Freddie. 

’’Not one of ’em ever comes out,” said Griselda 
sadly, if inaccurately. ’’That big room of Miss Freddie’s 
would be a fine place for the women to meet and hold a 
quilting once in a while. But I guess if she don’t want 
to mix, she don’t have to.” 

’’Well, you can see Alf every week if you’ve a 
mind to,” said her husband consolingly. 

’’That Alf2” I don’t know if he’s as silly as 
he looks!.. Just grins away an’ never a word to say!” 

»How about Ches’n Dan? They spend enough time at 
the store if you want a good gossip with them ,” suggested 
Y/alter with serious face. 















CHAPTER X 


-.183 - 


"Dan indeed!" G-riselda spluttered with indignation. 
"Dan! An 1 that ChesJ Well — I don’t know as you can expect 
much more of the boy, living there with Dan. But he’s not 
turning out very well. And there’s a limit to what the rest 
of us can do for him!" 















CHAPTER XI 


184 - 


FORCES OF DESTRUCTION 

Late that fall came the Armistice. The war over: 
and those who had had the thought of it heavy upon them for 
four long:years knew relief, but not for long. The Spanish 
influenza epidemic swept over one continent, crossed an 
ocean to invade a second, and crept westward. Eastern Canada 
and the United States, the big cities, the small western 
cities, the little towns, and finally the thinly populated 
farmland knew the infection of disease and fear. The terror 
of the »flu was everywhere: depressing rumors of overcrowded 
hospitals, of soup kitchens established in the cities to 
feed those whose homes were disorganized by the epidemic, 
tales of whole families in remote spots stricken and dying, 
one by one, circulated from mouth to mouth. Travel was 













CHAPTER XI 


- 185 - 


restricted: people were ordered to wear masks. 

Dan Meade, celebrating the Armistice in his accus¬ 
tomed fashion in the Prairie Vista Hotel, collapsed. He got 
a ride back to Rolling Slopes with a neighbor, and died two 
days later — the first to be dug in the Rolling Slopes cem¬ 
etery, half a mile east of the store. A cold north wind rustled 
through the tangled brown grass, flapped a tattered bit of 
paper oaught in the barbed wire fence beside some dusty strands 
of wool from the sheep that Jackson had pastured there a couple 
of years before. A flurry of snowflakes whirled in the air 
before the ceremony was over that committed the body of Dan 
Meade, to the keeping of the prairie whence he had sought 
refuge from the struggle he could not face. A few people only 
were present at Dan’$funeral, and the words of sympathy ex¬ 
tended to his nephew were purely conventional. 

"Guess you’re on your own, now Ches.” 

"I guess so..." 

Ches himself felt little grief. He had lived for 
six years with Dan, and they had taken each other for granted. 
Dan’s death was a surprise, but not a sorrow. 

The winter turned colder. Deep snow fell and the 
coulee bottoms, the rough roads were almost impassable. The 
weather, the land, the ’flu all seemed to league together 
to terrorize humanity. A shadow lay upon the world, blacker 
than that the war had cast. For this dread was near at hand 














CHAPTER XI 


- 186 - 


and spared no one, whereas there were many at Rolling Slopes 
who had never felt the effects of the war save in an increased 
prosperity. 


Griselda volunteered her services as nurse and 
accompanied the overworked doctor into several stricken homes. 
Her energy flagged under the continual strain, but she found 
at the time she was busiest an unexpected ally. Miss Frederika 
appeared at the store one day and demanded to see her. 

"Can you nurse?" asked Griselda doubtfully when 
the offer was made. 

"Yes," replied the other quietly. "Where shall I 

go?" 


"There’s Jackson’s. And Ches Meade is sick. He’s 
alone there ~ it’s an awful little place — they never oleaned 
it up. There’s a good well at Jackson’s and she’s a nice clean 
woman..." 


"I would rather not go where there are children!" 
Griselda accepted the vehement statement matter- 


of-factly. 

"All right. I’ll go there. Can you look in an’ 
see how Ches is? Send Alf down tomorrow night an’ let me know 
an’ I’ll tell the doctor Mien he comes on Friday." 

"I’ll come myself," said Miss Freddie. "Alf has 

been sick. So has Sam." 

"You mean — you had two of ’em ill at once?" 























CHAPTER XI 


- 187 - 


"Yes." 

Griselda passed a hand over her aching brow. 

"I guess you'll manage," she conceded. 

Miss Freddie took some medicines and went her way, 
the snow flying like spray from the narrow runners of the 
cutter. 

She nursed Ches for several days, and when he was 
better sent Alf, by then recovered, to stay for three days 
more. Miss Freddie herself moved on to the ranch where Harry 
Wise was the only one to escape the contagion, and from there 
to a farm west of the lease. 

As spring came on, the shadow lifted, and the 'flu 
subsided. But it had been a dreadful winter: a nightmare re¬ 
minder to Griselda of the years she had spent in isolation 
faced by inimical wilderness, winter, and sickness. 

Nor did it end with the coming of spring, for in 
May, after the crops were seeded, there was a great blizzard, 
a freak storm that lasted for three days and nights and piled 
snow high over the tops of buildings and strawstacks. Joe's 
little shack was almost buried in the high drift raised by 
the Kerrigans' buildings and the store. Losses on the range 
were tremendous, for the cattle were back on the lease, and 
Mr. Hampton-Reid could count his dead cows, each with its 
calf, by the hundreds. Many had drifted before the driving 
wind, only to suffocate in the deep snow of the creek-bed. 






. 



















CHAPTER XT 


- 188 - 


Old Bill Lilly was dug out of his drift like a hibernating 
bear. He manifested about as much gratitude for the favor, 
grunting something that might as well have been a curse as 
a word of thanks. 

"Damned if I know why we bothered," said Harry 
Wise, shouldering his shovel as he prepared to move on. 

"He might as well be under the snow as above itJ We f ll get 
as much thanks from the cows if there’s any left alive in 
that hollowJ 

Since the ’flu epidemic Miss Freddie was on a 
different footing with her neighbors. People no longer 
resented her aloofness, but came to take for granted Griselda’ 
explanation of it. 

"She’s had trouble — that’s what makes her so 
queer. But she’s good-hearted for all that." 

Other rumors — those concerning Miss Freddie’s 
foreign ways and the newspapers in strange languages that 
came for her -- were lulled when old Mr. Hampton-Reid called 
on her. He only went twice in the months she remained at 
Rolling Slopes, but he was solicitous for her welfare and 
often sent up a man to see if she wanted any help. Thus 
it seemed certain that she was persona grata with the Mounted 
Police, 

Meanwhile Miss Freddie seemed happier. She worked 
around the farmyard and commenced raising poultry. Her 



















CHAPTER XI 


- 189 - 


neighbors took to dropping in occasionally, offered advice 
which was gracefully received, and departed, issuing invitations 
to visit them. Miss Freddie thanked them, and rarely accepted. 

At the end of July, Ches Meade went to Calgary 
and there saw Miss Freddie and Alf, accompanied by a severe- 
looking grey haired man, entering an office block. Only 
the fact that the movie to which he was bound started in 
ten minutes kept him from waiting around to intercept them. 

As it was, he gave speculation a free rein. 

The explanation was actually so simple as to be 
uninteresting. Miss Freddie had gone up to get her car 
out of storage: Alf had made an emergency visit to the 
dentist. But when Ches got back to Rolling Slopes, one of 
the first things he saw v/as Miss Freddie’s big car with Alf 
at the wheel. He brought up the subject for discussion at 
the store. 

"Seen Miss Freddie an’ Alf drivin’ around in the 

car?" 

"They went past twice today,” said Jasper Kerrigan. 

"She’s teachin’ him to drive," volunteered Ches, 
who had extracted this information from Sam who likewise 
worked for Miss Freddie. 

"That so?" 

"Looks like Alf had a permanent job there," remarked 













< 






. 












* • 











CHAPTER XI 


- 190 - 


"I shouldn’t wonder if Alf was runnin’ the place 
pretty soon,” said Ches significantly. Gratified by the 
interest aroused by this statement, he went on, 

'‘He’s crazy about her." 

Someone demurred. "Aw, she wouldn’t look at Alf. 
What would a woman like that — educated an’ got money an' 
looks — if you like ’em dark — what would she want with a 
funny little fellow like Alf?" 

"It’s amazing what some women will marry, an’ some 
men too, for that matter," said Mr. Kerrigan. 

Mrs. Redding, an inveterate gossip, broke into the 

laughter. 

"Do you mean to say, Ches Meade, that Miss Freddie 
an’ Alf are gettin’ married ?" 

Ches hesitated, reluctant to seem ignorant of such 
an interesting matter. He was not often listened to with such 
breathless attention. 

"Aw, come on, Ches! What d’ye know? You’re always 
up there at Miss Freddie’s." 

"All I know," said Ches, drawing it out deliberately, 
"isn’t much... I seen ’em in Calgary last week with an’ old 
grey-haired guy an’ they all seemed pretty friendly. An’ now 
she’s teaching him to drive her car. Looks like there might 
be a reason!" 

The evidence was weighed for a few seconds. 
















CHAPTER XI 


- 191 - 


"Man an 1 woman don't live long together on the 
prairie Hhout gettin’ married — if they can I" pronounced 
one listener. Instances were immediately forthcoming. 

"Johnson married his housekeeper an ? her nearly 
ten years older if she’s a dayl" 

"Jack Kesson married his partner’s sister that 
came out to live with them!" 

"There was that old bachelor just this side of 
Maverick — what’s - ’s-name...?" 

"I wouldn’t be a bit surprised," said Mrs. Redding. 
"She lets Alf handle all her business." 

"An’ she does seem a lot more settled lately..." 

"How about it, Jasper?" 

"I don’t know." Mr. Aerrigan shook his head. He 
was uneasy over the whole situation: Griselda was away from 
home and was not expected back for two weeks, and at moments 
like this he missed her quick grasp of the matter. He knew 
that he could deal with the men at any time, but when the 
women came on the scene, he was at a loss. He temporized. 

"She’s an educated woman an' Alf’s pretty ignorant. 
But Alf’s learnt a lot since he came here, an’ he looks out 
for Miss Freddie pretty well. Still, I doubt they'd ever get 
married.” 

But public opinion continued to favor the idea of 
marriage. G-riselda was away: she would have been quite capable 
of asking Miss Freddie outright if she were married. Mrs. 














CHAPTER XI 


- 192 - 


Redding did not: instead she asked Alf. He immediately 
became violently flustered and denied it with such vehemence 
that his interrogator was convince he was a bad liar. Other 
people asked him with the same results. Ches embellished his 
tale a little, and without too much ornament it confirmed 
the notion that there had been a wedding. 

When someone suggested a charivari, the idea spread 
These celebrations were in the air: there had been several 
local weddings lately and each couple was noisily *shivareed ! 
by the neighbors who collected late at night around the 
dwelling with all sorts of noisemakers to raise a din. After 
five minutes of clamour, they trooped inside, bearing the 
’eats 1 for the occasion, and held a crowded and noisy 
impromptu housewarming for the couple. If the latter were 
lucky, they had received warning of what was to befall. 
Otherwise it came as a total and often embarrassing surprise. 

Several people demurred at the notion of a 
f shivaree f for Miss Freddie. 

”She f s so queer — do you think she T d like it?” 
said Emma Burton doubtfully when the idea was proposed to her. 

r, And who says she is. married?” 

“Everybody knows it,” said Mrs. Redding impatiently 
She was an assertive, talkative woman with a long-standing 
conflict with Griseiaa in the Women's Club. "Ches Meade 
saw them in Calgary just coming out of church." 













CHAPTER XI 


- 193 - 


"Ches is the worst liar that I know” said Emma. 
"If he says so, you can be sure it’s wrong] Mother’ll be 
back in a week — she knows Miss Freddie better than anyone 
else does." 

"There’s quite a lot goes on in this community 
your mother doesn’t know!" snapped the other. "An’ some of 
us think we’re quite capable of doing things without her 
to tell us I" 

"And some of you would be dead too, if it wasn’t 
for my mother," said Emma angrily. 

The shot told, and the woman rose to go. 

"Oh, I don’t say your mother doesn’t do a lot 
for the community — she does. Don’t think that, Emma. 

When did you say she’ll be back?" 

Two days before Griselda’s return, the charivari 
party assembled at Ches Meade’s place. It did not include 
the Burtons, the Kerrigans, or the Nordstaads, but was 
composed entirely of the more frivolous elements of the 
community. 

The group decided to drive over the field, taking 
a short cut that would bring them out behind Miss Freddie’s 
barn and granaries, well away from the house. 

In line the buggies crept along, and the riders 
trotted beside them. Laughter and talk fell off as they 
neared the buildings. A few hasty directions were given and 















CHAPTER XI 


- 194 - 


received. 

"You take the east side of the house, George, sin 1 
wait till I whistle...! 

"Is there a dog?" 

"Ches’ll look after the dog — it knows him..." 

"Where’s the tin?" 

"Holy Moses! don’t shake it, man...J" 

"Give us a hand here to hold this thing still...!" 

Two dark figures grasped the clumsy sheet of 
galvanized iron, attempting to carry it and muffle the tinny 
thunder it emitted when shaken. 

The men and boys slipped out of sight among the 
buildings. The women of the party hung back, whispering, 
in a little crowd near the fence where the tethered horses 
munched and stamped. 

It was a warm, dark, moonless night, oppressive 
and airless. A few dim stars gleamed overhead, and the vague 
outlines of the low hills blended into the sky without sharp 
demarcation. Against the general dimness the buildings stood 
up black and distinct and massive with a solidity that daylight 
denied to their ordinary wooden structure. 

Only at one corner of the house the lamplight 
stramed out between curtains that did not quite meet, cutting 
a yellow wedge in the darkness. Fluttering moths danced in 
















CHAPTER XI 


- 195 - 


the ray of light: the watchers were plagued by humming 
mosquitoes. A girl giggled shrilly, another hushed her, and 
subdued rustle ran through the group. 

M I don’t think — I — I f m not sure about this...” 
said a low, hesitating voice. There was a murmur of assent, 
and one woman shifted her basket of sandwiches to the other 
arm. 

"It don’t seem like a charivari somehow." 

"That’s just ’cause Miss Freddie ain’t so well 
known to us as — oh, as Emma and Henry..." 

"Maybe you’re right there. Was that the signal 
for us to move up?" 

No one moved willingly. The place was unfamiliar 
to them, and the reserve that the strange woman, its owner, 
cast about herself seemed to be in the very air, to hang 
broodingly from the dark sky, to lay clogs upon their feet, 
binding them to the dark earth. A little figure dogled back 
to them. 

"Hey, Mom! The men are all ready. Why don’t 

you come?" 

Thus bidden, the group moved slowly up the little 
slope towards the buildings. Passing between the barn and 
the granaries they stationed themselves at the rear of the 
house. Then with a thunderous rattle of the galvanized iron 





. ■: 










. 

- 

* 

, >■ . ' - : 


* 














* 7 

. 









CHAPTER XI 


- 196 - 


sheet, pandemonium opened in Miss Freddie’s yard. The clang 
of an iron triangle came in like the notes of a tolling bell. 
The rattle of the school hand-bell, an iron spoon beating 
on a tin pan, pebbles shaken in a tin bucket, a variety of 
whistles, children’s toy trumpets all contributed to the din. 

The door flew open and lamplight streamed into the 
night. Miss Frederika stepped into the lighted square: her 
figure looked taller than usual in a long dark-red robe, her 
heavy black hair hung loose below her waist. For a moment 
she stood blinded by the darkness. 

"Who is it?" she cried. "Who are you? Why are 
you making this noise?" Her strained voice, her tense 
attitude betrayed her fear. One or two of the watchers 
stepped forward to reassure her and to explain. The remainder 
of the charivari party pressed forward from the darkness. 

Then, suddenly a frantic little figure burst into the lighted 
square — Alf, half-dressed, his dishevelled gingery locks 
on end, his prominent grey eyes popping. He carried the 
little axe from the bunkhouse wood-pile in his hands: with 
one arm he swept Miss Freddie from the door-step back into 
the kitchen and took up his stand upon the threshold. Alf, 
the timid, aroused from his slumbers by an infernal din, had 
determined to sell his life dearly in protecting Miss Freddie. 

Then the tension snapped in a gust of hysterical 
laughter. Alf recognized his neighbors and dropped the axe, 









.— 


- ’v'- 




. 

: 


; 


























. . 

















V " • •. ;/ ... CISR* 










, 

■ ■ ■ ' • ■ 


' 













CHAPTER XI 


- 197 - 


and people came slowly towards the door, or recognizing that 
they had made a.dreadful mistake, stood back uneasily out 
of the light# Sam, the stolid Pole, appeared blinking from 
the bunkhouse, and his first stumbling words to Alf confirmed 
the error. 


here?” 


"What’s matter, Alf. What you wanta bring da axe 


Those on the outskirts of the charivari party who 
had not yet shown themselves melted quiety away — not far 
away. Inside the house embarrassing explanations were taking 
place and a morbid curiosity to see the end of it all possessed 
everyone. 

"What is it? Why are you here?" Paced by people 
she knew, Miss Freddie had recovered her poise, and a deepening 
line between her black brows indicated that she was not going 
to be satisfied with anything less than a complete explanation. 
To tell her that they had thought she was married to Alf was 
quite at that moment beyond anyone’s powers. Alf, espying 
Ches in the group, dragged him aside and demanded an answer, 
and Ches’s reply filled in clearly the awkward silence in 
the kitchen. 

"We thought you an’ Miss Freddie was married, Alf, 
honest we did — you bein’ in Calgary with her an’ drivin f 
her car an’ all...” 
















..... . ; -t ^ o 












. — 






















CHAPTER XI 


- 198 - 


Poor Alf was smitten dumb for the moment, but the 
brief ineffectual gestures he made to silence Ches were lost* 
Miss Freddie caught the words. 

"Married!" she said, her deep voice almost strident. 
"MarriedJ" Who said that?” she looked about the uneasy, 
hang-dog circle of faces: at Alf, crimson and fidgety, and 
Ches and Sam, whose dark, mask-like face was quite expression¬ 
less. One or two of the women tittered under the look, one 
began to cry. 

She turned back to Alf. "Did you tell them that?” 
He flinched and stuttered, and her relentless voice cut across 
hisspluttsrings like a lash. 

"Answer me I Did you tell these people — that I” 

Evidently, Alf f s misery reassured her, for she 
turned back to the others and spoke quietly. 

”No one has been married here. You have made a 
mistake. Now go! ff 

There was a movement towards the door. One or two 
stopped to apologize, but Miss Freddie cut them short. 

"Leave me alone 1" she said bitterly. "Why do you 
not leave me alone? Get out! Get off my land and never come 

here againJ Go, I tell youJ" 

They left her there, erect in her long red robe, 
her grey-brown eyes staring into space, her chiselled features 













CHAPTER XI 


- 199 - 


hard. When all were out, Alf followed them and gently closed 
the door. 

"You hadn’t oughta done it," he said miserably to 
the dim forms in the darkness. ’’She’s had enough trouble. 

You hadn’t oughta done iti She was feelin’ so much better an’ 
now you went an’ done this to ’erl” 

He disappeared into the bunk house and Sam, shrugging 
his shoulders, followed. Confused and ashamed, the charivari 
party went to their separate home s . 

For many weeks afterwards the incident was the 
only subject of discussion. It had been highly unfortunate 
for all concerned, and they sought for a scapegoat to blame. 

Ches Meade seemed a likely target of anger for a while, but 
he defended himself hotly, and no one could remember that 
he had actually said Miss Freddie and Alf were married. 

Cradul^ily the anger and resentment turned back on Miss Freddie. 

”’Course it was a mistake, an’ we apologized] An’ 
look how she took it -- wouldn’t listen — ordered us off the 
place]” 

’’She could ’a been a sport about it an’ not acted 

like that.’ ” 

Two weeks later Miss Freddie was gone. Alf announced 
the fact two days after her departure. Then a lawyer came 
out from Calgary to arrange for the disposal of her property, 













CHAPTER XI 


200 


and in the course of a talk with Mr. Kerrigan revealed the 
mystery of Miss Freddie’s conduct. He proved to be the same 
grey-haired man who had excited Ches’s curiosity in Calgary. 

"A remarkable womanl" he said. "Well... it is 
only right that she should take up her life again where it 
left off." 

Mr. Kerrigan made a murmur of assent, and the lawyer 

continued. 

"She should never have come out here — there f s 
nothing here for a woman like thatJ" His gaze swept the 
rolling land to the distant skyline, and he added, "But of 
course she was old Vanloder’s grandaughter, and I suppose 
she remembered the country from when she was a child. His 
ranch was just about here, wasn’t it?" 

Mr. Kerrigan agreed. "Before my time, but the 
Vanloder lease smarted about here - in the ’80’s." Much 
of the information was new to him, and he cast out bait. 

"A tragedy..." he remarked, and the lawyer 
responded in gratifying detail. 

"A tragedy indeed — I remember when it came out 
in the papers. Both children burned to death in the summer¬ 
house on the country estate. Her husband used it as a studio 
of course, and it was full of paints and oils. They thought 
she would go out of her mind." 

"Those scars.,." 














- 


■ 

















CHAPTER XI 


201 


"Trying to save the children.. But she's gone back 
to her husband now.. 1 wonder..." He looked up at the solid, 
well-built house. "You'd think she'd intended to live here 
for the rest of her life! Better as it is — much better!" 

Alf and Sam remained on Miss Freddie's farm until 
after harvest. Then they too left, and only the house with the 
stone chimney remained to show that Miss Freddie with her 
grief and her obsession had once sojourned at Rolling Slopes, 
endeavoring to wrest from her solitude forgetfulness of her 
tragedy. 

Griselda, arriving home some days after the ill- 
fated 'shivaree 1 , was shocked and angered by the news of it. 
Miss Freddie's tragic voice rang in her ears: her curtness 
took on a new and dreadful significance. 

"I would rather not go where there are children..." 

"The scars are so ugly..." 

Anger gathered slowly within her against the people 
who had let themselves be deceived into taking part in the 
'shivaree' - some of them had been the recipients of Miss 
Freddie's kindness during the epidemic. Had they then no 
perception, no feelings, no sense , that they should do such 
a thing, knowing as they did her aloofness and reserve? 

"Poor thing!" said Griselda. "If I'd been here, 
it never would have happened! If I'd come back when I planned 



















CHAPTER XI 


202 


to, instead of staying that extra week, I could have spared 
her thatl" 

She could not make up her mind to agree with the 
old lawyer’s summing up of the matter, his assumption that 
Miss Freddie was wise to take up her old life once more, 

"She’ll never forget there. But here — she might I" 
And, moreover, ran the unspoken thoughts, a woman like that 
-- if* she so chose -- could do much, so much, in a country 
district. Griselda, for whom work was ever a panacea, sighed 
at the thought of the waste that a few irresponsibles had 
brought about. 

"We needed her, and she needed us... I’ll give them 
a piece of my mindI 


Subsequently she allowed herself that luxury, waiting 
until Mrs. Redding, her private thorn-in-the-flesh, and the 
organizer of the abortive charivari, had had her say about it 
at a Club meeting. Mrs. Redding was injured. 

"And the ?/ay she talked to us you wouldn’t believe2 
We was just trying to be neighborly too, but that’s what you 
get for trying to be good to foreigners!" 

"Miss Freddie’s an American like you are," said 
Griselda with satisfaction. Mrs. Redding flushed and bridled, 
and Griselda continued, 












CHAPTER XI 


- 203 - 


"And I think you got w A at was coming to you, buttin’ 
in on people that wanted nothing but to be let alone. It’s 
time these shivarees stopped -- nothing but a chance for 
people to make nuisances of themselves!" 

"Back in the States*.." began the indignant victim, 
her hand trembling so that she could hardly make the next 
stitch on the quilt that was spread out between the two 
opponents, "back home we think it’s quite a neighborly 
thing to give people a shivareel" 

"Time you all outgrew that nonsense," returned 
the descendant of Loyalists. "So far’s any more doings for 
new-married folks is concerned, I’m all for having ’em in 
the school, like a social, an’ breakin’ up with a dance like 
civilized folks, ’stead of a bunch of painted Indians yellin’ 
’round the house] And speaking of the school — it’s getting 
too small for the crowd we get now. Time we thought of a 
hall here — maybe the U.F.A. would come in on the building 
of one." 

And in the discussion that followed this suggestion, 
the outraged Mrs. Redding had no opportunity to justify herself 


further 














jj _ 

































CHAPTER XII 


204 


A NEUTRAL MOTHER 

Before 1920, the veterans had returned to Rolling 
Slopes, Albert Horner was soon followed by his wife, Maude, 
and the two little boys, Griselda awaited the arrival of Maude 
with some interest: she had always like Albert, and she had 
a secret hope that Maude might fill the role she had destined 
for Miss Freddie, 

But Maude, although she fitted in well at Rolling 
Slopes, was not of a type to make a community leader, A 
cheerful, bustling little person, better educated than her 
husband, she quickly made friends. Within a few years she had 
come to be Griselda f s favorite among the younger women. 

Mrs. MacGillis, it seemed, was not to be easily 
replaced. Of Emma, Griselda made few demands. Since Emma had 
deliberately closed a door between them, Griselda was not 















CHAPTER XII 


- 20.5 - 


going to be the first to open it. Emma attended club meetings 
and church, and did an average amount of work for the Ladies* 
Aid. But for organization, special committees, or teaching 
Sunday School, Griselda looked for aid elsewhere. Most of the 
women had young children and their time was limited. Mrs. 

Price, whose youngest child, Eileen, was now twelve, was as 
uncertain and inefficient as ever. But Doris Price, for two 
years, became an unexpectedly valuable ally to Griselda. 

She was still unmarried, an unattractive girl with 
pale, thin features and a gawky figure. As in her school days, 
she was still painfully conscious of the fact. But she was an 
able and willing helper with the Women*s Institute, an untiring 
worker for the many dances, socials, and raffles that were 
held between 1920-1924 to raise funds to build the community 
hall. Griselda invariably selected Doris as an assistant in 
preference to Mabel Prescott who often volunteered her ser¬ 
vices, perhaps in an effort to placate Walter’s antagonistic 
mother. 

Antagonistic she still was, and remained so during 
the years when Walter and Mabel’s romance seemed to stand 
still. In the spring of 1920, however, she had almost reconciled 
herself to the marriage. Walter went to see Mabel every week: 
he had discussed a business partnership with his father. To 
Griselda he said little, and she was determined not to ask. 

”They can come and tell me I” she said, and her 


& 





c 


5 








( 


c 



t 




t 
















- / 





















CHAPTER XII 


- 206 - 


attitude was so forbidding that Walter’s courage froze when¬ 
ever he tried to mention Mabel* He was naturally inarticulate, 
lacked the stolidity that enabled his father and sister 
to cope so well with Griselda’s difficult moods by ignoring 
them until such time as she gave in* 

Griselda was quite conscious that she had no legi¬ 
timate grounds for objecting to Mabel Prescott, and she was 
wise enough not to speak of her prejudice to anyone but 
Jasper or Emma. 

"Girl’s got no gumption!" she said tartly* "No 
more brains than God give a goose 1 Walter’s too easy-going 
anyway. He needs a wife with some get-an’-go to her!" 

"To tell the truth," remarked Jasper thoughtfully, 
"I can’t see you approvin’ of a gal that bossed Walter around 
the way you do!" 

Emma was equally doubtful. 

"Oh, Mother, you know very well you wouldn’t think 
much of any girl that Walter married! Mabel’s just the kind 
he needs. He’d send any lively girl crazy — poking around 
as if he was about forty, ’stead of twenty-five!" 

Griselda began to entertain serious doubts of her 
own position, and to reconsider her stand on Mabel. But she 
made no gesture of reconciliation towards the young people, 
and the events of the Valentine’s Day box social took matters 


out of her hands 



i 












t 





t ' * 


i 



< 















CHAPTER XII 


- 207 - 


This affair was of course held in the schoolroom, 
that the children had decorated beforehand. Twisted red-and- 
white paper streamers ran from corner to corner: enormous 
red hearts with white frills were tacked up at each window. 

On the front blackboard, an enormous valentine in colored 
chalks presented the conventional display of hearts, blue¬ 
birds, tulips, and roses. A display of valentines made by 
the school in art class himg on a string all along the side 
blackboard, ornamented with hearts and arrows, blotted cupids 
in pale pink, lobster-red, or crimson, and lavish borders 
of gilt paint. The side blackboard itself was, by public 
request, kept clear of chalk decorations, for the sa£e of 
those who came to socials and dances to lounge against the 
side walls. 

The box social was almost ready to begin when 
Dave Wilkie arrived. He was by nature unsociable and hard¬ 
working: his absence from community merrymakings was taken 
as a matter of course. But on this occasion he wore a neat 
navy-blue serge suit instead of the overalls in which he 
was familiar to his neighbors, and his long, stubborn jaw 
was without its usual crop of fair bristles. 

Wave’s sure spruced up l" was the general comment. 
"What 1 s up?" 

Dave greeted his neighbors curtly and sat down on 
one of the long benches under the windows. Sone of the school 










CHAPTER XII 


- 208 - 


desks had been piled up in the cloakrooms, others were pushed 
to the back of the room and boards spread across to serve for 
tables for the lunch. After supper they too would be piled up 
to increase the size of the cleared space for dancing. 

Several men sat along the side benches, and a knot 
of idle lads, Ches Meade, Walter Kerrigan, Maurice Jackson, 
Bertie Price, and others, talked, laughed loudly, and jostled 
by the stove at the back of the room. The women entering by 
ones and twos had to walk the length of the room to deposit 
their baskets in the boarded-off well at the side of the 
stage. 

Five minutes argument among the men concluded with 
Albert Horner stepping up on the platform. He acknowledged 
a hearty clapping with a polite bow and rapped loudly onthe 
teacher’s desk. 

"School’s called1” said Ches. 

"Gentlemen!" began Albert Horner in a slow voice, 
"We’ll make it lively. This corner’s full of gorgeous boxes!" 
He dived into the wooden well and drew out a box loosely 
wrapped in newspaper. "Now," he continued, "let me tell you, 
ever since I met a pal in Juunnon with a bloke that ’ad been 
with Allenby’s mob, I’ve always fancied one of these ’arems. 
An’ I’ll bid meself on every box to see if I can’t sit up 
’ere on the stage with ’alf a dozen of the best looking ladies 
in Rolling Slopes. Yer better look lively, gents —better 













CHAPTER XII 


- 209 - 


look lively! Now then...” 

He stripped off the newspaper and held up the 
brightly-colored box* 

"Look at this ’un would you gents! Red, white an’ 
blue — patriotic I calls it. Who’ll bid me ’igh for a flying 
atart?" 

"Two bits!" said a disrespectful voice from the 


rear* 


"Garn!" said Mr. Horner scornfully. " Two bits , ’e 
says... f oo bid two bits on this lovely box? Is that Ches 
Meade? Ah, you’ll never come to good, me lad, valuing the 
labor of a woman’s ’hands like that! Now I’ll bid a quid — 

I mean a buck!" 

"One an’ a half," squeaked Joe Griggs. 

"Two," said Mr. Kerrigan. 

"Two an’ a quarter," came clearly from the huge 

Nordstaad. 

"That’s the way, boys, that’s the way," encouraged 
Albert. "Keep ’er up. Any advance on two an’ a quarter?" 

"Two-fifty." It was Henry Burton’s low voice. 

"Two-fifty? Any advance on two-fifty? Going at 
fifty...going...gone! Sold for two-fifty to Henry Burton! I 
guess I don’t get Emma for lunch!" 

Henry Burton, without opening the box to find the 
name of its owner, had made a bee-line for his wife. 
















CHAPTER XII 


- 210 


"Next, gents, we T ll f ave this pink one with the 
cupids on it. Ah-h-h— there’s a pretty box for me oorner — 
fair treat this one is, eh, Maude? I’ll start this one at a 
dollar. Any advance on a dollar, gents?" 

"Two-fiftyl" The surprise bid came from George 
Evans, Burton’s hired man. There was no advance on the bid and 
Evans, apparently knowing without looking whose box he had 
bought, crossed the room to claim Doris Price as his partner. 
Doris, still pale and gawky, flushed self-consciously as the 
boys at the back whistled and clapped. 

The sale proceeded merrily, Albert’s quips keeping 
the crowd amused. 

"Would yer look at this one now? Bid quickly, Gents 1 
Bid quickly — I can’t ’old this ’ere box for long -- it’s 
’eavy, gents 1" 

The crowd guffawed and Maude Horner shook her fist 
at her husband. 

"One dollar," shouted Walter Kerrigan. 

"I’ll bid one-fifty,” said Albert. "Any advance 
on one-fifty? Going, going..." 

"Two,” said Ches, grinning. 

"Two an’ a quarter," said Mr. Horner. "Any advance?” 
But the box was his, and he handed it to his little son with 
the caution, "Don’t drop it, now, Jim.•.mind yer toes if you 


do!" 









CHAPTER XII 


211 - 


One of the last baskets that came up was a daintily- 
decorated circular affair with green and lavender ribbon bows, 
"’ere’s a beauty1“ said Albert, "What’s the bid¬ 
ding?" 


But the crowd had almost spent itself and no bid 
came for moment. Then a low "two dollars" sounded. 

Albert looked quizzically at the speaker and then 
across to Ches Meade 

"Worth more’n two dollars, ain’t it Ches?" 

"Three," said Ches, responding to the wink, and 
Walter, the first bidder, raised it to four. A knowing grin 
spread from face to face, and several men joined in the bidding. 

"Four-twenty-five1" 

"Fiftyl" 


"Any advance on four-fifty? Four fifty...." 

"Five!" Walter reddened. Across the room Mabel 
Prescott, a knot of the green and lavender ribbon at the throat 
of her white blouse, sat watching, pretending an indifference 
that her high color denied. She had not changed greatly in 
the four years since she came to Rolling Slopes. She was gentle, 
good-natured, with beauty that depended more upon her abundant 
golden hair and exquisite coloring than upon distintion of 
feature or animation of expression. 

"Five an’ a quarter!" said Jasper Kerrigan, and a 
roar of laughter went up. 




. 


< 














CHAPTER XII 


212 


"You’ll lose the old man yeti” said Engvald Nord- 
staad to Griselda. 

"Seems like it’s got to be one or the other of 
f eml” she replied drily. 

The bidding went ahead rapidly and the box was 
already at a record price. At ten dollars, Ytelter began to 
look uneasy. Although he wanted desperately to buy the box, 
he was saving money to buy a ring, and he wanted to:get a 
good one. He cast an appealing look towards Mabel, sitting 
serenely beside her married sister. She was deeply flushed, 
had never looked prettier. He would gladly have moved across 
to consult her in this emergency, but the intervening space 
was becoming crowded with desks and lunching couples, and 
every eye was fixed on him, or on Mabel, or on the box. 

"Looks like he’s in for itl” drawled Henry Burton. 

"It’s a shame,” said Emma angrily. "Those boys are 

meanI" 

But Ches and his cronies had dropped out of the 
bidding, and it seemed that waiter might get the box for twelve 
dollars. 

"Going at twelve,” shouted Mr. Horner. "Any advance 
on twelve dollars, going...” 

"Fifteen dollars!" 

Even Albert Horner was taken aback. He recovered 

quickly. 

"Thank you, Dave! Fifteen I’m bid. Any advance? 








c 










/ 

















CHAPTER XII 


- 213 “ 


Who’ll raise it?...•Fifteen.•• going, going...gone to Dave 
Wilkie at fifteen dollars I" 

In awed silence, Dave Wilkie clumped across the 
room to claim the box, a big man with a long, hard jaw, and 
close-set grey eyes. He had a fresh, healthy coloring and 
a thatch of hair nearly as fair as Mabel’s own. Watching 
him settle himself beside her at the desk, a good many came 
to the conclusion that Walter Kerrigan stood little chance 
there now. 

So, indeed, it proved. Walter could not explain 
himself to Mabel. She alleged that he had embarrassed her 
’before all those people’ by not taking her box whatever it 
might cost. The match which Mrs. Kerrigan had feared never 
came to pass: late that summer, Mabel married Dave Wilkie. 


Walter as usual, had little to say. G-riselda was 
uneasily conscious that if, at any time in the past two years 
she had given the slightest sign of relenting towards Mabel, 
things would have turned out very differently. She excused 
herself in vain, 

”1 never said a word to Walter against her, or to 
her... 11 for her own inner accuser would not be denied. The 
hard core of her had triumphed once more, and against it the 
softer people, Walter and Mabel, like Luke and Mary Belle, 













» • • 


■ 


t 






CHAPTER XII 


214 


beat in vain, fell back defeated. She had been right before, 
and not happy. This time she was sure she was right, and 
certainly she was no happier. 

Walter ! s partnership with his father went forward 
as arranged, and the store was enlarged and expanded to meet 
the increasing demands of a growing community. The new 
front of it read JASPER KERRIGAN AND SON: GROCERIES, DRY 
GOODS, HARDWARE. Walter was firmly established as a part 
of the community, and on the general level. 














* 

- 

* 









. - 




- 






CHAPTER XIII 


- 215 - 


THE FIRST CHANGES 

The summer of 1920 found Rolling Slopes a settled 
and permanent community. The veterans were all back on their 
farms again and unoccupied land had been taken up by new 
settlers. Two or three farms had changed hands. The Olsons 
had gone, so had Oliver Harris. Except for the long wedge 
of the hilly lease, last of its kind in that part of the 
country, the land was all fenced and farmed. Perhaps that 
knowledge helped to sever Mr* Hampton-Reid f s hold on life. 

He died suddenly during his convalescence from a mild attack 
of f flu, and the ranch passed to his nephew, whom the 
Kerrigans remembered as a slim, fair, polite lad of thirteen: 
the boy who had loved his exciting summer on the ranch in 1908. 




CHAPTER XIII 


- 216 - 


Harry Wise was left to oversee and manage the 
ranch until its new owner, Richard Hampton-Reid, should give 
instructions as to its disposal, or take it over himself. 
Returning on the train to Maverick with the Kerrigans after 
the funeral, Harry was pessimistic. He deplored the ceremony 
that had been attended by an imposing number of old-timers 
from all over the west, and dignified by the presence of 
representatives of the Mounted Police and the Army. 

"Don’t seem right," he muttered, "puttin’ him in 
that cemetery with all them strangers. He wouldn’t like it— 
he liked his privacy] I wish we could of buried him out 
somewheres on the lease — that big hill where the Indians 
usta camp, or overlookin’ the house an’ the crick. He’d’ve 
liked that — didn’t like to be crowded." 

Jasper assented sympathetically, and Griselda said 
nothing. She could not understand why a man should object 
to being buried among his own kind, any more than she could 
the desire to lead a life apart from humanity. It seemed 
to her that privacy was a good thing in moderation, but not 
when carried to extremes. In life, one’s house was exclusively 
one’s own — in death, one’s coffin. What need then of all 
the outdoors within the circle of the broad horizon to watch 
in life, alone, to slumber in for eternity? 

But Jasper understood: as he understood the man 
while he lived, he could appreciate Harry Wise’s estimate of 




























. 




c - ; 1 « ' 












- 




. 


• ■ ■■ t 

$c::\ ?Q A y* "■ ■ VGA &1SJ0O 

* 


- 





. 






* 

























CHAPTER XIII 


- 217 - 


him now he was dead. 

"Menl" thought uriselda. "I do believe they’re all 

alike.. 

Aloud she observed, 

"That young man may not want the ranch, an* in that 
case it might go for homesteads?" 

Harry Wise nodded glumly looking out of the coach 
windows where the smoke of the engine billowed past. 

"Soldier, isn*t he?" said Jasper. 

"Yeah. Not likely he*11 keep it. He got married 
a while back — I don*t s*pose she *d want to come out here 
an* live on a ranch. Hut Dick usta like the ranch — him an* 
the old man got along fine. He was proud of the young chap 
an* his medals he got in the war... But I s*pose he*11 sell 
now..." 


Harry Wise*s gloomy prediction was not fulfilled. 
The young Hampton-Reids came to Canada in 1?21 and lived for 
some months on the Grasmere Ranch. 

That same year saw the beginning of a trend away 
from the prairie settlements. There had been a drought, and 
hail, and farmers who had moved into Rolling Slopes from the 
prairies of Saskatchewan and Manitoba and the United States 
listened with interest to reports of the Peace River country. 












CHAPTER XIII 


- 218 - 


The gaily colored maps issued by the Dominion Government told 
a fascinating story of unoccupied land in the north. Most 
of the homesteads in the south were taken up: a few grazing 
leases remained on the prairies, timber berths in the wooded 
foothills, and large tracts of privately-owned land were 
still unsettled. But the price per acre was high in the 
latter, whereas the brown patches on the maps of the north 
were limitless and almost free. They represented hundreds 
of thousands of acres of fertile land, a whole new country 
to be settled. 

The appeal was undeniable, and all over the west 
farmers wondered if they might not have been better off in 
a country where lumber was to be had for the cutting, where 
firewood was plentiful, and the high bush broke the force 
of the wind. In Rolling Slopes, one of the earliest settlers, 
Elmer Jackson, sold out and went north. The sale of his 
household and farm effects, accumulated over a period of 
ten or more years, was well attended. 

»Did you get the binder, Engvald?" observed Albert 
Horner as he lit his pipe in the sunny, sheltered lee of 
Jackson’s big barn. 

The big Norwegian shrugged. "Not for sale." 

"Seems to me he’s takin’ the good stuff and leaving 
the junk," complained Horner. "I could do with that wagon 





CHAPTER XIII 


- 219 - 


and he’s taking it — disc too,” 

"He’ll need it," said Jasper Kerrigan. "Prices 
are high in the north. It’s the freight. Elmer’s shipping 
a carload." 

He shifted to avoid a drip from the eaves. "Good 
day for the sale — sure warmed up I" 

The day that had begun cloudy and cold was now too 
warm for the men to wear their heavy coats. A brisk March 
Chinook was softening the snow underfoot, a steady drip ran 
from the roofs of the buildings, and the well-trampled yard 
was deep in dirty slush. At two o’clock the sale was in full 
swing. The cattle and horses were disposed of, the last 
of the machinery was up for sale now, and the crowd was 
beginning to disperse, ready to move to the next point of 
interest. 

"Wouldn’t like to be settling up again meself," 
said Albert Horner. "Never thought Jackson would leave now." 

"His wife’s been at him for a long time," remarked 
Mr. Kerrigan. "She oughta be satisfied now — all French 
where they’re going — Grouard." 

Nordstaad said nothing, but a flicker of satis¬ 
faction lightened for an instant his impassive face. For the 
past three years he had been trying to buy more land, with 
little success. Ches Meade, approached after his uncle’s 










CHAPTER XIII 


220 


death, had refused to sell, George Evans, who had come to 
the district as Burton’s hired man, had anticipated Nordstaad 
in the purchase of Miss Freddie’s farm. It was still 
’Miss Freddie’s farm’ although it had changed hands twice 
since she lived there. Nordstaad and Evans had had words 
about the land, for the former regarded it as something more 
that coincidence that Doris Price, who had been working at 
Nordstaad’s during harvest, was now about to be married to 
George Evans. 

"Veil, you send your woman to find out vhere iss 
land for sale, hey?” he demanded of Evans a week after dis¬ 
covering that he had lost the quarter. Evans, a little 
weedy-looking fellow with lank reddish hair with a hang-dog 
look, was truculent on the instant. 

r, The land was for public sale, wasn’t it? You had 
no agreement with the owner, did you?” 

"I vant to know where you found out it vass for 
sale ao qvick," said Nordstaad. "Maybe Doris tell you?" 

Doris who was present, burst into tears and 
Nordstaad, somewhat discomfited withdrew, convinced nevertheless 
that Doris had betrayed to her sweetheart his intention of 
buying the land. It was the beginning of the bad blood 
between Evans and Nordstaad that lasted on for years. Doris 
and Minna, under Griselda’s forbidding eye, subdued their 












CHAPTER XIII 


221 


differences well enough, but their husbands were never more 
than barely civil to each other at the best, and in after 
years the quarrel was carried on at school by the children. 

However, on the day of the sale Nordstaad had 
just bought Jackson’s land, and he was in a good mood. 

"Veil, I’d hate to start clearing brush before 
I could put in the crop," he observed, and the others assented. 
The auctioneer, carrying his buffalo coat, crossed the yard 
towards an assorted pile of household and farm equipment 
piled near the house. Several women hurried out of the 
house, and the schoolchildren, who had a half-holiday for 

the occasion, tagged along with their parents. 

o 

"What am I bid for the gramaphone, ladies and 
gentlemen?” cried the auctioneer. "Pine machine — listen — 
I’ll start her going!” 

” 1 need sympathy, sympathy, just sympathy ...” 

Q 

wailed the gramdphone before its tinny voice was extinguished, 

0 

”What am I bid?... And the gramdphone switched 
to "Swanee River”. 

The Jacksons left, and the Reddings, and Ches Meade, 
who bade fair to be as restless and irresponsible as his 
uncle, likewise went north to homestead. Some fleeting impulse 
of prudence made him keep his quarter at Rolling Slopes. 




















CHAPTER XIII 


222 


He rented it to George Evans on shares, and left for the 
Peace River homesteading block in the early summer of 1921. 
For three years Rolling Slopes saw nothing and heard little 
of him. 

Doris Price married George Evans and went to live 
in Miss Freddie’s house. The long room with the fireplace 
was thrown open now to the meetings of the Women’s Institute 
and the Ladies Aid, and Dorsi began to assert herself as 
she had never done before. Imperceptibly, over the next 
year or two, she changed sides, moving away by degrees from 
Griselda and her faithful supporters, Mrs. Horner and Mrs. 
Nordstaad, past the large middle-of-the-road group that 
included Mrs. Price, Emma Burton, and Mabel Y/ilkie, over to 
the disaffected. The latter had received a setback when 
their leader of some years’ standing, Mrs. Redding, left 
for the Peace River. Instead of a definite opposition, 
they formed a shifting group that sided sometimes with 
Griselda, sometimes, covertly, against her. They made little 
open objection to her policy, fearing perhaps the spoken 
word in which she was so apt to have the advantage, perhaps 
recalling the dependence of the community upon the store. 

Nevertheless Griselda soon perceived Doris’s 
change of allegiance, for she had come to depend upon the 
girl more and more. She had not expected such a thing to 


































-- 


e ■ . 








CHAPTER XIII 


- 223 - 


happen, for Doris owed what education she had to Griselda. 
Moreover Griselda had recommended Doris to Minna Nordstaad 
as a cook one fall — with the result that Engvald Nordstaad 
lost his opportunity of buying Miss Freddie’s land. 

Now Doris was turning against her, not openly, but 
subtly, in a host of ways hard to define. Griselda was not 
hurt. She had felt it her duty to do what she could for 
Doris in the past, but she had never really taken to the 
girl. Rather she was grimly amused by Doris’s shufflings. 

T, Getting married went to her head!” she commented 
daustically. "She’s got a lot to learn — she’ll come off 
it in a year or two!” 

And more than ever convinced that what she required 
as an aide was a woman who was not part of the district, 
Griselda looked around for a younger one to fill Doris’s 
place when Doris should openly at last declare herself. 

Her first thought was of Victoria Hampton-Reid, the newcomer to 
the ranch. Maude Horner, a war-bride, had been an asset to the 
community — why should not Victoria prove another? And 
Victoria would have the authority of superior education: a 
certain prestige.... There would be problems to overcome, 
of course, but if Victoria showed the right spirit it could 
be done.... 

Dick and Victoria Hampton-Reid had arrived at 
Rolling Slopes in April. Their coming aroused a curiosity 
in their neighbors that their manner did nothing to lessen. 



CHAPTER XIII 


224 


The fanatical desire of old Mr* Hampton-Reid for privacy 
had been taken for granted by his neighbors. He was, they 
reasoned, elderly, an invalid, and as an ex-Mountie and a 
pioneer who pre-dated the Kerrigans, deserving of respect. 

His interests, once the initial struggle between rancher 
and homesteader had been conceded to the latter, did not 
conflict with theirs. In fact he often bought cattle feed 
from local farmers who had a surplus, and when mange 
threatened the cattle, those from the farms were dipped at 
the ranch. 

However the new owners of the Grasmere ranch were 
no less reserved than their uncle without his sound reasons 
for being so. They were young and apparently able-bodied. 

As strangers to the country it behooved them to show a 
proper respect to those who were established there — if 
needful to ask and take their advice. This was the line of 
reasoning prevalent at Rolling Slopes in various degrees: to 
those who held it, the conduct of Die. and Victoria was an 
utter enigma and at times a serious affront. For they showed 
no tendency whatsoever to T mix ? or be f sociable*; they adhered 
stubbornly to their ov/n opinions, and, above all, they spoke 
with an English accent that was far too cultured to be 
sincere••• 

Of these errors and omissions, the offenders 








■ 












0 








« 

. 

: 

. 














CHAPTER XIII 


- 22^ - 


themselves were unaware, Victoria came in time to have an 
uneasy sense that the women she pitied for the poverty of 
their lives were equally inclined to pity her, Dick never 
did quite realize what was the barrier that separated him 
from the farmers. 

Shortly after the young couple arrived at the 
ranch, Griselda called there. Dick and Victoria were away, 
and Lee Wong explained that they had "Gone liding — all lound. 

Griselda left a note with an invitation to tea, 
and two weeks later the Hampton-Reids arrived. They came 
on horseback, and that alone stamped them as eccentric. 

People who owned a fine automobile, and preferred to ride 
horseback,.• 

Griselda met them at the door, splendid in her 
Sunday silk. Victoria, who had abandoned formal riding 
gear for a cooler garb of white cotton shirt, short riding- 
skirt, and shady hat was instantly conscious of her costume. 

"A state occasionJ ,f she thought, subduing the 
inclination to apologize for her informality. Her hostess 
ushered them into the parlor, a very different room from 
that in which the meeting of 1909 had been held. This room 
was long and narrow with dark-stained, highly varnished wood¬ 
work and doors, a glittering waxed linoleum floor, and 
heavily embossed wallpaper. The tall, narrow windows were 








CHAPTER XIII 


- 226 - 


curtained in a brownish lace, there were scarlet geraniums 
in the plant-stand and a great leafy fern in a shady corner. 

The polished dining-room suite at one end showed that this 
room did double duty as dining-room and parlor. It was clean, 
crowded, and old fashioned: the furniture and windows had 
a perpendicular primness, the pictures^framed in heavy gilt, 
were uniformly hideous. 

Victoria was fascinated, a little amused at the 
prevailing decor. 

Sis 

"It reminds me of Dickins," she said to her husband 
later. "I don’t know why — the houses in his books were always 
dark." 

"It suits her," said Dick. "When I was here before 
they lived in a place with three or four tiny rooms, and 
she used to bustle back and forth across the kitchen about 
twice a minute. You’d think she’d wear a groove in the floor!" 

"Did she work in the store?" 

"Not much. Uncle Rupert said she wasn’t good for 
business-- she hurried people too much. Instead of sitting 
around talking and then buying half a dozen things, they bought 
the first two they thought of, and went straight home because 
she made them feel so dreadfully idle I" 

Victoria laughed. "Mr. Kerrigan’s nice, isn’t he?" 

The situation at the tea party had eased somewhat 
when Jasper arrived from the store. Griselda had, with her 







„ 




■ 


-• 





t ' •- 

. . 










CHAPTER XIII 


- 227 - 


usual directness, brought up the matter that was on her mind 
at the moment: the Sunday School, 

11 We wondered if Mrs. Hampton-Reid would take a 
class for a few months. Mrs. Horner isn’t very well, and 
it’s a class of little girls." 

"OhJL" Victoria looked at her husband for aid, but 
he was examining a seashell, a twisted and contoifed product 
of tropical waters that had come from Nova Scotia with Griselda 
thirty years before. 

"I say," he observed, "I remember this when I was 
here before. Did they ever catch that rustler — that — 
what’s-his-name-- Steve, that we all went looking for that 
morning?" 

Griselda laughed. "No one ever heard a thing of 
Steve from that day to this. Clean disappeared — he was a 
bad one!" 

She turned back to Victoria, who collected herself 
and delivered a polite refusal. Undaunted, her hostess returned 
to the attack. 

"It’s not denominational, you know. There’s Church 
of England and Presbyterians and Methodists come to it..." 

Victoria stubbornly reiterated her refusal. 

Repeated, it lost some of its tact, and a slight chill per¬ 
vaded the atmosphere. That was the moment Jasper came in, 
and reinforced by his genial presence, the teaparty resumed 
cordiality. 









CHAPTER XIII 


228 - 


"She 1 s a pretty girl," said Mr. Kerrigan with 
approval after the guests left. M A very pretty girl!" 

"She T s well enough in looks," admitted his wife. 
"But she f s not easy to get along with — proud. Now the 
Captain’s a nice boy — just like he used to be. Well 
mannered." 

"In fact," mused Mr. Kerrigan, "she’s a beauty." 

"Tcha!" 

"Always did like that style myself," continued 
Jasper. "Dark eyes an’ lots of black hair. Reminds me a 
lot of you when you was a girlJ" 

Griselda, who had been slowly swelling with 
indignation at the prolonged paean of praise, collapsed, 
murmuring in mollified tones, 

"Oh, I never was that good-looking. She’s got a 
lovely white skin." 

"Not enough color!" said her husband briskly. 
"Dark-eyed girls should have rosy cheeks..." 

"Well, I wish she’d have seen her way clear to 
giving us a hand with the Sunday School until Maude has had 
her babyI I don’t know who to ask." 

"Mabel!" said her husband. 

"Mabel!" Griselda was deliberately putting Mabel 
out of her mind as much as possible these days. She smothered 




CHAPTER XIII 


- 229 - 


the inclination to T snap Jasper’s head off’, as she phrased 
it, and said calmly, 

"I don’t think Mabel could manage it." 

"Good God,woman! What managing is there to a 
class of five or six little girls? Give Mabel a chance at 
this, anyway." 

He sounded genuinely annoyed. 

Had he emphasized the this ? Griselda was not 
sure. She said no more on the subject, set her lips firmly 
and went about the preparation of supper, but Jasper’s 
advice stayed with her. Two days later Mabel Wilkie came 
to the store, and Griselda asked her if she would take over 
Mrs. Horner’s class for several months. Mabel did so with 
entire success: later in the summer she was elected Vice- 
President of the Ladies Aid, and Griselda was forced to 
revise her estimate of Mabel’s capability. 

Although the Hampton-Reids stayed the summer on 
the ranch, Griselda saw little more of them until August. 
Then Lee Wong, who had been old Mr. Hampton-Reid’s cook for 
years, abruptly announced that he was quitting and no amount 
of persuasion could induce him to stay. He reiterated, 

"Go home — back to China!" and within the week had gone. 
Harvest was approaching, and not a cook was to be found. 
Victoria, who had plenty of energy, attacked the problem 









CHAPTER XIII 


- 230 - 


herself and handled the housekeeping without trouble. Her 
year of V.A.D. work in the war helped her here, but it 
offered no clue to solving the question of cooking. The 
stove in the lean-to kitchen at the back of the ranch house 
would do nothing for Victoria, despite the flaky pastries 
and good bread it had turned out for Lee Wong. 

In utter desperation, she appealed to Mr. Kerrigan 
when he came to the ranch one day. 

"Burned outj" said the storekeeper after investi¬ 
gating. "I’ll bring my wife over." 

He did so, and G-riselda in turn inspected the stove 
and pronounced its doom. 

"It’s done — you’ll never get on to the way of 
it. Ought to been thrown out years ago — goodness knows how 
old Lee ever got it to cook! Better get a new one, an’ I’ll 
write you out some easy recipes." 

She did so, and within a week Victoria had a new 
stove and could see some results for her v/ork. Griselda lost 
some of her first animosity toY/ards the girl Y/hen she saw 
how she made the best of a difficult situation, cooking all 
fall for three and sometimes four men. 

Victoria herself bore with it fairly cheerfully. 

She hated the ranch for its loneliness, and the leaseland 
for a barren waste. The summer was hot and dry: the hills 
turned brown early and seemed more desert-like than ever. 

Only one thing kept her content — the steady improvement 



, 

... 


< 

. 




■ ; s 




- 






: 






■ 
















•• \ . . 









- ' 

- 




■ 




■ • 


^ K ■ Wmi 

■■■ 








CHAPTER XIII 


- 231 - 


in her husband 1 s health. 

For Dick, wounded only once and that slightly 
in his four years of war, had received other and more serious 
hurt. He returned subject to blank-eyed moods of silence 
and dejection that seemed to run a set course and could not 
be broken into. Victoria suspected they covered the turning- 
over of dreadful recollections: she could not be sure, 
because he would not talk during them, or about them. For 
the duration of such moods he withdrew completely into himself, 
emerging with a puzzled, questioning look as though he wondered 
why he existed at all. 

But his absorption in the ranch seemed to have 
helped these moods: there had been little evidence of them 
in the months since they came. So Victoria accepted the 
improved state of affairs with an inner thankfulness. She 
thought of their life on the ranch as an interlude — a period 
of indefinite length that would improve Dick’s health, 
perhaps cure him. Then their real life in Canada would begin. 
Where and how, she did not know, perhaps at the coast, where 
they had property and she had relatives, and everyone said 
it w r as so like England. She never thought seriously of 
living on the ranch: Griselda’s calm assumption that she 
would do so had come as a shock, and had been in part 
responsible for her abrupt refusal to help with the Sunday 


School 







- 


% 

. 

: 

, - . ? • 

* L . .. V 










. : 






„ 















: - 


* 


. 


- - 




: - 


* 

. • 

* 













CHAPTER XIII 


- 232 - 


"I couldn T t live here," she reflected. "I»d 
disintegrate - I f ve nothing in common with these women and 
the way they live. No books, no newspapers worth reading, 
no music.. What kind of education do these children get, 
leaving school at fourteen and fifteen. Suppose we had a 
child?" 

Her meditations often broke off there with a sigh. 
After five years of marriage, she had almost given up hoping 
for a child. She envied the farm women — the same that 
she pitied — when she saw them in the distance, moving 
around the farmyard, or driving along the roads with two 
or three or four sturdy youngsters. 

So for that summer, her life stood still. She was 
in a backwater, washed up for the time being in this isolation. 

Griselda was disappointed with the results of her 
negotiations v/ith Victoria. Rolling Slopes and its welfare 
had become so much a part of her that she did not recognize in 
the younger woman T s desperate determination not to remain there, 
an echo of her own resentment of fifteen years earlier. 

Neither woman realized that the other f s attitude was rooted in 
the same feeling as her own: the refusal to accept the prairie 
on its own terms. But where Victoria’s alternative was flight, 
Griselda ? s was the unceasing struggle towards change. 
































































For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 











































© 


X 



















CHAPTER XT V 


- 233 “ 


THE OPPOSITION 

Between 1921 and 1923 the machine age established 
itself upon the Alberta prairies. The steam-powered thresh¬ 
ing machines that had been in use during the first harvests 
at Rolling Slopes made way for their counterparts that ran 
on gasoline, Dave Wilkie and Engvald Nordstaad bought the 
first tractors seen at Rolling Slopes: other farmers followed 
suit during the boom years of the T 20 f s until very few 
continued to work their land with horses. Automobiles and 
farm trucks became common, and the network of roads spread, 
filled in the thirty miles of rolling prairie between 
Maverick and Rolling Slopes. A new, straight, graded road 








•; y . 





















CHAPTER XIV 


- 234 - 


had replaced the old winding trail, used for nearly half a 
century by the cattlemen and their herds, and perhaps for 
countless years before that by the Indians and the long-dead 
buffalo• 

Rolling Slopes rejoiced at the introduction of 
the automobiles, and weloomed the labor-saving motor age, 

For the long-awaited railroad did not reach the village 
until 1923: ten years too late. Had it arrived in 1913, 

Griselda might have seen the neat prairie town of her dreams, 
clinging like so many of its fellows to the track that was 
the lifeline of their existence. The town would have grown 
and spread, for all who lived in and around it would have 
been utterly dependent upon the railroad. 

However the automobile came first, and Rolling 
Slopes ceased to grow. No longer was the community so closely 
knit as it had been: it was continually drawn towards Maverick 
and out of itself. Thirty miles of prairie shrank to*an 
hour f s drive by automobile. The country on the fringes of 
farmland was no longer isolated, A telephone line linked Maver¬ 
ick with the store and the ranch: there were two or three 
radios in the district, 

A branch line of rail from Maverick started in 
1924, crawled snail-like across the few miles of flat prairie, 
turned westward and entered the hills. It was within ten 






























? 

. . . 












_ 












CHAPTER XIV 


- 235 “ 


miles of Rolling Slope when construction work closed down 
that year* 

The site of the last big camp became for a time 
a thriving prairie town -- Bell Creek, whose mushroom growth 
was watched with amazement and horror by the Kerrigans, 
who had hoped that Rolling Slopes would get the bustle and 
the business. Others, who lived east of Rolling Slopes, 
found the booming of Bell Creek very convenient, especially 
when a grain elevator was erected that summer and the thirty- 
mile haul to Maverick became a thing of the past. Bell Creek 
at its zenith had a bank, a post-office, a small school, and 
two stores. It had a church, and a large hall that bade 
fair to rival the U.F.A. hall at Rolling Slopes, erected about 
the same time. For a time Bell Creek threatened to run its 
old-established neighbor out of business. 

But a year saw the peak of prosperity there pass. 

In the spring of 1925, the camp, with its noise and bustle, 
its rows of tents, its trucks and teams and wagons and piles 
of ties, moved on, to spend a few weeks at Rolling Slopes 
and then move on again to the west. Bell Creek shrivelled 
to a post-office, an elevator and a name on the newly- 
printed maps. Its hastily-erected frame buildings fell 
vacant, stood empty with the dry prairie wind warping the 
unpainted lumber, whistling around the boarded-up windows, 







I 


t 









t 


. 





















CHAPTER XIV 


- 236 - 


until most of it was sold, dismantled and hauled away. The 
Bell Creek church survived, and the grain elevator, and a 
length of narrow wooden sidewalk that crumbled away with 
time and was finally stolen in sections for firewood during 
the depression. 

Before it reached Rolling Slopes, the railway line 
crossed Dave Wilkie’s farm, and Henry Burton’s, and passed 
a hundred yards north of the store to enter the lease. At 
that point the grain elevators were erected. Their towering 
height made them a landmark. The site of the village was 
now evident for miles around. Even from the secluded ranch- 
house the square tops of the elevators were visible, an 
ever-present reminder to the Hampton-Reids of their helpless¬ 
ness in a machine age. 

Dick Hampton-Reid bitterly protested the driving 
of the railway line across the lease, but existing legis¬ 
lation favored the railways, and he was powerless to prevent 
the amputation of the southern wedge of his range. True, 
he gained in shipping facilities right at hand, but the fact 
did not reconcile him. His opposition to what they considered 
their best interests exasperated the farmers and they were 
less inclined than ever to be friendly towards him. 

In 1923 Rolling Slopes still consisted of Kerrigan’s 
store that dealt in groceries, hardware, and dry goods, and 
was likewise the post-office and the filling-station. A couple 

















CHAPTER XIV 


- 237 - 


of sheds were appended to the store, and a small new building 
at the left housed the barrels of gasoline and oil. South 
of that again was Joe Griggs’ little shack, now neatly- 
painted, with the blacksmith’s shop nearby. Joe did(Slittle 
blacksmithing now: Lady and Mike had long since disappeared 
from his stable to be replaced by a brown team called Bob 
and Sally. Joe still hauled freight, but only from the 
siding near the elevators. He worked on Kerrigan’s farm 
a good deal, for falter had largely taken over the store. 

Mr. Kerrigan spent little time there save in the mornings. 

Joe was not of much use around the store: he was very 
slow, and at dispensing gas and oil he was quite hopeless. 

He could not get used to cars and tractors, although trains 
fascinated him and figured largely in the endless stories 
he told to whoever would listen. 

In spite of the material progress of Rolling 
Slopes, the years between 1920 and 1923 were not, on the 
whole, happy ones for Griselda. The preceding decade had 
seen many of her earlier hopes realized: she had a settled 
home, she had watched the growth of a thriving community 
to which her own contributions had been large and successful. 
If her daughter’s early marriage had disappointed her, she 
was now reconciled to it. Henry Burton, a prosperous farmer, 
was a good husband and father, and Emma a happy woman. The 









. 








i 












_ 


/. 












CHAPTER XIV 


- 238 - 


business of Kerrigan and Son was equally satisfactory, and 
Jasper spoke often of their trip east. 

"Bit late," he would say cheerfully, "but in a 
year or two...." 

Outwardly Griselda had every reason to be content 
with her life, but she was not. A vague uneasiness troubled 
her that would not be defined — could not be analyzed. 
Uncertainty, doubt, self-questioning: these were some of 
the elements in it, and Griselda, usually so sure of herself 
and of her motives, was plagued by them. 

The worst of it was that she could not locate 
the source of her doubt or uncertainty. There had, in the 
past, been specific causes: Mabel Prescott was one such. 

If at any time after 1?22, Griselda had been asked if she 
regretted her three-year silent campaign against Mabel, 
she would have admitted she did. But no one asked her: she 
had no intimates, and Jasper rarely reverted to the past 
in his talks with his wife. His life was the present and 
the future: his philosophy an uncomplicated one. The present 
he lived as comfortably for all concerned as was compatible 
with common sense and morality: the future, he anticipated 
with optimism. 

If Griselda f s uneasiness had a source, it was 


impossible to locate. Rather, it was in the air: a difference 



, 


' 

, . . :/ ; .. .. ; ' a . J- 

. 








. 


















. 

. 

* 






: ; 







































CHAPTER XIV 


- 239 - 


in outlook, a new attitude that pervaded every aspect of life. 
Almost as soon as she stepped out of the tall white house, 
Griselda was aware of change, of unfamiliar noise, of hustle 
and bustle and a passion for speed: in short, of a younger 
generation that was strange to her, although she had watched 
them grow up. Sadly perplexed, she began to wonder how the 
change had come about. She understood their parents well 
enough: the hard-working farmers who came from England and 
Iowa and Norway and Ontario and Ireland and Bavaria. They 
were perfectly intelligible. They had purpose, they labored, 
and deserved what reward they got, and were, it had always 
seemed in the past, thrifty with money that took long to 
earn. People like the Prices were intelligible to Griselda. 
Price did have hard luck, year after year, and that made him 
suspicious and complaining. And Mrs. Price, too, with her 
flock of children and a grumbling husband. ..No wonder 
she was worried and inefficient: a borrower, always apologising. 

But how did people come to have the children they 
did? This settlement, like most of the prairie settlements, 
had started from scratch. People came to a new land, one 
almost without tradition. It was not like the northern bush 
settlements, where, since the days of the earliest explorers, 
there had been a tradition of white men living with brown¬ 
skinned women: where the fact was simply taken for granted. 















- 

< 











. 

' 

- • . : 

‘ 

C { : 

■ • ' ' v; ■ , 

e 

5 < ...» 
















* 






■ 





. 

. 



' 
















' 




. 













CHAPTER XIV 


240 


A younger generation there belonged nowhere — the social 
gradient led down and down, back to the level of the native... 

The furrow between Griselda’s black brows was deep when 

she came to this stage in her thinking. She had been so 

relieved to leave behind her the north and its problems, to 

get her children out into a life where she, personally, 

could keep her civilization unimpeded, and, perhaps, with 

the help of others. At Rolling Slopes, she had set the 

standards, and had, with pleasure, seen how others coming 

in, accepted and conformed. Setbacks she had had, and over- 

ud\ o 

come them. Disappointments too -- and^ icould expect to live 
a life free of disappointment? But on the whole, the level 
had been maintained, even raised, with the cooperation of 
most of the community. And now, just when things were going 
so well and people were winning to a prosperity they deserved, 
their own children seemed determined to tear down all that 
had been accomplished. 

There was, for instance, Eileen Price. Eileen Fay— 
who had been the first baby born at Rolling Slopes. Griselda 
shook her head at thought of Eileen. Af fifteen, running 
aroung the country in Ches Meade’s rattletrap Ford. At sixteen, 
rouged and painted, noisy at the dances, surrounded by men.. 

And not the local boys, either, but the transients from 
threshing crews, and the railway construction camp. What would 

















CHAPTER XIV 


241 


Eileen be at seventeen, eighteen...? What was she now? A 
mere painted doll, with round, bold, light-blue eyes under 
thin, pencilled brows and fair short hair, touched up to 
make it impossibly golden, done in a row of little curls 
across the brow? A brittle, tinselly prettiness, an 
all-consuming restlessness, a bundle of disconnected emotions 
with no controlling will? All these, apparently, to judge 
from the girl herself, sitting on the counter in the store 
with her brief skirts everywhich way, singing in her sweet 
little voice the tawdry songs of the time, 

"I ain’t nobody’s darlin’ 

I’m as blue as can be, 

’Cause I ain’t got nobody 
To make a fuss over me. 
if I don’t get somebody, 

I’m going back to the farm 
To milk the cows and chickens 
For I don’t give a good gosh darn!” 

All these and little more, to judge from the 
complaints of her family. Doris presumed upon her married 
status to lecture her mother about Eileen’s conduct. 

”You never used to let me get away with things 
like that, Mai Out till two and three in the morning with 
those fellows from Maverick!” 

But she said as much to Mrs. Price in the store 
one day, and Ches Meade rose to Eileen’s defence. 

f, Don’t seem to remember what fellows wanted to 
keep you out till two an’ three in the morning, Dorrie? 











































CHAPTER XIV 


242 


Anyone I know?" 

He stood waiting with spurious interest for Doris 
to reply, and the sly, oiocking glimmer of his malicious grin 
began to spread over his face as Doris reddened with anger. 
Eileen laughed, ignoring her mother’s rebuke. Certainly 
Eileen was a problem, always trying to keep up with her 
friends at Maverick who were trying desperately to keep up 
with their friends in the city. Their philosophy - all of 
them - the words of their cheap, silly songs - ,f Cause I 
don’t give a good gosh damJ 11 And others of Eileen’s age 
or younger at Rolling Slopes tried to keep up with Eileen. 

Their parents did not approve of Eileen...nor of the company 
she kept: the railroad construction men, Ches Meade... 

Ches Meade. What of Ches? thought G-riselda. 

Ches was back from his homesteading jaunt to the Peace River. 
Much improved, no doubt, in his ability to do a steady day’s 
work, more assured. Far too assured... And what business 
had Ches, at twenty-four, to be running around with a fifteen- 
year-old Eileen? These differences in ages were characteristic 
of the newly-settled bush or prairie.... Henry Burton was 
seven or eight years older than Emma... Very common in the 
bush settlements, where bachelor homesteaders waited for 
the daughters of their neighbors to grow up to fifteen or 
sixteen and then married them... But Rolling Slopes was well- 
settled: there were plenty of girls of eighteen and twenty 
who would be more suited to Ches. G-riselda reflected that 
















CHAPTER XIV 


- 24? - 


perhaps those older girls had more sense. Obviously, Eileen 
had not, yet she refused to be guided by her parents. 

Ches and Eileen, and the others.. Different. 

Where had it all started? Griselda could not recall. The 
difference had not been there when Walter and Emma were 
younger — then, suddenly it had been. Not only the young 
people were different. Many of the others — the late comers 
to the district — were different too. Griselda was inclined 
to blame the coming of the railway construction crew for 
some or most of the laxness: certainly Prohibition had not 
been the blessing it was intended to be. With people like 
the Cottles about, what could you expect? But then, did 
conditions create the Cottles and their like, or did the 
Cottles create conditions? Griselda never solved this 
conundrum to her own satisfaction after Jasper put it to 
her one day. She shelved it to think about later, and it 
remained unanswered, adding to her doubts whenever she 
remembered it. On one point only she was quite clear: the 
Cottles were extremely unsavory citizens of Rolling Slopes, 
and their going would solve many problems. For a time, 
while she concentrated on the Cottles, Griselda believed 
it would solve all of them. 

The Cottles were comparatively recent comers, 
arriving about 1921 to settle on a quarter near the Burtons, 




* 





c 

. 

. 

t 




. 


' 

If 





















CHAPTER XIV 


244 


and south-east of the store. The road out to Maverick ran 
between their house and the Burtons. For over a year the 
Cottles came and went in the district without causing much 
comment. Mr* Cottle was a loud-voiced, square-set individual 
with a nose that had been broken in the distant past, and 
never properly set. From the beginning he was loud in his 
denunciation of prairie farms. He borrowed machinery from 
his neighbors and was careless about repairing and returning 
it. On the whole, he was no asset to the community. 

For these and other reasons, the neighbors pitied 
his wife. She rarely went out with her husband on his 
frequent jaunts to Bell Greek, Maverick, and more distant 
points, and, since after 1922 word soon got around that 
Cottiers real business was bootlegging, her disassociation 
from her husband 1 s activities was a point in her favor. 

A stout near-blonde with a husky voice and a ready laugh, 

Mrs. Cottle was genuinely likeable® She joined the Women’s 
Institute and the Ladies’ Aid (although she never went to 
church), and revealed an aptitude for knitting and sewing 
that was the envy of less gifted women. She was moreover 
a good cook. Her inclination to snuggle up close to her 
neighbor at a sev/ing circle,or to a bystander in the store, 
and tell a broad joke was deplored by some, but on the 
whole Mrs. Cottle was taken for what she was: a good-natured, 












CHAPTER XIV 


- 245 - 


blowsy, rather coarse woman who made the best of a bad job 
at home, and brought up her daughter well. 

The Cottles had but one child, a thin, shy, big- 
eyed girl of thirteen or fourteen: Leona. She was scared 
to death of her father and very fond of her mother, Emma 
Burton reported. Emma had opportunity to see a good deal 
of the Cottles for they lived just across the road from 
Henry Burton T s neat farm. Mrs. Cottle often ran over to 
visit with Emma: the latter did not make as many calls on 
her neighbor because she heartily disliked the man of the 
house. Mrs. Cottle seemed to understand: she was sometimes 
embarrassingly frank about her marital difficulties. 

In the summer of 1922 the ladies of Rolling Slopes 
held a quilting bee at Emma Burton’s. The quilt was destined 
for Boris Price, soon to become Doris Evans, and the group 
that stood around it at two o’clock that afternoon were 
discussing the pattern to be followed in the quilting. 

"Just folio?/ the seamssuggested Emma® 

"Probably be all right,” agreed Griselda. f, The 
pieces are small enough, I guess. You need a pattern in 
the corners.” 

"Mark out a fan in circles with the edge of a 
saucer,” said Mrs. Price, and Emma went to fetch the saucer 
and a pencil. The others, including Maude Horner, seated 





■ 


. 


■ 

- 



- . ... . i ■ 

t 




0 



. 


e 


* * 

- ' • 




. 

. - . ......... ... ■: 

. oi . 






- 










. 

• ■ • t ■ : 

‘ . 

. ... .: . e : ... 




. 






















CHAPTER XIV 


- 24 ^ - 


themselves around the edges of the quilting frame and began 
to thread needles. Emma T s voice came -to them, 

•'Hello, there, Mrs. Gotti el I*m glad you could 
make it. Come in." 

"Am I late?" 

Emma broke in on Mrs. Cottle f s husky tones, 

"My goodness 1 Your eye.*.I" 

"Yes," said the other flatly. "Cottle — las* 
night after he got back from town." 

She entered the front room, greeted the others 
casually, and went to deposit her hat in the bedroom, leaving 
in her rear a stricken circle around the quilt, whom the sight 
of her black eye had silenced. 

"Pass the thread, Maude I" Griselda broke the 
spell, and Mrs. Cottle squeezed into the circle. Mabel Wilkie 
and Minna Nordstaad arrived, and Emma met them on the step 
to caution them not to mention the black eye. The quilting 
went on rapidly, until, when lunch was served, there was only 
a small patch in the middle to complete. 

"I f ll do that myself tomorrow," said Emma as the 
party dispersed. 

"Maybe 1*11 run over and give you a hand," said 
Mrs. Cottle. She glanced out the window. "I better go. 

There f s Leona now." 








































CHAPTER XIV 


- 247 - 


Leona, now fifteen but looking younger, was still 
at school. Her mother, much against Cottiers wishes, insisted 
on the girl T s attendance, although Leona was not clever. 

She slid off her pony at the gate and rapped timidly on the 
kitchen door. 

"Is Mother there, Mrs. Burton?” 

”I’m coming, LeonaI” Mrs. Cottle hurried out, 
calling hasty good-byes over her fat shoulder. Behind her 
the expressions of sympathy were profuse. Even G-riselda, 
who had never liked Mrs. Cottle’s free-and-easy ways, v/as 
moved. 

During 1?24, while the railway line crept out 
from Maverick, Mr. Cottle did a thriving business with the 
camp. He joined forces with the Bell Creek bootlegger and 
for some months his comings and goings were erratic in the 
extreme. In the fall of that year he went on one of his 
long jaunts and did not return. Mrs. Cottle was philosophically 
unconcerned: when, in an heroic attempt to keep the tactful 
fiction that the Cottle menage was of the ordinary type, 

Mrs. Horner asked, ”Y/hen do you expect Mr. Cottle back?” 

Mrs. Cottle replied, nonchalantly: ”1 don’t/ I expect he’s 
found greener pastures.” She went her way unconcerned, 
leaving Mrs. Horner in speechless confusion. 















CHAPTER XIV 


- 248 - 


The Cottle farm, on which Mr. Cottle had paid 
little or nothing during his three years of occupancy, was 
subsequently rented to Dave Wilke ? and Mrs. Cottle and Leona 
stayed on in the shabby little house with no visible means 
of support but two milk cows and a few chickens and turkeys. 
That fall, Mrs. Cottle cooked on Burton’s threshing gang, 
and Henry told his wife, 

"Never had such a good cook. But she sure don’t 
mind how she talks to the men!" 

Leona Cottle still attended school regularly, grew 
less scared, more confident. She developed a shy, appealing 
prettiness, and her mother was very strict with her. Over 
the summers she had been doing housework, and the women 
who employed her, including Emma Burton, spoke well of her. 
She was neat, willing, and good with children. Her only 
csss- fault, in fact, was a lack of initiative. 

However under the circumstances this was scarcely 
a fault. Mrs. Cottle was steadily going from bad to worse. 
She declined a good job as cook in the Prairie Vista Hotel 
in Maverick, electing rather to stay on in the little house 
on the farm. That she was carrying on her husband’s boot¬ 
legging was easily apparent. The untidy little shack seemed 
a rendezvous for all kinds of nocturnal callers. And more 
than once Henry Burton, routed out of bed after midnight 












CHAPTER XIV 


- 249 - 


by a peremptory knocking, discovered one of Mrs. Cottle’s 
customers on the step. 

"Want two!" demanded the first of these unwelcome 
visitors, swaying gently as he stood. 

"Two what?" asked Henry sharply. 

"WAnt two!" muttered the man thickly, holding out 

a bill. 

And as Henry stared at him, a voice from the car 
parked outside the house gate, called urgently, 

"Mel! It’s the wrong place — c’mon! Mel!" 

"Oh, sorry!" muttered the man who wanted two. 

"Wrong place -- wrong place — very sorry...!" 

And the car proceeded to turn in at the lane 
leading to Mrs. Cottle’s home. 

Such visitors were rarely identified. Many of 
them were from the construction camps, and from Maverick, 
or further. A few were local® Ches Meade was among them. 

Mrs. Cottle was accustomed to tell him all her choicest 
jokes in the store, and he was seen passing the store late 
at night on horseback. Flushed, hilarious, husky-voiced, 

Mrs. Cottle went to all the dances in the new hall. She 
never left alone, 

Leona quit school sometime before these happenings, 
and went to work for a farmer’s wife near Maverick. She 
























CHAPTER XIV 


- 2^0 - 


rarely came home* After that, Mrs* Cottle really let herself 
go* The railway had reached Bell Creek, and all that winter, 
the little town boomed. Mrs. Cottle ran a thriving f blind 
pig f : it was assumed that not all her visitors went there 
for liquid refreshment. She dressed flashily now, paid up 
her bills regularly at the store, and would spend the after¬ 
noon there, talking, laughing, telling her ribald jests to 
Ches Meade, who haw-hawed loudly, grinning from ear to ear, 
to Joe Griggs, who would turn scarlet and back away, stutter¬ 
ing and embarrassed, or to any and all of the railway workers, 
who often came to the store at Rolling Slopes. But with the 
Kerrigans, father and son, she adopted no such familiar tone. 

Mrs. Kerrigan watched this situation develop with 
increasing irritation. Mrs. Cottle, from an object of pity, 
had progressed to become the plague-spot of Rolling Slopes. 
Worse, she would not admit she was a plague spot, did not, in 
fact, even realise her outrageous conduct. Her charity 
outshone that of all her virtuous neighbors. She donated 
ten pounds of candy to the school Christmas treat, she knitted 
a dozen pairs of gay mittens for the bundles for the Salvation 
Army, and she sent half-a-dozen excellent pies to the sale 
of home cooking for the W.I. 

The continual flaunting of the wages of sin in 
full view of the community and of impressionable youth was 













CHAPTER XIV 


- 251 - 


too much for Griselda. And when Mrs. Cottle’s offer to make 
and contribute two pairs of lace-edged pillow-slips and three 
aprons for the church bazaar was relayed to the Ladies 1 Aid 
meeting along with an apology for not attending in person, 
Griselda rose in wrath. 

"Either that woman stays away from meetings or 
I resign] She’s a disgrace to the community, and how she can 
be so brazen as to live the life she does and then expect 
to be welcomed by decent people, I don’t know..." 

There was a murmur of assent from the assembled 
ladies, and the ultimatum was relayed to Mrs. Cottle. She 
strolled over the road to visit Emma Burton. 

"I hear your Ma’s on the war path ’bout me an’ 
my pillow-slips, Emma. That so? My, it’s a warm day, ain’t 
it?” 

She seemed in good mood: one reason for her 
affability was increasingly evident in the warm kitchen 
where she sat overflowing a small wooden chair. Emma admitted 
that Griselda was opposed to Mrs. Cottle’s course of action, 
and the latter nodded without rancour. 

”Tha’s what I hear...” Her head sunk for a moment, 
then she wakened with a jerk and seemed quite sober for the 
next remark. 

”1 don’t know as I blame your Ma, Emma. She works 
hard for this community, an’ not many appreciate it. Folk 













- 



I :: -■ ", 

. 


t 





"■ -1 



0 





' . . ' . ' 9 v. j; ■ 3 

* 

- 

* - 

* • t 

/ 

t ' .. ... 0 0,: 













CHAPTER XIV 


- 252 - 


don T t as a rule* They rather go to hell on their own than be 

drayy^-L 

to Heaven by someone better T n themselves...” 

”What shall I say about the pillow-oases?” de¬ 
manded Emma, for her guest seemed again on the verge of sleep. 
She swayed ever so little back and forth on the creaking chair, 
and her plump curves quivered like jelly. She blinked and 
surveyed Emma with a mild surprise. 

"Pillow-cases? Oh, drat, now — what was I goin ! 
to do about them pillow-cases? Oh, yes — I’11 do ’em an’ 
send f enTover to you, Emma* You slip ’em into the pile on 
the quiet. What your Ma don’t know, won’t hurt her, and the 
bazaar can do with the money, hey? 11 

She winked as one conspirator to another, and 
levered herself to her feet with one fat hand gripping the 
solid window-sill. 

"You’re easier to get on with than your Ma, Emma. 

But she’s a good woman — she does good in her way an’ I do 
it in mine. You tell her that the next time she sounds off 
about me! Guess I better be goin’ home...” 

For several months after that, the whole matter 
hung fire. Mrs. Cottle obligingly stayed away from Ladies’ 

A 

aid meetings, but she evidently considered herself a member. 

She gave her donations to Emma who put them aside for the 
bazaar without saying anything about them. Griselda like- 

VJCi-A 

wise, as^her wont, said nothing, waiting for the other side 













CHAPTER XIV 


- 233 - 


to make the next move. Eventually her patience was rewarded. 

Late in the fall, Leona Cottle arrived at Kerri¬ 
gans one Sunday evening, red-eyed and tearful. 

Mrs. Kerrigan, will you come an 1 see Mother? She 
wants to see you awful bad! 

Griselda was taken aback. Such demands on her, 
common a few years earlier in cases of illness, had been rare 
of late years. 

"Is your mother ill?" she demanded. 

The girl began to sob wildly. "Please come," she 
begged. "Please cornel" 

Griselda attempted to find out more about Mrs. 
Cottle, but Leona was in no state to clear up the confusion® 

She seemed almost hysterical, and the boy who had driven 
her over, a shy, quiet, gangling lad in his early twenties, 
stood silent and embarrassed by the door® Griselda recognized 
him for one of the sons of the family where Leona had been 
working for the last year. 

"I don’t know what to do,” she complained aside to 

Jasper. 


"Better go," he counselled. "I’ll drive you over. 
These kids can stay here, or go over to Emma’s, or come with 
us. 


Leona and her escort elected to remain where they 
were. Griselda glimpsed them as she drove away. They sat 














CHAPTER XIV 


- 254 - 


very still and close together in the cab of the truck, Leona 
wiping her eyes, the lad staring straight ahead of him with 
ferocious concentration upon nothing* 

"What can it all be about?" fumed Griselda. 

"Looks to me like Mrs. Cottle f s got to make up her 
mind to lose Leona for good an f all,"said Jasper shrewdly. 

Mrs. Cottle was sitting alone in her kitchen when 
Griselda rapped at the door. She was not ill, but she was 
very drunk. At sight of the bulging figure in the sloppy 
blue kimono, Jasper discreetly withdrew. Griselda held her 
ground although the atmosphere of the kitchen sickened her. 

"Leona asked me to come,” she said impersonally. 
"Are you ill?" 

Y 

Mrs. Cottle stated at her, pushed back the hair 
from her puffy face and shook her head once or twice. 

"Yeah!" she said thickly, "wanted to see you... 
wanted see you...wait a minute...make some coffee..." 

She heaved herself to her feet, waddled over to 
the stove and picked up the coffee pot. It hung unsteadily 
in her hand, a trickle of coffee dribbled to the floor. 
Griselda was disgusted, but it did not occur to her to leave. 
She took the coffee-pot from the flabby hand. 

"Sit down,” she said sharply. "I’ll make it.” 

"Top cupboard,” muttered Mrs. Cottle, and flopped 
into her chair once more, head on hands. 











CHAPTER XIV 


-255 - 


"Shouldn’t do it,” she mumbled. "Should’nt drink 
now — my GodI What a headache 1" 

w Why don T t you stop?” Griselda stabbed at the fire 
set the coffee-pot over the flames. 

"Me? On the water-wagon?" Mrs. Cottle gave a stri¬ 
dent hoot of laughter, shook her head. "Couldn’t do it - not 
now. Tried before — stopped for six years... not now..." 

Jasper rapped timidly on the door, beckoned to 

his wife. 

"I’ll wait in the car," he whispered. 

Mrs. Cottle’s raucous laughter filled the room. 
"Ain’t you afraid someone’ll see him sitting outside my 
house..." She was suddenly serious, 

"Guess they’d know the rights of it if they did. 
Everybody knows how he thinks the sun rises ’round you...if 
I’d had your chance -- good man like you’ve got—different... 

Griselda’s disgust was mixed with pity for the 
sodden, hopeless creature before her. "You’ve got Leona," 
she said gently, and heard with relief the bubbling of the 
coffee on the stove. 

The other looked up with an effort at•concentra¬ 
tion. 


"LeonaJ" she said quite clearly. "Never stuck to 
him if it wasn’t for Leona. Stayed six years — not my kid: 
Cottle’s. Glad I never married him--could’ve...at first!" 










CHAPTER XIV 


- 2^6 - 


Griselda nearly dropped the coffee-pot. 

"Married!" she gasped. 

"No," said Mrs. Cottle with an air of great patienc 
f, I wouldn’t marry a man like Cottle — after all, I got some 
self-respect 1 But I stayed to bring up the kid -- wish she 
was mine I” 

Griselda turned -mechanically to the cupboard to 
seek a cup. She turned with it to find Mrs. Cottle’s eye fixed 
on her with an unexpected twinkle in its bleary depths. 

"They’re clean!" she said. "All clean — Leona’s 
been here all weekend —cleaned me up -- she’s a good girl. 

Too good to come here any more. B’sides, I don’t want my girl 
mixed up with that Eileen Price, an’ that gang!" 

Griselda pushed the cup of coffee across the table 

to her. 

"Drink that — now, what about Leona?" 

"Want to talk to you about Leona," said Mrs. Cottle 
"Sit down — have a cuppa coffee." 

Griselda sat as invited. In spite of the woman’s 
repulsive aspect, in spite of the untidy kitchen that symbo¬ 
lized Mrs. Cottle’s rapid decay from the neat housekeeper she 
had been but three years before, she was drawn to Mrs. Cottle 
as never before. Mrs. Cottle struggled out of her torpor, 
and spoke more fluently. 

"Never thought you’d be sittin’ here havin’ a cup 











CHAPTER XIV 


- 257 - 


of coffee with me, did you? I’d offer Mr. Kerrigan one too, 
but I wanta talk to you alone just now.’ 1 

She sipped, frowning, and went on, 

’’I’ll make a bargain with you — you ! d like to see 
me gone, hey?” 

Her tone was factual, not truculent: there was 
almost a glint of fun in her little blue eyes. 

"You got this district all sewed up to go the way 
you want it — church, Sunday School, Ladies’ Aid, the Club- 
Everybody but us no-goods, rne’n Ches Meade, an’ Old Bill — 
not that he’s ^ny pal o’ mine, but I notice he don’t play on 
your side of the fence neither. Folks don’t hardly dare wipe 
their noses ’thout asking Ma Kerrigan! Me, I think it’s all 
right — you done a lot for Rolling Slopes in your time. An’ 
you live your life the way you want it, an’ I’ll live mine." 

Griselda answered with spirit. ’ Ma Kerrigan ’ indeed! 

"I don’t care how you live so long as it’s your 
life. But when it hurts other people — I f m thinking of the 
name you give the community an’ the example you set to the 
youngsters. How do you suppose Leona feels about you?" 

The shaft told. In fact, for the moment it killed 
Mrs. Cottle’s lucidity, 

"Don’ blame you," she muttered vaguely, her eyes 
filling. "Have some cream in your coffee — it’s all right — 
Leona washed the separator this morning... What was I saying? 
















CHAPTER XIV 


- 2^8 - 


Oh, yes — Leona.*." 

She gulped the rest of the coffee, pushed her cup 
over for more, and continued. 

"Make a bargain with you — I’ll get out — right 
out of this district an T go a long way so’s you’11 never hear 
of me again. Soon — next week, if you say the word..." 

She looked cunningly at Griselda who sat watching, 
suddenly tense, her face like iron. 

"I T 11 go," repeated Mrs. Cottle. "But I want you 
to take Leona up. She wants to marry that boy — that young 
Vernon ■— but his folks ain f t happy about it. Can’t say as 
I blame ’em. Long as Leona’s associated with me, they’ll 
kick. But if you take Leona over for a month or two — 
you talk to Mrs. Vernon an’ tell her Leona’s on the level an’ 
always was -- an 1 see that the district gives her a nice 
send-off, like they done for Doris Price. A shower from the 
Club an’ a nice quilt made for her and you to back her up — 
it’ll be O.K. for the kid." 

She looked sharply at G-riselda. "That’s my bargain 
I’ll get out for good, an’ you see that the kid gets a nice 
send-off, so she can be proud of her v/eddin’. He’s got his 
own land out here, an’ they like Leona all right. Jest don’t 
want her in the family, but they’ll come ’round if I get out. 
People forget, an’ she’s not my kid — that’s one good thing. 
You can tell ’em that." 







8 

. 

* 

■ 


















CHAPTER XIV 


- 259 - 


Again she seemed on the verge of tears, but blinked 

them away* 

"Well — that f s my bargain* Take it or leave it?" 

Griselda sat silent. She would never have allowed 
an exception to be made of Leona Cottle, as Mrs* Cottle 
evidently feared. Leona would have had her shower and her 
quilt regardless. But if Mrs. Cottle left, it would be 
better for Leona, better for Rolling Slopes, might even still 
the current of unrest that was unsettling the district, 
especially the younger members... That Mrs. Cottle should 
thus bargain, attempting to bribe Griselda by the promise 
of the removal of her unsavory presence, was subtly insulting. 
Did Mrs. Cottle mean it as an insult? Looking at her, gross, 
pitifully in earnest, Griselda thought not. She rose: she 
had the whip hand now, and she knew it. But she would not 
commit herself openly, nor descend to bargain. 

"When Leona gets married,” she said quietly, "she 
will have a shower like all the other girls, and be treated 
just the same by this community. We all like Leona and want 
to see her happy." 

Suddenly, dreadfully, without warning, Mrs. Cottle 
burst into tears. Griselda fled, closing the screen door on 
the sound of the heaving sobs, thankful beyond expression for 
the clean, fresh air, the comforting presence of Jasper. 










. 

* 

v 

. • 

. 

* 

* 

. 

< 

- / ■ ( V 













CHAPTER XIV 


- 260 - 


Something of what Mrs. Cottle had said added materially to 
the weight of her uneasiness, 

"People don’t dare wipe their noses ’thout askin’ 
Ma KerriganI" 

The mental picture of herself it evoked was not 
pleasant: a community resentful, but obedient, herself, 
dictatorial down to the smallest matters. It was not true— 
but was it what people really felt? She could not tell. 

There was comfort in Mrs. Cottle’s words as well 
as the seeds of self-doubt. What had she said of Jasper? 

"Thinks the sun rises around you... a good man." 

Driving home, Uriselda was aware of a sudden rush 
of gratitude towards Jasper. He was so loyal. Where would 
she have been without him? In spite of the wandering years, 
Jasper had given her what she craved: an inner security, a 
sense of being needed, a consciousness that she was not alone 
in her undertakings. 

When they reached the store, she spoke kindly to 
Leona and congratulated the shy young farmer. She had a 
feeling that Mrs, Cottle would be as good as her word, and 
so it proved. The railway construction camp broke up In 
November, and in the same week Mrs. Cottle vanished from 
Rolling Slopes, She left at the store a box of beautifully 
embroidered linens for Leona, but apparently made no attempt 










CHAPTER XIV 


- 261 - 


to communicate with the girl. Leona Cottle was married that 
winter and received the usual community send-off. Emma 
Burton gave her a shower and Mr* Kerrigan gave the bride 
away at the wedding, which^although held in Maverick, was 
well attended by people from Rolling Slopes. 

Leona’s family by marriage received the girl well 
enough, and on the rare occasions when Oriselda saw her 
henceforth she seemed perfectly happy. Of Mrs. Cottle no 
further news ever reached Rolling Slopes. 



















CHAPTER XV 


- 262 - 


DEFEAT 

However, Mrs. Cottle’s going solved nothing, as 
frriselda found in the next year, unless it were the matter 
of Leona Cottle’s future. The era of post-war prosperity 
was in fullest swing. Everyone had money, everyone was 
buying, spending lavishly and recklessly, taking trips 
"back home", investing in oil stocks, real estate••.always 
counting on next year’s crop to pay. Some of the older 
people were a little puzzled, a little bewildered at the 
speed of life. Their children were frankly delighted. 

They turned back eagerly towards the world that their parents 
had left behind when they settled the bare rangeland a few 
















CHAPTER XV 


- 263 - 


years earlier, reached out greedily for all that that settle 
ment had not yet attained in its mushroom growth. 

Sometimes it seemed that all they craved was 
pleasure. Responsibility, serious effort, even the super¬ 
ficial good manners were not there, or had been forgotten. 

In 1923, Mrs. Price confided to Griselda her concern over 
her daughter. 

"She won’t listen to me — I don’t know what’s 
got into these kids nowadays. I used to think she’d get 
over it in a year or so, but there’s no reasoning with her. 
All she says is ’I’ve got a right to live my own life’?" 

Griselda could almost hear Eileen’s voice, that 
by nature was a silvery treble, endeavoring to sound mature 
and—and—what was their silly word they all used so much- 
modern, as she cried defiantly, 

"I’ve got a right to live my own lifel" 

A right— 

Thoughtfully she observed, 

"These young ones have a lot to say about what’s 
modern and what’s their right, don’t they?" 

It was like turning on a tap. Words poured out 
of Mrs. Price. 

"I don’t understand them. Doris was such a good 
girl — never a moment’s trouble to me, an’ such a help. An 
this onel Always telling me I’m old fashioned, an’ talking 












? 


■ 













• t ' . • hom 






a. 
















CHAPTER XV 


- 264 - 


about her right to be happy an’ her right to live her own 
life, an T her right to do what all her friends do and go 
where they go.. Did we ever talk so much about our rights 
when we were young, Griselda?" 

"No," said Griselda. "We knew we had to work for 
what we wanted, and people figured they had duties instead 
of rights... Or if they didn’t they kept quietI" 

"What I want to know," lamented Mrs. Price, "is, 
whose idea is it all — this stuff about being modern an 1 
having rights to do everything they shouldn f t?" 

But Griselda could not enlighten her. "Sometimes 
I wonder," she admitted. "Seems like it f s in the air. It f s 
the times, I guess. Doesn’t Eileen mind her father?" 

"She does not!" There was surprise and consternation 
in Mrs. Price’s voice: she herself had always obeyed Andy 
Price to the letter. "She even talks back to him. If ever 
I’d spoken to my father like that...!" 

"I wonder if we could find her something to do in 
the club?" said G-riselda. "We could let the seventeen-year 
olds in, and give them something to think about here in the 
district. That might stop some of this gadding about in 
cars]" 

But Eileen Price, when she was formally invited 
to join the women’s club, was scornful of the privilege. 



















CHAPTER XV 


- 265 - 


"Mel" she said loudly as she read the written 
invitation in the store, "Me join the old ladies I Not on 
your lifel Who thinks I’m going to sit around and knit when 
I can find something better to do? Tell your Ma I don’t 
want to join, WalterJ" 

"Tell her yourself, Eileen," replied Walter, who 
was well aware that Eileen considered him an old stick-in-the- 
mud, and often said so# "Tell her yourself. All you got to 
do is walk out the back door and across the yard!" 

For a moment the girl seemed about to accept the 
challenge. Then, feeling perhaps that her saucy defiance 
would meet more than its match, if sheALd, she tossed her 
little head with its burnished cap of short tinted hair, 
curling forward in two crescents on her round, painted 
cheeks. 

"I don’t care," she said petulantly# "I’ll tell 
my mother to tell her# So there 1" 

And in due time, Mrs. Price apologetically delivered 
her daughter’s refusal to Griselda. Eileen continued to run 
around the country with Ghes Meade or one or another of the 
railroad men, noisy, chattering, uncontrollable as spilt 
quicksilver* She formed a sort of nucleus around which 
Griselda’s sense of uneasiness collected itself# So much 
energy without a purpose, so much emotion without a controlling 










1 




. 

: 







* 





. 


, t 

, 

e - ' 

, 

. 








* 


' 




i 








' 








. 

* 

t , ' ■ 





















CHAPTER XV 


- 266 - 


sense of responsibility was dangerous, the older woman felt* 
But what could be done about it? if the girl*s own parents 
could not control her, whose business was it? G-riselda, 
always a member of the lunch committee at dances and socials, 
continued to see Eileen at all of them, always popular, 
always conspicuous, from the moment she entered the hall. 

The hall itself had never meant as much to ^riselda 
as the little frame schoolhouse had done, although she had 
worked equally hard towards the building of both. But the 
younger generation were unanimous in declaring the new hall 
to be the best thing that had happened in Rolling Slopes yet. 
Their elders were not so sure. They carried nostalgic 
memories of the crowded dances, parties and socials in the 
little school where everybody knew everybody else. The new 
hall was large: it had a good floor and a stage and a kitchen 
at the back of the stage, it was, with its high square 
front, lettered U.E.A, HALL ~ ROLLING SLOPES, 1925* an 
imposing monument to the prosperity of a thriving farming 
community. 

Ironically enough, as this symbol of the existence 
of the community came into being, the community itself was, 
in spirit, in danger of dissolution. The middle twenties were 
years of flux, farms were changing hands as their owners saw 
a chance to sell profitably, or to rent and take up residence 



















CHAPTER XV 


- 267 - 


elsewhere. The constant nucleus of the district was a small 
group: the Horners, Nordstaads, Burtons, Wilkies, Prices, 
Kerrigans, Joe Griggs, and Ches Meade. For Ches, in spite 
of his constant coming-and-going, his continual investigation 
of new projects: the Peace River homesteads, the Turner 
Valley oilfields, the lumber camps in the foothills, kept 
his foothold in Rolling Slopes. Apart from the Kerrigans, 

Joe Griggs, and Old Bill Lilly, he had been at Rolling 
Slopes longer than anybody else. Few people realized the 
fact. Ches to most minds, was not a constant quantity but a 
drifter, restless and aimless as the wind, as the wild birds 
that came and went with the changing seasons. 

In 1925, the population of Rolling Slopes was 
augmented by two elevator men and the sectionman and his 
family. Thereafter the elevator men changed every two or 
three years, but the Patchenkos had come to stay. Peter 
Patchenko was a bulky Ukrainian, the history of whose family 
in the last two generations provided a fair epitome of the 
changing map of Europe. His mother, who lived with the 
family, had been born in Roumania, Peter himself had served 
in the Czar ! s army, the Roumanian village they had left 
had been occupied by Polish troops several times in recent 
years. The adult members of the family, having in memory 
the recollection of a disordered Europe, and having known 



.. 

t . . 

„ ; ' • ' { ■ 

' 



, ■■ 

■ 

. 

. 

: 


- 


• 


. : . . - ...... ; .... - ..v v'U: 

* 




B 


, 


t . . ■ 


1 " ' 


. 



t 


















CHAPTER XV 


- 268 - 


the government of Austria, Russia, Roumania and Poland, 
preferred the former, and venerated the memory of the old 
emperor, Franz Joseph, 

History sat lightly upon Peter Patchenko after 
he came to Canada, He patrolled the track between Bell 
Creek (where a Swedish section foreman reluctantly took 
up his lonely abode) and a point some miles west of Rolling 
Slopes, With him arrived his wife, his mother, and his 
flock of dark-eyed, barefooted, brown-skinned children who 
spoke the oddest mixture of languages. The memory of 
Ukrainian with its smatterings of Polish and Roumanian, 
faded in time, and the younger Patchenkos were fluent in 
English, But the two women of the household never did learn 
very much English beyond the conventional words of greeting 
and farewell. They lived quietly to themselves, rarely 
leaving the untidy, sprawling house beyond the tracks, where 
Peter added one lean-to after another to the box-car that had 
been the original home. 

For a short time, until Mike, Young Peter, and Stephan 
found themselves conversant with English, they fared ill. 

But they learned fast: in their own interests, faced with 
Ches Meade and his jokes, they had to. In a few months they 
were able to cope with Ches f s wit, and being easy-going, 
stolid youths, they forgave him and continued to tag around 














t i 




. 


. 













■ 












. 

- 




t 



‘ 








. 

; 

c 

< .; . : , c ■ 1< "• 

t 















CHAPTER XV 


- 269 - 


with him until in a year or two they in turn got jobs on the 
railway* 

Stephan and Annie and little Paul went to school 
where they proved good pupils, and unusually talented artists 
and actors. As the section-man’s house was on the edge of 
the lease, the sturdy children virandered all over the grassland 
with a freedom that none of the farm children had ever dared 
to use. 

They swam in the creek all summer and skated on it 
in winter if no slough lay closer at hand. Harry Wise warned 
them on several occasions to keep off: they disregarded the 
words they did not understand and, as they did no harm, he 
came to tolerate them. Once they came boldly to the ranch- 
house and told him of cows on the track, and after that they 
were permitted to roam at liberty. They even met Old Bill 
and passed by without signs of guilt or fear, and the former 
terror of the lease, like a savage old dog that does not 
bite the person who is not afraid, ignored them. But usually 
they did not penetrate to Old Bill’s corner of the lease, 
considering that which lay between their home and the school 
as their particular property. 

Living in this fashion, the Patchenkos did not really 
become a part of Rolling Slopes for many years. They held 
aloof, like the Hampton-Reids and Harry Wise, like Old Bill 
Lilly. The reserve was on both sides. There were those at 











* 








* 


e 





* 

: ' 

. 

■ . ' 

, 

e 

* 







. 


. 



0 






' 







■ 





- 


‘ 













CHAPTER XV 


- 270 - 


Rolling Slopes, who remarked, "bohunks", and ignored "the 
newcomers. Others who made an effort to be friendly were 
baffled by the shyness of the peasant women, their broken 
English. But the younger children grew up among their 
playmates at school and held their own with credit in the 
games and at concerts and school fairs. C-riselda spoke to 
their father about sending them to Sunday School, and, 
although the big boys never came, the family, from Annie 
down, attended regularly. 

1923 was, on the whole, one of the most eventful 
years in the development of Rolling Slopes. It brought the 
railroad and the new hall: it established once and for all, 
so far as its inhabitants could see, the fact that the 
district was an integral part ofthe province as a whole. 

A bus line ran within 'three miles of the village, and 
supplemented the twice-a-week train with a daily bus 
service to Maverick and Calgary: isolation was a thing of 
the past. 

The * social life* of Rolling Slopes was livelier 
than it ever had been. Dances and ball games and movies in 
Maverick made up the greater part of it for the younger 
generation: their elders shared in these, and supported 
church activities and the U.F.A. organizations with more 
enthusiasm than did their children. But the trend was away 






* 


< 

* 

* 


t 






. 














* 










« 







• 





■ 

. 



* 






























. 

. 



* A . . 

* 



L_ 























CHAPTER XV 


- 271 - 


from the district: amusement at home could no longer compete 
with entertainment abroad. 

The tendency oppressed G-riselda: things were 
turning out so very differently from what she had hoped when, 
years before, she had set herself to fostering a settlement. 
She had worked all along for permanence and stability — what 
had developed was quite the reverse. 

Late in the summer of 192J? a dance was held in 
the new hall. It began auspiciously enough with a good 
attendance of local people and a small sprinkling of workmen 
from the railY/ay, by then well past Rolling Slopes. 

Ordinarily these men would have driven into Maverick for their 
evening f s entertainment, but the idea of the dance held them. 
The first carloads to arrive v/ere reasonably sober and 
friendly. A big, slouching, raw-boned fellow with a violin 
offered his services to the orchestra and scrambled up on 
the stage to tune up. His companions distributed themselves 
about the hall, talked quietly, or joined in the dancing. 
Walter Kerrigan knew some of them, Ches Meade others. Enough 
came to make a marked shortage of women and no one suggested 
to Henry Burton and Engvald Nordstaad that they get up and 
dance instead of smoking and talking in a corner. 

A square'dance was called for, and Ches Meade, 
who had of late superseded Joe Criggs as caller, got up to 













, 

•• 

* 








• - . ~ 1 : vcnrl 

- c ■ ?'iS. ■ : : ya A 

t 



» 

' * - ..." '■ < . t ■ i 

. 

. 

, 

. 

- • . < 

- - • . , r .■:, ' . .. OCT i 




. 


mm 




















CHAPTER XV 


- 272 - 


preside. Couples formed up. At the back of the room, Albert 
Horner hastily tried to gather one more set, 

"Two more couples I Just two more — come on, 

Eileen2" 

Eileen Price refused, poutingly, turning to the 
man beside her to say scornfully, 

"Those old things — now we f ll have to wait for 
a good dance I" 

"Come on Mrs, WeitzJ" urged Albert, "Oh, well — 
you will, won f t you, Mrs, Kerrigan? Show these girls how to 
do a real danceJ No, you don f t, Walter —• find yer own 
partner — i f m dancing with your mother — T tain f t often 
I get the chanceJ,,." 

Griselda saw Eileen laugh, and knew a surge of anger, 

"A good sound spanking,••1" she thought, and then 
the figures of the dance claimed her attention. 

"Eleman left!" 

Ches’s high voice carried well and could be heard 
at the back of the hall far better than Joe f s. 

"Meet your partner, pass her by, 

Wink at the next one on the sly..• 

Swifrg when you mee t..,," 

The dance was just finishing when the second lot 
of workment burst in with a clatter and loud shouts of, 

"Le ! s dance,,, C*mon sweetheart.. Le’s dance," 



















s 




c 






i 















* « « 











CHAPTER XV 


- 275 - 


and some ribald singing. Evidently they were very drunk. 

The committee in charge of the dance held a hasty consultation. 

’’What’ll we do? Throw ’em out?” 

"We don’t want a fight in here — wreck the place!" 

"Maybe those first ones kin keep ’em quiet." 

An appeal to the sober element among the workmen 
resulted in temporary restoration of peace. The latecomers 
obligingly retired to the back of the hall and sat down. 

One or two slid off the benches and went to sleep on the 
floor, and the dance went on. 

Griselda went quietly into the cloakroom at the 
side of the stage in order to reach the kitchen at the back. 

She thought she would make the coffee early, or find someone 
else to do it. Absently she wondered where the workmen had 
got their liquor this time — a year ago, it would have been 
from Mrs. Cottle 1 

In the cloakroom she found Mabel Wilkie in tears. 

She had long since forgiven Mabel for almost marrying Walter: 
she pitied the girl, knowing well that Dave Wilkie was a 
harsh man, and that Mabel was not happy. Mabel’s color had 
faded in four years: although still a pretty woman, she 
looked wan and lifeless. Griselda stopped to enquire of her 
what was wrong, and Mabel controlled herself and explained. 

She had come late, and while removing her wraps 


in the cloakroom, noticed a stir in a pile of coats that 
had toppled off an overladen hook. Investigating, she 













UHAPTER XV 


- 274 - 


discovered beneath them, a half-suffocated baby* The child T s 
cries brought its mother, a stranger to Mabel, to the scene, 
and she had now taken the baby out to the car* 

Griselda too was shocked at the near-tragedy. 

She calmed Mabel as best she could, and asked her to look 
after the making of the coffee. Mabel promised, and outwardly 
her placid self once more, only said bitterly as they passed 
back through the cloakroom on their way out, 

"If I had a baby, I wouldn’t leave him to be 
suffocated under a pile of coats!* 1 

The moment she stepped out of the cloakroom, 
she was claimed as a partner. Griselda looking after her 
was divided between pity and self-reproach. She turned to 
leave by the side door of the hall, but Maude Horner bustled up. 

"Do you suppose that’s the new people on Harris’s 
place?" she demanded. "There — at the back." 

Griselda eyed the lumpish youth, the stocky, 
foreign-looking man, the two women thus indicated. She was 
in no mood to welcome strangers, but somebody had to do it. 
"Jobson’s their name, isn’t it?" 

"Yes.. Oh, maybe not — that girl *3 just plastered 
with paint..•" 

"They all are I" Griselda looked around disapprov¬ 
ingly. "Look at Eileen Price -- I don’t see her just now-- 
makes me want to scrub her with soap and water!" 



















CHAPTER XV 


- 275 - 


”1 think that is Jobsons,” mused Mrs* Horner. 
’’Albert says he*s a foreigner who changed his name from 
Jabisky...” 

”Let f s get it over,” said Griselda. Ches Meade 
paused near them, and she asked, 

”Do you know, Ches ~ is that the new people from 
Harris f s place «— Jobsons?” 

Ches in turn surveyed the newcomers and assured 
her they were the Jobsons, and Griselda and Mrs. Horner 
moved towards the back of the hall to speak to the women. 

One of them, a slim little thing in her twenties with short, 
straight, coal-black hair and slanting black eyes, answered 
pertly and joined the dancers immediately. But the other, 
a stout blonde about ten years older than her friend, smiled 
pleasantly despite two missing teeth in the front, and 
seemed glad of their greeting. She was untidily dressed, 
and unlike the other, wore little makeup. 

The next dance started, and Griselda and Mrs. 
Horner made their ?/ay back to the front of the hall, still 
puzzled, a little doubtful. 

’’That little snip!” 

”If my husband ever spoke to me like that on the 
dance floor or any other time...!” 

’’Dance, old girl?” said Albert at her shoulder, 
and as Maude moved away, she began to pour out her tale to 


































CHAPTER XV 


- 276 - 


him* Albert listened, and laughed. 

”Ches ’ad you two on, didn’t T e? Never set 
eyes on ’im I expect—anyway it ain’t the Jobsonsl” 

Griselda again had her hand on the knob of the 
side door when shouts at the main door at the end of the 
hall arrested her exit. She waited until the latest group 
of the construction crew got into the hall. 

r, 0nce they’re all in,” she thought, ”I’ll go — 

I don’t want to meet them outside epid I hate to bother 
anyone to see me home.” 

These latecomers were less amenable to reason 
than their comrades. They scattered through the crowd 
yelling and singing: one of them spied the fat blonde whom 
Cheshad identified as Mrs. Jobson. He charged into the 
crowd of dancers and pushed aside her partner. 

”Irma! Good ol’ Irma! H’yah, Irma? Howsh 
bish-bishness at Flynn’s?” 

Griselda realized with a flash of anger that 
she and Mrs. Horner had been the victims of one of Ches 
Meade’s jokes. For Flynn’s , which claimed to be a restaurant, 
had set up in Maverick at the time of the railway building. 

To date, the dining room of the PRAIRIE VISTA hotel and the 
Chinese restaurant had lost no trade through Flynn’s, yet 
Flynn throve exceedingly in spite of su^h minor setbacks 














CHAPTER XV 


- 277 - 


such as his waitresses being ordered out of town by the 
police, and regular fines for selling liquor. The fat 
blonde with the toothless smile, was then, one of Flynn’s 
latest. (T? 

Mrs. Kerrigan looked around for Ches, the perpetrator 
of this ugly jest. The only thing that saved him from a 
public calling-down at that moment was the fact that he was 
talking rapidly and his listener was the little slant-eyed 
girljlikewise from Flynn’s. 

The partner of ff good ol ’ Irma !l had tired of the 
detention of his blonde by the drunken newcomer. He pushed 
him roughly aside and clutched Irma around her bulky waist. 

His rival uttered a roar of rage, and grappled with him. 

In an instant they were rolling on the floor and Irma 
uttered a piercing shriek. 

Griselda slipped quietly from the hall. A line 
of ears stood along the side of it: she passed between two 
that she recognized as Horner’s and Nordstaad’s, and thought 
vaguely, ,f at least they’re good people...” 

Her foot struck something that rolled and clinked: 
she hurried behind the line of cars to gain the road, and 
could hear inside the hall enough noise to indicate that 
peace was not to be easily restored, A silly high-pitched 
laugh came from the last car but one ^n)of the line, and a 
man’s voice said thickly, 



. .. ... tJ' o 

■ 

. 

« « < • 

- 

* 

.. 

* 

# 

. 

.. . ; 

, 

; _. ' *>v - - - ■ 

« ■! » 



. 

c 

















CHAPTER XV 


- 278 - 


"Aw, c f mon, Eileen...!" 

"Eileen!" thought Griselda, " Eileen Price ? 

Surely not — but I didn f t see her during that last dance.. 
Her mother would be so upset — she doesn f t know about this, 
I f m sure..." 

She went home, and once inside the tall white 
houseg) felt old and tired and forlorn. Upstairs Jasper 
slept soundly and awoke only when.she crept into bed beside 
him. She told him everything that had happened, and he 
murmured, 

"Time you f n me was stayin* home from these things. 
Gat someone else to see to the lunches. Times has changed!" 

He slept again, but his wife lay awake for a 

long time. 

"We wanted it -- the railway an T the cars an 1 the 
money.. We wanted progress. What ! s progress... Is this 
progress? Eileen Price... She was such a pretty little 
girl — not skinny, like Doris 1 The first baby born here, 
and now... That Ches! I ? ll give him a piece of my mind 
when I catch him.. Him and that little tart with the slant 
eyes.. Guess it wouldn f t do any good...,." 

It seemed hours later that she heard Walter come 
in, and called to him softly. Walter seemed cheerfully 
excited by the events of the evening that had so depressed 


his mother 










. . 






' 























CHAPTER XV 


- 279 - 


11 And Engvald threw him out I 11 he concluded a brisk 
account of the free-for-all that had ended the evening. "And 
you should see the black eye Ches got from one of those 
fellows I" 

"I f d like toT* said u-riselda. She went to sleep, 
vaguely comforted by the thought that someone had given Ches 
Meade a fraction of what he deserved. 


The episode left a bad taste in her mouth, and 
spurred her on to try to find a remedy for the state of 
affairs. She first approached individual women in the 
community, who might be expected to feel the same way as she 
did about the problem. Mrs* Horner, Mrs. Nordstaad, and 
Emma all agreed with her that such an exhibition as the 
dance had provided was deplorable. Yet, when, encouraged 
by this support, G-riselda suggested that the Women ? s Club 
and the Ladies’ Aid, working as groups, try to clean up 
x the dances and ban liquor on the premises, she found no 
support. The women as a whole were apathetic. She urged 
them in vain* 

"A good many of your children are still small. 
This sort of thing won T t look so harmless to you in ten 
years, when it T s your sons and daughters at these dances 1 st 

f, Seems to me our dances are no worse ? n dances any 





















CHAPTER XV 


- 280 - 


other place!" said Mrs. Murphey. Her words released a 
string of protests against Griselda’s appeal. 

"They’re a lot better’n the Maverick dances!" 

"That railway gang T 11 be out of the way in a 
week or two an T things ’ll settle down." 

"Course the kids are a bit silly, but what kids 

aren’t?" 

"If you want to see a really bad bunch of kids, 
look at that hell Creek bunch!” 

"We’ve got to move with the times." 

Griselda, looking around the circle of faces, 
knew she was defeated. These women, good and decent as 
they were in the main, either had no conception of the 
problem as it loomed to her, or were refusing to face it. 

She went home discouraged, and as she passed through the 
store to pick up the mail, she thought there was a sort 
of triumph in the looks directed her way by the group of 
young people lounging around the store. Eileen Price, airy 
and mocking, Ches Meade leaning on the counter, a couple 
of girls from Bell Creek, a sleek-haired, black-eyed lad she 
had never seen before, with a cigarette clinging to his lip 
as he talked.. Triumph — or indifference? At all events 
they were deliberately not noticing her. 
























CHAPTER XV 


- 281 - 


She stepped inside the post-office cage and took 
down the mail from the box marked KERRIGAN. Walking across 
to the house, she examined it. THE FAMILY HERALD AND WEEKLY 
STAR, The NOR’WEST FARMER, a belated Eaton T s sale catalogue, 
a farm machinery circular, the CALGARY HERALD for three days, 
a couple of letters. A Halifax postmark: that would be Jean 
of course... The other, addressed in pencil in a round, 
childish hand, was likely a note or a letter from one of 
her grandsons. They sent her Valentines made in school and 
Christmas cards decorated in crayon, and invitations to 
school exhibitions.. She tore it open, it was poorly 
written and atrociously spelt.. It Y/as incredible. 


Hello, Ma Kerrigan, 

This letter mebbe won’t get no 
welcome from you, being that its functin is 
to tell you some true facts. 

This community is plain sick of 
you running things just because your old you 
think things has got to be run the Y/ays you 
want them. You think young people oughta 
do nothing but go to church and work. Beleive 
you me the people Y/on’t stand for it much 
longer. 

I know it was you drouve Mrs. 
Cottle out and 1 just want to say she ? s as good 
as you any day and mebbe she*s not the only 
one that will be drouve out. 

You neednt try to figger who sent 
this for it is writen for lots of us and I’ll 
sign it right. 

Here for Rolling Slopes, 
























CHAPTER XV 


- 282 - 


G-riselda gasped, feeling hex breath come short* 
She read it again, and examined the envelope. A cheap 
blue-lined one, postmarked Calgary -- that meant nothing 
in these days of easy travel* The writing might be anyone T s 
child, or adult, man or woman -- a thick lead-pencil and 
a big round hand*, disguised perhaps* Who? 

The chattering, giggling group in the store*•* 

It could be* But then, they had not been adherents of 
Mrs. Cottle.** Yes, Ches Meade hadl If it was Ches, sooner 
or later he would give himself av/ay — he loved the public 
eye too well to conceal for ever the fact that he had 
scored off Mrs. Kerrigan.. It might not have been Ches — 
there might be others who resented her.* 

She read the letter a third time and a fourth. 

No clues beyond the two obvious ones — the reference to 
the young people, that to Mrs. Cottle. Might they not 
have been put in by someone else -- they were so obvious. 

A Ches Meade would certainly think of them — so would any 
snippy sixteen-year old in the district *— so would someone 
else, clever enough to ape this illiterate style, and so 
divert suspicion. 

w It could be anyone 1 thought G-riselda with 
horror. u Anyone 

A moment’s calm reflection told her that was not 


quite true. She began to eliminate, counting off the 



. . « 

l 








‘ 












■ 

. 

' 


■ 

. 

■ • - . : : 

















CHAPTER XV 


- 283 - 


people who could not have written it. The Horners, the 
Nordstaads, the Burtons, the Prices... A the elder Prices.. 

AJdJbe/ had no to W her... 

... the Wilkies.But so many were left who quite possibly 
might have written such a letter. Or instigated its writing. 

Round and round went her mind, round and round, 
gathering in suspects, tossing them out, gathering in and 
tossing out. The clock chimed the hour and uriselda with a 
start, hastened to get supper. She heard the men on the 
step, debated within herself. If she showed the poisonous 
letter to Jasper, there would be steps taken to protect 
her.. The combination of an infuriated husband and an 
outraged postmaster was not one to trifle with. There would 
be a policeman on the scene and the intricate machinery of 
the law would order a watch kept on all incoming letters., 
if the culprit were caught it might be a serious matter 
for him...or her... it would certainly be an unpleasant 
matter for uriselda with the publicity. 

As Jasper turned the door-knob, his wife dropped 
the letter into the stove, it flared, blackened, was gone... 
Uriselda served supper with a smile, and asked her husband 
if he thought the U.F.A. local groupd would do anything about 
the dances at the hall. Jasper did not think they would. 

The hall, as he pointed out, was strictly a community under¬ 
taking. Practically all the farmers had a share in it: 









CHAPTER XV 


- 284 - 


they would prefer to see it profitable rather than respectable, 
under the circumstances, 

Dave Wilkie, president of the U.F.A. local, put 
the matter simply and briefly when G-riselda made her final 
appeal to him. 

"This hall ain’t paid for yet, you know," he 
said. "Long as we have dances here, the money comes in. 

What’s the sense of throwing it away, Mrs. Kerrigan? 

That’s what we’ll be doing if we get too strict about a 
little drinking. They’ll all go to Maverick, or open up 
that Bell Greek joint again, and then we’ll be left with 
the mortgage!" 

His view prevailed. Griselda, having made her 
stand clear to all, refused to compromise. She abandoned 
her single-handed struggle and in bitterness of heart 
went further and resigned her office as President of the 
women’s club. By the end of 1923 she rarely went near the 
hall except for church services. And then she could not but 
note, that although the population of the district had more 
than doubled in ten years, the congregation was smaller than 
it had been during the war. 

Discouragement at this time was leading her more 
and more to identify herself with the past. She who had 
advocated change and progress, and considered the terms 




















CHAPTER XV 


- 23j? - 


synonymous, would now gladly have called a halt to all change* 
She was no longer drawn to the future. It was all around her, 
the future she had anticipated, and the settlement and the 
prosperity. But it was not an orderly, sober prosperity, but 
a restless changing world of people apparently no happier 
and no better for the improvement in their material circum¬ 
stances. Neighbors quarreled: there was bad blood between 
Nordstaad and Evans, between Dave Wilkie and Ches Meade, 
Between Ches Meade and Nordstaad. Since the Eampton-Reids 
had opposed the building of the railway that cut in two their 
grazing lease, there had been increased coldness between 
ranch and farms. It was only mitigated briefly at the time 
of the prairie fire, the most serious in thirty years... 

Shortly after the trains began running through 
Rolling Slopes, the prairie fire occurred. Ignited apparently 
by a spark from the engine, it crawled slowly at first, a 

thin line of orange flame, scarcely visible against the 

h 

tawny grass save for the ever-spreading patck of char in its 
rear. It was early December, and the light snowfall of the 
preceding week had disappeared in a Chinook that lasted for 
thirty-six hours and dried the ground thoroughly. Smoke curled 
up leisurely, and told its own story, and a hasty warning was 
telephoned about from the store to the ranch-house and to 
the farms to the east. Fire-fighters assembled at the store: 










CHAPTER XV 


- 286 - 


Ches Meade and George Evans, Nordstaad and Henry Burton, Joe 
Griggs and Walter Kerrigan, and the oldest Pat^henko boys* 
Other men promised to come if word were sent back for more 
helpers* They attacked the thin line of fire at its east 
end, beating and smothering the flames with sacks dipped 
in the barrels of water in the backs of the trucks that 
had brought them to the scene* The line of fire shortened 
perceptibly, and its eastward advance just north of the 
village was checked. To these efforts was owing the fact 
that Patchenko’s house, the elevators, the schoolhouse, and 
the south-eastern corner of the lease north of the railroad 
were spared from the blaze. The western side of the flattened 
V-shaped line of the fire was in turn tackled by the ranch- 
house crew, who, fewer in number, and faced with the problem 
of moving the cattle that ?;ere wintering on the range, were 
less successful in their efforts* The fire was well into the 
lease before they got the back-fire set, quite close to the 
ranch-house and buildings which were protected by a wide 
ploughed guard. Old Bill, co-operative for once in his life, 
with Albert Horner and two other men set their own back fire 
across the big coulee and along the road. The fire-fighting 
started about noon: by four o’clock the flames were extin¬ 
guished everywhere save along a narrow strip south-west of 
the ranch-house. Several of the original crew who turned out 
to battle the blaze were on their way home when, with a rush 




t . 

; 






■ 
















CHAPTER XV 


- 287 - 


and a roar, the wind came up. It was no Chinook this time, but 
a cold, fifty-mile-an-hour westerly gale, that, in its first 
gust scattered far and wide bits of burning weeds and fiery 
sparks from the original blaze. 

’’Can’t go far,’ 1 said Ches Meade, wiping his sooty 
face, ’’the backfire’s just over that little hill.” 

”If it doesn’t get away,” agreed his partner, one 
of the elevator men. As they looked, the fire roared away, 
already over a mile in advance of them, a low but lurid ridge 
of orange-red flame in the twelight, crested with billows of 
smoke and followed by a black blanket of burnt grass. Ahead of 
it, Albert Horner and Old Bill were caught in a great shower 
of blown ash and fine black charcoal dust: had it not been 
for the frozen marshy patch in the coulee bottom, the whole 
willow thicket and Old Bill’s shack would have been burned. 

As it was, the flames were stopped by a plowed field on the 
north and by the road, and the farms north of the coulee 
were no longer threatened. 

The ranch-house and its buildings were protected 
by some yards of plowed ground that would have stopped any 
ordinary blaze. But the strength of the wind carried the 
sparks to ignite the feed-stacks, and the frantic Harry Wise, 
having by desperate efforts extinguished the flames around 
the barns and sheds, turned back to see that the trees and 
bushes of the little plantation against the house were all 


ablaze 


















CHAPTER XV 


- 288 - 


Albert Horner and his crew arrived at that moment: 
they could not save the house, which might not have burnt if 
it had been surrounded by grass. The grass fire passed quickly, 
but the flaring evergreens and tall poplars and manitoba ma- 
pies planted by old Mr. Hampton-Reid thirty years before were 
but a torch held to the house he had built. 

South of the big coulee, the fire crossed the road, 
licked over a stubble field and threatened Price T s farm. It 

d 

passed the next road allowance, /v was halted (^nepby a plowed 
field. As its front was then over two miles wide, the wedge of 
plowing was a godsend to the v/earied firefighters.They had 
long since been augmented by men from the Bell Creek district, 
and by volunteers rushed to the scene from Maverick. The south 
tongue of the blaze was finally extinguished at the edge of 
Burton’s farmyard after destroying his two haystacks and a 
granary of wheat. But the northern wedge, widening once more 
as it spread and pushed by the brisk wind, went on for ano¬ 
ther five miles. 

Pew people slept that night at Rolling Slopes. 

Mrs. Horner sat up all night, dressed for instant flight, 
with the three children sleeping in their heavy clothes 
Towards midnight her husband, black and grimed, looked in 
to tell her he thought it was safe now. But to the west 
she could see the tongues of flame rising from the burning 
ranch-house: to the east several strawstacks flared luridly 

















CHAPTER XV 


- 289 - 


and occasionally she saw the actual ridge of flame on the 
crest of a rise. The air was heavy with smoke, and the strong 
cold wind laden with ashes and cinders. 

In the village, G-riselda made hot coffee and lunch 
for the men who came in by twos and threes to report progress, 
phone their information in to Maverick, and gulp a hasty meal. 
A big herd of the cattle wintering on the home range were 
hurried by, bawling pitifully, to be turned into the southern 
tip of the range that had escaped the blaze. Ches Meade and 
Walter returned, completely exhausted, and grimed from head 
to foot. They were followed by the elevator man, and shortly 
after, by Harry Wise, who phoned his message of disaster in 
to the Maverick telegraph office. That was shortly after mid¬ 
night when the fire had swept beyond Rolling Slopes. Towards 
morning the wind went down and dawn revealed a blackened 
world. Next day it snowed, and a foot of snow covered the 
ash and cinder and restored to the hilly land its normal 
winter aspect. Only, for months afterwards, the charred, 
burnt-off fence-posts dangling here and there on the Hires 
told of the passing of the fire. 

The ranch had suffered most heavily. The loss of 
the house, of the feed, of the winter grazing, was a serious 
matter. 

r, It f ll never be the same again,” mourned Harry Wise 

"Aw, what d T you care?" scoffed Ghes Meade. "You 


















CHAPTER XV 


- 290 - 


get your wages jest the same, It’s his royal highness out 
there at the coast that T ll be footin’ the bill!" 

But the Kerrigans were sympathetic, and for the 
first time in the twenty years of their acquaintance, there 
was a genuine understanding between G-riselda and Harry Wise, 

For the first time she could put herself in the place of the 
ranchers and think what the devastation must mean to the men 
who had worked so hard to preserve the Grasmere Ranch, She 
put it into words while Harry Wise warmed his stiffened hands 
at the stove. 

A7r. 

!, I can’t help but be glad that* Hampton-Reid didn’t 
live to see it! It won’t mean so much grief to the young 
folks. " 

Harry Wise glanced at her suddenly, gave a twisted 

grin. 

"Yeah,•.that’s right!" he said. 

The words were the epitaph of his old hostility 
towards the Kerrigans. Henceforth he took to dropping in to 
visit them occasionally, evidently having made up his mind 
to accept them as a bit of the past, a link with the old . / . 

been f rvK* n acL 

days of the ranch. Griselda wondered if it had^the whole district, 
or if Harry Wise too had come to realize like herself, how 
greatly times had changed... Either thought was depressing 
for the light it cast upon human nature. 


- 0 ■ ' v 




. 





■ 








- 




; : • ' • 


. 


. 


. 











- 





. * 

- 

* 






















* , . 




















CHAPTER XV 


- 291 - 


"Our hard times were our best," she reflected. 

"Our hard times... and our disasters." The great blizzard 

of 1919 had brought people together, and the influenza, 

and the hailstorms. Not the prosperity and the good luck. 

Jasper was well aware of her depression and of 

its cause. Half jokingly, he said one day, 

"Now that you’ve at last had the sense to give 

over all this community stuff to the younger women who ought 

to have been doin’ it long ago, how about you an’ me taking 

this trip of ours back east?" 

Suddenly it seemed to her that of all things in 

the world, this was what she most wanted — to go back. 

Back where things were rooted firmly and did not change — 

back with Jasper, who did not change. He was always the 

same, always dependable, other women envied her the husband 

who ’thinks the sun rises ’round you’. The present did not 

aV 

need her: the future v;as vague and menacing, and^the mercy 
of a younger generation like Ghes Meade and Eileen Price, 
young people who flickered like a candle flame, and like 
a flame, threatened to run wild and do incalcuable damage. 
But the past was safe, stored in memory, alive in those 
who remembered it with longing.. Harry Wise, and Griselda 
herself, and Jasper. 

"Lots of times I haven’t paid much attention to 


















CHAPTER XV 


- 292 - 


Jasper,” she resolved, 11 but tilings’ll be different now. 
We’ve earned our holiday -- him and mel” 

"Oh, yesj” she cried with unwonted enthusiasm. 


’’We’ll go — we’ll go next fall I" 
















CHAPTER XVI 


- 2$>3 “ 


ADRIFT 

There was comfort in the thought for the months 
that followed. To go back, to find oneself in the past 
again... Griselda began to think about her old home, more 
than she had done for years. Long-forgotten details of 
Uncle Jacob Leslie’s house came back to her, and she had 
constantly to remind herself that that house had not existed 
for ten years: that the heavy old furnishings and the 
narrov/ garden were gone, blown to nothingness and dust. 

Even so something in her refused to accept the fact, and 
sometimes she dreamed that she was back there — not as a 
young girl, certainly, but younger than her fifty-nine 













I 




















CHAPTER XVI 


- 2?4 - 


years, young enough to run quickly up the dark stairs, past 
the be-fogged little window on the landing, never once 
touching the heavy banister rail. 

She deliberately ignored events in Rolling Slopes. 
Hints came to her that the women’s club was disintegrating: 
that Mabel Wilkie, who had succeeded her as President, could 
not hold it together. She could see for herself that people 
were more concerned with getting out of the district for 
their amusements than remaining in it and trying to amuse 
themselves. Dances and ball games were the only things that 
kept the young people in Rolling Slopes in their spare time® 
Griselda had no objection to a ball game as such, but she 
could not approve the fact that they took place on Sunday 
afternoons directly after church, and were invariably 
better attended than the service in the hall. She could not 
say very much about the ball games because her own household 
was solidly in support of them. She stoutly refused to 
attend, even though Jasper, Walter, and Joe did. The 
order of their departure was invariable. 

Joe went first. He had the advantage of being 
able to go straight from church to his own little shack 
and thence to the ball diamond Y/ithout having to encounter 
Griselda’s disapproving eye. Walter was the next to leave. 

"Got enough wood and coal?" he would ask 








- 









































. 












■« 



















CHAPTER XXI 


- 29^ - 


solioitiously after their return from church. Thanks to 
the fact that the Kerrigans owned the townsite, including 
the ball diamond, the game could not commence until church 
was over* 

There was always v/ood and coal in the kitchen, 
and Walter knew it. He would busy himself about it for a 
minute or two and then slip quietly ai/ay. Fifteen minutes 
later, Jasper would begin to fidget. 

"Think I*11 — er — get a bucket of water in 
fresh..,. Could do with a nice cold drink,.•" 

And after he set the pail down in the kitchen, 
he too v/ould amble off to the ball diamond beside the hall, 
not far from the store, G-riselda usually maintained the 
pleasant fiction that it was purely by accident her men folk 
wandered off to the game. Sometimes before they got away 
she managed to impale one or the other with a sardonic glance 
over her spectacles, and had the satisfaction of seeing him 
turn red and wriggle. She had, too, been known to remark 
to Jasper before he made his escape, 

"You’ll miss the first innings if you don’t get 
your cold drink!" 

When the men returned, Gkriselda never asked them 
for the results of the game. But if no information was forth¬ 
coming, they noted that the conversation at supper took a 
















, 













. 






* 

* 




: • 









. 

. 

. :i.: .. . 

. 








■ ■ ' : V , 

i 


_ 
















CHAPTER XVI 


- 296 - 


slant that way. They in turn suspected her of watching the 
game from behind the lace curtains of the parlor, but had 
no proof, and all their attempts to entrap her into an 
admission of interest had to date failed. 

Actually Griselda did less watching than they 
gave her credit for. Sunday afternoon she wrote letters, 
made out the Sunday School reports and read the church papers. 
Q,uite often she had one or two callers from among the women 
who had driven over with their families to the ball game. 

Mrs. Horner, who had never learned to appreciate baseball, 
frequently appeared. 

”The girls are playing today,” she observed one 

hot Sunday. 

”What next?” said Griselda. ”1 didn f t know they 
had a team.” 

”It f s new,” replied her friend. ”Ei!een Price, 
of course — those silly Parr girls from Hell Creek, Doreen 
Prescott, Gertrude 7/ietz, are all in it, and they say Ohes 
Meade is coaching them. They f re playing Maverick today.” 

”So that r s where all the cars are coming from.” 

Griselda glanced out of the window. Eileen Price 
was running, after a strike. Her short skirts fluttered 
outrageously in the wind, the ball sailed over her into 
the hands of the girl on base, Eileen ducked and dodged 


















CHAPTER XVI 


- 297 - 


and slid in to the base, sprawling on the ground, and a 
faint sound of shouting and cheering penetrated to the 
parlor. A dispute arose on the ball diamond, and Eileen, 
brushing off the dust, seemed to be the core of it. 

"I don T t understand them,’ 1 said Griselda slowly. 
"I guess I’m getting old.” 

But she did not feel old in herself. Her mind 
was keen, her energies unimpaired. Only the difference 
perplexed her — her inability to grasp the feelings and 
motives of others. Was it then old age -- or was it an 
inevitable condition attendant upon the. passage of time? 

"Do you understand them, Maude?” she asked 

curiously. 

"No,” said Mrs, Horner promptly. She was not 
perturbed: the fact did not bother her. Little that others 
outside her own family could do would seriously ruffle her 
comfortable equanimity, yet she was not a selfish woman — 
quite the reverse. She was kindly and open-hearted and 
intelligent. And untroubled. 

With a sinking feeling, Griselda saw the barrier 
rise here too, unrealized by Mrs. Horner, all too keenly 
felt by herself, 

”We don’t understand each other either...!” 







, 


V 






Ifcl 

















CHAPTER XVI 


- 298 - 


The trip was only a few weeks away when Jasper 
Kerrigan came in from the store one morning rather earlier 
than usual. 

"Don T t feel so good!" he complained. 

"I’ll bring you a cup of coffee — go and lie 
down for a while,” said u-riselda. It was the habit of those 
who were working in the store to come across to the house 
for mid-morning coffee. As she poured out a steaming cup, 
she heard the sofa springs creak. Casually she thought, 

"The trip will do him good — he needs a rest.” 

Cup in hand she entered the parlor. Jasper lay on 
the sofa, seemingly asleep. His old hat had fallen to the 
floor beside him: it seemed for the moment that he was groping 
for it. but the hand brushing the hat was open and relaxed, 
and suddenly she knew. 

Walter entered the house half-an-hour later to 
find her sitting tearless and erect beside the sofa, hands 
folded in her lap, her dark eyes fixed and strained. The 
cup of cold coffee stood on the table nearby. 

"Dad...J" He paused, came to stand beside her. 

"He ? s...gone..." 

"Yes." Dully she thought, He»s not surprised.-- 
Jasper told him -- he didn't tell me... 

She looked up. "Did he know it was going to 


happen?" 












CHAPTER XVI 


- 299 - 


"Yes," replied .Valter, '’Since May. The doctor 
said he might live five years — or it might be any time. 

Dad didn't want you to worry." 

Griselda looked away from him and remained silent 
although he waited for the words that he could sense she 
was about to utter. Still she did not speak and there 
grew in the room an unbearable tension until Walter went 
quietly away. 

Unlike her mother, Emma was voluble in her sorrow 
Her unrestricted grief, her easy flow of tears were as 
inexplicable to Griselda as the older woman's hard, dry 
misery was to her daughter, 

"You'd think she didn't care I" said Emma half- 
resentfully to her brother the day before the funeral, 

"I haven’t seen her cry once l " 

"Did you ever see her cry?" demanded Walter, and 
Emma realised with a little shock of surprise that she 
had never done so. Her father's death was the first real 
sorrow of Emma’s comfortable life, and she would gladly 
have turned for consolation to the mother who shared that 
grief and given in turn what consolation she could. But 
there was to be no question of consolation given or received 
Griselda’s stubborn stoicism repelled her daughter and 
Emma’s display of emotion was alien to her mother. 






























































CHAPTER XVI 


- 300 - 


The same barrier persisted at the funeral. The 
service was held in Maverick, but Jasper was buried in the 
little graveyard at Rolling Slopes as he had specified not 
very long before in conversation with his son. He reiterated 
at the same time that Griselda was not to know how serious 
was his ailment. 

M She worries - always did. The shock won f t be 
as hard for her as the worry." 

Griselda had been spared three months of worry: 
it was August when Jasper Kerrigan was buried on the sloping 
side of the big coulee that ran east from the store. A 
hot dry wind whipped and fluttered the women’s skirts, 
rustled the brown grass all along the hillside, and seared 
the fragile petals of the flowers piled near the open grave. 

The strong gusts wafted away their heavy sweetness that 
had lain sickly in the dead air of the church, and Griselda 
was thankful for that, as she stood between Walter and Emma 
near the grave. 

Her emotions were numbed, her mind aimless. She 
found herself thinking with detachment that it was twenty- 
two years since Jasper had come here and located his homestead. 
She thought how odd it was that she should have been so 
determined in those years that they should not leave — how 
terrified she had been that Jasper would once more pull up 











CHAPTER XVI 


- 301 - 


his stakes and move somewhere else. And now he would stay at 
Rolling Slopes for all eternity... Here, and not here... 

Her little grandson, Tom Burton, who had been 
Jasper f s great favorite, suddenly burst into loud sobs. 
Griselda had no impulse to comfort him: she sought instead 
a reason for his outburst and thought she found it in the 
strangeness of the scene — Emma weeping, Henry with a black 
arm-band standing among the pallbearers, Walter very stiff 
and strange... 

The burial-service was read and Griselda crumbled 
a handful of earth into the grave, and heard again Jasper f s 
voice saying, 

"They said this land woudn f t grow crops — and 
look at it... In ten years we’ll go east and tell them..." 

The attendants began filling the grave, and Walter 
drew his mother away. She moved only as far as the edge of 
the graveyard, and stood there, while Walter, Emma, and Henry 
Burton exchanged unhappy looks at this new whim. Neighbors 
came and spoke, and Griselda replied mechanically to the 
kindly, well-meant words, wishing they would go. The pall¬ 
bearers filed past, Joe and Henry remaining with Walter at 
her elbow. 

"Ye miss him!" muttered Engvald Nordstaad and 
passed on, leaving her hand numb from the grasp of his own. 
Harry Wise shook hands: his grip had little strength in it, 


















CHAPTER XVI 


- 302 - 


his hand was knotted with arthritis, Griselda thought there 
were tears in his eyes, he who had been antagonistic to their 
coming, two decades before! Andy Price stood talking, talking 
aimlessly until his wife hurried him away# How old they look! 
thought Griselda... They have all grown old! All of us — old 
together! 

It was finished. The mound, flower-covered, looked 
out of place on the bare, brown, wind-swept hillside. The 
mourners had gone, the family stood there alone. But just 
outside the gate were two of the gypsy-like children of the 
sectionman, Annie and Paul, 

"What do they want?" said Emma fretfully, "Just 

curious..." 

But Walter noted the handful of flowers each child 
held, and went to speak to them. A moment later they were 
crossing the graveyard to lay the ragged little bouquets of 
late wildflowers and bright marigolds among the wreaths and 
sprays. Then, silently, with awed sideways looks at the grave 
and at Griselda, they ran away down the slope, towards the 
elevators and their home, running freely, bare brown legs, 
flying hair — free and wild, and young. 

Griselda recalled her husband’s voice, saying, 

"A smart little thing, that little Patchenko, 
Pretty eyes — I wouldn’t wonder if you didn’t look quite 
a bit like that when you were her age.,," 





















CHAPTER ZVT 


- 203 - 


He spoilt Emma, she thought suddenly. He spoilt 
Emma -- because he felt _I had an unhappy childhood. He couldn’t 
make it up to me, so he made it up to Emma.., 

Tears prickled behind her eyes and she turned and 
hurried out of the graveyard, towards the car. 


During the winter that follov/ed, she scarcely left 
the house and hercustomary activity dwindled to a minimum, 
Emma’s exasperation with her mother’s seeming lack of grief 
turned to a lively concern over her brooding. She joined with 
Walter in urging the trip east. Griselda heard them out in 
silence and said little. Her attention seemed fixed elsewhere: 
insistence upon it made her irritable. 

That fall there was renewed gossip about Eileen 
Price, and by December there was no doubt about the girl’s 
condition. She stayed at home most of the time, never got 
out of the car if she did go for a drive, and sat huddled 
by herself in the back seat, her soft face as defiantly 
painted as ever. But her round, light-blue eyes that had 
shifted so challengingly from face to face now stared emptily 
ahead. Rumors went around, some of them exaggerated, others 
with a basis of sordid truth. Andy Price was said to have 
tackled Ches Meade about marrying Eileen. Ches’s reply, as 
he told several of the men, was, f, Aw to hell with it -- I 
ain’t the only one I” Mabl[e Wilkie was supposed to have said 






» ' ■ 


* 

\ 

t 

t 




t 


. 









, _ c.; : '■ ■ ' ■: 


. 






























CHAPTER XVI 


- 304 - 


to her husband that she should like to adopt the baby when 
it was born. And Dave, it was rumored, had replied brutally 
that even though he had no children of his own, he was damned 
if he T d raise Meade f s bastard. 

Early in the new year, Mrs. Price came to see 
Griselda and sat in the front room with the tears streaming 
down her lined face. 

' M I don’t know what to do, Griselda — what can 

we do?” 

Irrelevantly it crossed the other’s mind that this 
woman, hopeless, muddled, foolish as she was, was the only 
person remaining in Rolling Slopes to call her ’’Griselda’. 

She had never taken kindly to the easy Christian-naming of 
people of a later generation. That Mrs. Price should call her 
’Griselda’ meant something. 

She tried to concentrate on the problem in hand. 
Two years, a year before, she would long since have had a 
solution worked out, so far as was jjjLumanly possible. Now it 
seemed she must start thinking about it at that very instant. 
Her mind, sodden with her own grief, was dull — she fumbled. 

"Can’t you...send her way?” she asked finally. 
"Some relative where she could stay until the baby’s born?" 

"I thought of that," said Mrs. Price drearily. 

"But Andy’s sister has girls of her own, and she don’t want 
Eileen there. Her other aunt never did like the kid -- says 




















CHAPTER JSfl 


- 303 - 


it serves us right for spoiling her so. Oh, Griselda — you 
don f t know how lucky you are that both your children turned 
out so wellj" 

Her tears started again, but Griselda caught the 


words, 

here... M 


"...so proud of Eileen being the first baby born 


Griselda recalled how they had wanted to call the 
post-office after her, and then after the baby. The fact made 
her feel that she too was responsible in part for Eileen’s 
welfare now. 

"Griselda," said Mrs. Price, "You know so many 
people in the women’s groups an 1 the church and all that. Bo 
you — would you write somewhere and find out some place she 

could go until...?" 

Why should I? thought Griselda irritably. Why should 
X? Why don’t they do something for themselves? Eileen’s their 
child, and her mother’s been in the women’s club and the church 
as long as I have... 

But looking at the blotched, sagging face of her 
neighbor, she knew the answer. The prices could not rise to 
this emergency any more than they could to any other. The 
inner will was lacking — they had taken the path of least 
resistance so long that they now had no other choice. If some¬ 
one else made the decision, they followed — otherwise they 


drifted 





















CHAPTER XVI 


- 306 


f, I f ll write," promised Griselda, and was as good 
as her word. She had a talk with Eileen before the girl left: 
her parents brought her along, sullen and reluctant, to say 
good bye and to thank Griselda. In no very good mood, G-riselda 
surveyed her protegee. Her pity for Eileen was mitigated by 
the knowledge that the girl had certainly brought her troubles 
on herself, by Eileen’s sulky defiance, and by her own Cal- 
vinistic upbringing. Sin must be paid for: Eileen had sinned: 
ought the consequences to be lightened for her? Griselda had 
her doubts about it, although she reflected that Price and 
Mrs. Price were paying as heavily as Eileen, and someone else, 
be it Ches Meade or another, was getting off scot-free. 

"Well, Eileen," she said, "You’ll be good at the 
Home, won’t you, and do as they tell you? Just remember that 
people want to help you, and don’t make it any harder for 
them•" 

"I didn’t ask anybody to help me," muttered the 
girl. "I only want to be left alone — I can run my own life I" 
"A fine mess you made of it, tooj" said Griselda 
angrily. "Just you remember that, my girl -- a mess of your 
own life and a peck of trouble for your parents!" 

"I’ve got a right to run my own life.,!" said 
Eileen furiously. "You old people,.." 

A coarsely-written unsigned page flashed into 
Griselda’s memory: anger shook her. 






' t 













CHAPTER XVI 


- 307 - 


”We old people have worked hard building up a decent 
way of life that you young ones seem bent on pulling down. 

And you’ve no more right as you call it, to things you don’t 
work for than you have to the shoes on your feet without you 
pay for them! Now you be off, and don’t let me hear any com¬ 
plaints from the Home about you, or I’ll come and ’tend to 
you myselfI” 

The tears had dried in Eileen’s eyes, a natural 
color deepened the painted spot on her round cheeks. She 
straightened her shoulders and opened her mouth to speak. 

But Mrs. Price was at the door, and she advanced timidly 
into the room. 

"I guess v/e’ll go, Griselda. You finished your 
talk with Eileen?” 

Eileen’s furious look altered to one of appeal. 

Had she then a spark of better feeling - a concern for her 
mother? G-riselda did not betray her. 

”Yes,” she said. ”3he’s all ready to go. Good-bye, 

Eileen.” 

”Good-bye, Mrs. Kerrigan,”said the girl. Anger 
or relief deepened her treble tones and gave the words a 
firmness unexpected in Eileen. She went out with her head 
up and the color still high on her face. Mrs. Price looked 
after her. 

”She looks better for a talk with you, Griselda-- 













. *: ■ ■- ' • . ., 











' 






-a 




• ■ - 






. 






- 


. 

e 


* 








. 



























CHAPTER XVI 


r ^08 - 


you are a good friend to usl” 

The tribute brought little satisfaction to Griseldda. 
Mixed with her concern for the Prices was irritation that at 
a time when she herself was suffering, others should impose 
an added burden. 

Walter and Emma continued to talk about her trip 
east, and that too she construed as a grievance, remarking 
when she (absented to go, 

’’Seeing as you T re all so dead set on getting rid 

of me, I guess 1*11 gol” 

Feeling that here was a return of her old, half- 
humorous pungency, her children were relieved. But Griselda 
was entirely serious. She wanted to get away from Rolling 
Slopes, yet lacked courage/to make the break* Her brisk self- 
confidence had gone, and when in March she packed the new 
luggage and left, it was with a sense of depressing finality. 





















CHAPTER XVII 


- 309 - 


THE DEAD PAST 

A month later she wondered if she had been wise 
to come. The long train trip had done nothing to raise her 
spirits. Instead, for the first day of it she was oppressed 
with the sense of being adrift once more on the vast plains. 
The feeling was spiritual rather than physical, for the 
prairie was very different from her early recollections of 
it. Fenced and farmed and criss-crossed with roads, linked 
with railways running east and west, north and south, the 
land was patently under man f s control. The little towns, 
the sprawling prairie cities had all an air of prosperity. 
How big it is, she thought, how .much of it lies 
between me and Rolling Slopes already,®, ,And at Winnipeg she 
remembered her long stay of forty years before, waiting for 
the ice to go out of the northern lakes and rivers before 



t «. 





< - • 






c . < 




- 




. 


- < . ' v - 




































CHAPTER ZYII 


- 310 - 


she continued her journey north. She had resolved then to 
return to Halifax, and show them Uncle Jacob, and Mary Belle, 
and Luke, and the others, that she was now important and in¬ 
fluential $nd well-to-do, and need never depend on them 
again. OnA M/s he-r . 

There was no doubt that she was very welcome in 
Halifax. Jean, her little sister, who had been Uncle Jacob’s 
favorite was now over fifty. To look at her was to see Emma 
Burton in twenty years, just as stout, placid, and jolly. 

Jean was glad to see her sister and made her pleasure evident. 
Griselda, undemonstrative as ever, was a little embarrassed 
by her sister’s emotion. It saddened her to find hov; little 
in common she had now with Jean, save the memories they both 
shared of their youth. Even these ? seen in sharply-differing 
perspectives by the two women were not alike. There was, for 
instance, the recollection of Uncle Jacob. 

When Jean spoke of him with sincere affection, 
G-riselda wondered. "Like a father to us," Jean said. Had Uncle 
Jacobythen, been to Jean as Jasper was to Emma? It might have 
been so, but G-riselda herself had not seen it. Tentatively 
she cast out a feeler. 

"Of course, Uncle Jacob had no use for mel" 

Jean’s reply was surprising. She said, 

"He always thought you had no use for him! He felt 
bad about it, but he never could get to know you." 















t ; • . 

. .. c > * • 

. 

, - ...... 

t 

- 

< " t 

. 

* 

. 

c 

5 

c 




- 





















CHAPTER XVII 


- 311 - 


Griselda ag&ed that it had been so, and added her 


reason, 

"I always thought it put him out, having us here 
when he was such a busy man." 

Jean shook her head, "Oh, no! He always felt he 
could have dome more to help Mother out, and doing what he 
could for us was his way of making that up," 

"Mother didn’t feel like that," said Griselda. 

"She wanted us to be sure and repay him for all he did for 
us. I guess I didn’t do much towards repaying!" 

"Don’t feel like that," replied the other. "He 
told me once that — that we had meant a lot to him," 

. "You mean, that you had!" said GriseIdas/s/*** 

dt4 Tl 0 ' o/criij fhz 

Her feelings were oddly mixed. Her return to 
Halifax had brought Uncle Jacob and her mother to her mind 
again: she recalled vividly the promise made and not kept. 

If Uncle Jacob had felt himself amply repaid by Jean’s 
affection and devotion to him, so much the better. An old 
account was squared. Yet there was irony in the thought 
that she, Griselda, had worried and agonized and tormented 
herself over that promise when she was still a child, and 
all to no avail. It had been left to Jean, unconscious that 
there was a debt at all, to pay it. Duty had not animated 
Jean, but sincere affection. 

Its sincerity was proved, to Griselda’s mind, 













CHAPTER XVII 


- 312 - 


by the fact that Jean had married a man who very like Uncle 
Jacob, He had the same seriousness, the same love of order, 
and lack of imagination. Like Uncle Jacob, too, he was puzzled 
by Griselda. It was evident that he was impressed by her, 
equally evident that the impression was not entirely favorable. 
Griselda thought how Jasper would have enjoyed telling tales— 
artfully exaggerated— of the north, of the Indians, of the 
prairies, in this orderly house. The impulse arose in her 
occasionally to do so herself, but she suppressed it. Jasper 
could have done it without giving offence: his humor was 
kindly. Her own had something of irony, a caustic word came 
too easily, and she knew it was best not to give it full rein. 

Thinking of such a wasted opportunity one day, 
she realized suddenly that she was thinking of Jasper without 
the usual dull, sickening, leaden weight of grief. Deliberately 
summoned up, it came, but not for long. She reproached herself 
for forgetting, and Walter f s words came to her mind. 

"He didn’t want you worry.*." 

At the time of Jasper’s death they had seemed an 
added misery, but now, after six months, they were a comfort. 
They were Jasper’s permission to her to go on living. And 
with a sense of wonder she thought, 

"How is it that I am here — I am the same, and 
everything else is changed and gone?" 

It was so: she felt it keenly with every step that 







CHAPTER XVII 


- 313 - 


she took about the city, every word she spoke to old friends 
and relatives. People, things, places, seemed to have turned 
fluid and run away, water under a bridge, or changed to dust 
and blown away before the wind. With them went the memories 
she had cherished, the life of her youth, that for forty 
years she had preserved, unchanged, like a miniature under 
glass. 

Mistlike, it melted and disappeared when she walked 

oCt 

through the half-rebuilt, devasted area that had been their 
home, on the slope of the hill above the Narrows. A tall new 
church with a bell-tower had arisen as a memorial near the 
site of the old one they had attended as children. There 
were new houses on the street, and long grass growing among 
the rubble in the bottoms of ruined basements and between 
the cracks of the pavement, all heaved and riven by the blast. 
She had difficulty finding the site of Uncle Jacob’s house: 
the street seemed shorter than of old. And when at last she 
stood before it, she felt only regret that she had ever sought 
it out. Until that moment the house had still existed for her. 
By coming to see the spot, she had destroyed it anew: she 
almost expected to see the fresh dust rising from the grass- 
covered ruins, from the gaping basement-hole. 

Jean greeted her on her return, placid and smiling. 

"You’d never know the old street, would you? 11 she 
asked. She was long since reconciled to the changes, she had 




, 


. . 


c 

* 

t 

c 

. '■ t 

e ■ 

, . t 

* 




f 








, 


• 





. 




ft ■ 

|V i 

* 

. •• < 

< • ' - .• ; t 


: 

















CHAPTER XVII 


- 314 - 


lived with them for forty years... 

"Did you look for Webster’s house?" she continued* 
the smile suddenly overshadowed by memory of the greater 
tragedy. 

"No," said Griselda, "and I’m not going to." 

At least, she thought, I’ll keep Mary Belle alive 
in my mind — I can’t bear not to! 

For now that she was back here as she had planned, 
forty years before, she missed Mary Belle more than she would 
have admitted. Their friendship -- if it could be described 
thus — had lasted several years, supported more on the bicker¬ 
ing they both enjoyed, the differences between them, than on 
any genuine liking for each other, Mary Belle patronized 
Griselda because she was prettier than the older girl, because 
she had every advantage instead of being dependent on an uncle. 
And Griselda in turn patronized Mary Belle because she was 
older, she was more capable, and because some people — hot 
many -- liked her better... Luke, for instance, had seemed to, 
until the quarrel,,. 

She v/ould have enjoyed seeing Mary Belle once more. 
Always amusing, Mary Belle would not, surely, have changed 
so much — they would have sparred in the old fashion® And 
how well, now, she could have countered the little thrusts, 
how capably returned them! 

But Mary Belle had been dead for ten years.,. 













I 









t 






























CHAPTER XVII 


- J15 - 


Lily, who had been a friend of both of them, was 
there, however. Griselda found her a comfort, for her talk 
of past and present was very matter-of-fact• She alone did 
not strain to explain every reference to persons and events 
unknown to Griselda. She talked naturally of Mary Belle, and 
Griselda came to realize what sort of person Luke f s wife had 
been. Not so very different from seventeen-year-old Mary 
Belle Webster, according to Lily, but her listener knew better. 

Inevitably too, she met Luke Herron. Her first 
thought was, How he has aged! He looks years older than Jasper! 
Yet Jasper had been sixty-seven when he died: Luke was now 
sixty-two. He looked tired, was obviously very lonely and 
very glad to see Griselda. They spoke of the past with con¬ 
straint, and not until she mentioned Mary Belle did the con¬ 
versation flow easily. 

She saw him several times in the weeks that fol¬ 
lowed. He told her about his daughter, married in Boston, 
about the son who had been killed in the war a few months 
before Mary Belle f s death. 

tt She was splendid. •• t? His voice trailed off, and 
Griselda tried to imagine Mary Belle being heroic. In thirty 
years, she might have learned heroism: so far as Luke was 
concerned, she had. 

It was Lily f s suggestion that Griselda remain in 
Halifax. Lily had a house: Griselda could live with her. 








t 

t 

, 

* 

, t 


. 

* 






, 




■ 

t 

. 


, . 

. 

. 










* 













, 

. .. r 

: t 

* 





■ 




















CHAPTER XVII 


- 316 - 


They had always agreed well, and although G-riselda discouraged 
the idea, she did consider it. Her sister was enthusiastic 
over the plan, and Luke equally so. He talked about it, time 
after time, and one day, as she watched him plod down the 
walk, shoulders a little bent, she had in rapid succession 
two appalling thoughts. 

"If it had been Mary Belle instead of Luke, I 
wouldn’t have been bored stiff all afternoon!" 

And then, "If i stay here — maybe every day will 
be like thisl" 

It did not bear thinking of...Days that followed 
a routine of which Luke would be a part. He might ask her to 
marry him — most likely not. But he would depend on her to 
listen to him and console him, to prop up his failing self- 
confidence and mitigate his increasing loneliness. 

The prospect was awful... In a sudden revulsion 
of feeling, she saw Luke for what he was? a weak man. Forty 
years ago, he had been weak, taking the line of least re¬ 
sistance and leaving her to face alone a tempest in a tea¬ 
pot, created by a jealous girl. It had worked out for the 
best all around. Because Mary Belle was weaker than Luke — 
or pretended to be — she had forced him into an assump¬ 
tion of strength. And he adored her. But no one could take 
Mary Belle’s place, least of all Griselda. 














CHAPTER XVTI 


- 317 - 


Griselda went home. She arrived at Rolling Slopes 
in June, when the fields were green, the hillsides grassy. 
From the coach window she caught a glimpse of the graveyard 
across the deep coulee, and beyond it, the red barn on her 
son-in-law’s farm. 

They were all at the siding to meet her, Walter 
and Joe, Henry and Emma and the little boys. In a solemn row 
on the cinders stood the young Fatchenkos, wide-eyed and 
barefooted. Their unkempt mongrel dog licked sore pav/s as 
he lay, stretched out behind the row of scratched brown legs. 

Behind the section-man’s house, out in the lease, 
half a dozen white-faced cows grazed, calves beside them. 

And as Henry Burton’s car crossed the tracks, they nearly ran 
over Old Bill. 

The hermit, deafer than ever, invariably plodded 
down the middle of the road as he approached the village. 
Angry drivers declared that he did it on purpose: prolonged 
blasts of the horn failed to move him, and on this occasion, 
Henry pulled over to the extreme edge of the road to pass. 

Old Bill raised his head and looked sideways at the car, spat, 
and looked once more to earth as they drove by. Sack on back, 
rifle under arm, he was the same as he had been ten years 
before, little changed from twenty years back. Griselda felt 
almost^affectionate towards him. He was dirty, disreputable, 
and hostile, but he was a constant among the many variables 






t ’ 








.... . 


* 

, ; t 

t 

( ' < 

T . .... , ■ ^ 

' 

t '■ 

■ < 

t 

t ' 

e 

* ' ‘ ■ 

■ 

t 












% 






— 












CHAPTER TTU - 318 - 

of life. He might have resisted civilization, but he was 
equally, blessedly, impervious to disintegration. He was an 


element... 






















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 31S - 


THE LIVING PRESENT 

Rolling Slopes was outwardly much the same as 
when she had left it. Visitors came and within a week Griselda 
was aware of all that had happened since she left. Mrs. Price 
told her that Eileen’s baby had been born several weeks be¬ 
fore, and adopted out. Eileen herself had a job in the city. 

There was constraint in Mrs. Price’s manner when 
she spoke of their obligation to uriselda, and the latter 
did her best to make the other feel more at ease. The old 
casual friendship with its interchange of talk about small, 
everyday matters was clouded by a tragic knowledge: between 
them, a painful intimacy lay raw under the placid surface 
of the relationship. She was relieved when Mrs. Price left, and 
she knew that relief to be shared by her friend. It was all a 
part of the inevitable change, pervading every aspect of life 















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 319 - 


in spite of all the individual could do to resist it. There 
was no cure for it: no palliative but indifference, u-riselda 
tried hard to cultivate indifference, to look upon the lives 
of others with detachment instead of with the lively partisan 
interest that was natural to her, that had made her for so 
long a staunch friend, a foe to be reckoned with. But indiffer¬ 
ence and detachment came hard# 

There was the matter of avoiding community entangle¬ 
ments. Doris Evans appeared one day with a complaint about 
Mabel Wilkie f s management of the club. 

" f Twasn f t like when you were President!" she la¬ 
mented. "We don f t seem to get near as much done, either. 

There f s lots of people would be glad to see you in again, if 
you f d consider taking office...? 

She looked at Griselda questioningly. The other 
recalled how Doris, once her right hand in the club, had changed 
sides, drifted into the opposition. Now she was changing sides 
again — she, and how many others? I don f t want to know, she 
thought, and aloud she said, 

"I f m not interested, Doris# It’s not the President 
that makes the club — it*s the people in it. I think if you*ve 
got complaints, you f d better make them in open meeting." 

Doris bridled and flushed. "Oh — I-I-you know how 
hard it is to stand up and say to her face that you don f t 
like the way she*s doing things...” 












CHAPTER XVIII 


- 320 - 


"I know,” said Briselda. "It’s a lot easier to 
talk behind her backJ H 

She reflected after uoris had gone that probably 
the other woman would never forgive her and that she did not 
care. But when they next met, Boris was much the same, 
apparently had not taken offence. Uriselda puzzled about 
it, for Boris was notoriously touchy, and came finally to 
the unflattering conclusion that her opinion no longer 
mattered. She had ceased to be a power in the district: 
she was an old lady whose ideas counted for little. The 
thought stung at first, yet she had to admit that her own 
attitude had fostered the impression. 

By the fall she had something else to think about. 
Her absence from home enabled her to look at Walter with 
something of an unprejudiced eye upon her return. She decided 
that Emma was perhaps right in claiming that her brother 
was getting to be a regular, pokey old bachelor and needed 
livening up. Walter was far too sedate for a man in his 
early thirties: he certainly had no interests outside the 
store and the farm and the family. 

Griselda f s conscience still worried her over the 
outcome of Walter»s affair with Mabel, and she had come of 
late to wish that he, too, were married. He would be lonely 
when she died, and the fact that she had lived the greater 
part of her life passed often through her mind, not with 















uHAPTER XVIII 


- 321 - 


threatening or foreboding, but as a simple fact. Yet Walter 
took kindly to his bachelor condition, showed no inclination 
to change it. His mother, surveying the local eligible 
girls, told herself that she was not surprised. They were 
not good enough for him. 

But even when Betty Allen came to board with 
the t&rfffi Kerrigans, who had not boarded the teacher for 
the past three years, Walter remained unquickened. She 
arrived in 1?28 to teach at Rolling Slopes, a friendly, 
enthusiastic girl with curly sandy hair in a boyish bob, 
and round, honest grey eyes. While appreciating her interest, 
Rolling Slopes found her interesting. She was an immediate 
success at Rolling Slopes, so much so that in spite of 
the fact that she was boarding with Burtons until Christmas, 
Griselda saw little of her for some weeks. 

Then one Saturday afternoon when harvest was 
nearly over, Bmma and Betty drove out to a field where the 
Burton*s threshing outfit was at work. At the store, 

Griselda joined them, squeezing into the back of the car 
with her lively grandsons, the basket of sandwiches, and 
a couple of corked granite jugs of coffee. 

‘'Where's the cookcarV” she demanded at sight of 

the lunch. 

"It*s moved," explained Bmma. That field's nearly 
finished and I told Mary l f d take lunch this afternoon." 


.0 


- 

.... . . :. .......| 





< 

• 


. 


. 


* 

• 

. . . . . . . , ... 



> 


* 

. 



... 



. .. . 





.. 


* 


■ . •• 

. 

■ 

. . 

; 


: . 

.- ' ... 




...... ..... . 7 .*■ r 











CHAPTER XVIII 


- 322 - 


The cook-car and bunk car had indeed vacated 
their corner of the field and were nearly out of sight when 
the car drove up to the outfit. The little boys scrambled 
out and ran away up the field towards the machine: Emma 
and tfriselda began to take out the lunch, and Betty stood 
with the two-year old Sammy clinging to her hand, and 
watched the harvesters. 

The hum of the machine ceased and the racks 
stood still while the men came for their lunch. The fine 
dust hung in the air for yards around the outfit, clung 
fuzzily to the face and hair, outlining every line and 
wrinkle and muscle on the faces of the workers. For 
twenty minutes they relaxed, talking and laughing gustily, 
teeth and eyeballs flashing white in the grimed faces. 

Then the machine spluttered again, the throb of 
it filled the air and the empty racks swayed and creaked 
as they lumbered off. The laden ones commenced moving 
towards the thresher: the first began unloading, and the 
chaff flew out in a golden spray. The three women sat 
watching for a few minutes, G-riselda and her daughter with 
the pleasure of seeing a familiar scene re-enacted, Betty 
with a curious sense of exhilaration. The quick throb of 
the engine, the vibration of the air, the rhythmic tossing 
of the sheaves that were swallowed up and disgorged as a 





: 

. .1 

« 

. :y ... ' 

. 

. 

: : ■ . . ; / . m 

c • - < .... .. i; ■ . J i j T 

£ .. ■ • ■ . . . ; :• eI-‘i*bwo£ 

* 

. 

■ : lo :lo 2 rn 1% ei t , ml no rut 

: . ' 

‘ 














CHAPTER XVIII 


- 323 - 


trickle of grain from one spout, a flying golden arc of 
chaff from the blower, all took meaning, fell into a pattern 

"It’s right , 11 thought Griselda, and the word 
itself seemed enriched in meaning here in a wide, open world 
warm in the September sunlight, smelling of rip, dry straw 
and horses. 

e. 

"Do you like it?” Emma asked Betty Allan. 

"I love it I" said Betty. "It f s so—so excitingl" 

She looked for a moment apologetic, as if she 
had sounded silly. But Emma smiled, so her dark eyes 
crinkled up in her fat face. 

"Isn f t it?” she agreed unexpectedly. "People 
sometimes say life in the country’s dead, but I don’t 
think so. There’s always something doing. An’ like you 
say, the harvest’s exciting — I could just sit here and 
watch it for hours if I hadn’t anything else to do." 

Griselda said nothing, looking from one to the 
other as they spoke. But the little incident was the 
beginning of her liking for Betty, and it was her own 
suggestion that the girl should board with them for the 
rest of the school year. 

Until the end of the fall term, Griselda watched 
and listened patiently for any information she could glean 
about Betty Allen. The girl was a capable teacher, and she 









4 




.. . . ' . . : jo.L 

i'll . .v ; ' :& v .. rl 

* 

*■ . 

s l 


...u i 

... : 

.... . • 


.: . 




. ■. 

. 


t 


. 

. . 




. . r ;:o‘i ' AJn. 




; i; . 


j V. 





















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 324 - 


had come to a good school. Not for some years had Rolling 
Slopes been a pioneer school district, doomed by its isolation 
to the Mr. Hacketts and Mamie Treights of the teaching 
profession. It was now a prosperous farming community with 
a pride in its own achievements, and the change in circum¬ 
stances was reflected in the well-being of the school. The 
classroom was tidy and well-kept, the children obedient and 
reasonably proficient in their work. People with little or 
no education were determined to see that their children 
did better. Where the older brothers and sisters of her 
pupils had perhaps only a Grade Five or Six schooling, 

Betty’s students took for granted that they would go on 
to Grade Eight at least, and perhaps to High School in 
Maverick. Rolling Slopes prided itself on its harmonious 
relations with its teachers, who received a good salary, 
usually s&y^ed two or three years, and maintained friendly 
communication with the district when they left. 

Betty made no secret of her enthusiasm for her 
school and students. It was one of the reasons for her 
popularity. She liked the location of the school, lonely 
on its grassy hill-top. In the fall the short, grazed-over 
lease was brown, save where a trace of summer’s moisture 
lingered in the coulee-bottoms. Wild sunflowers bloomed 
late along the roadsides. Even a few, stalky, parched- 


- ■ - 






■ 

:0t 


• t ■ 



' 


t 






* 




■ 


- 


- ... . t ■ 

■ .' . 3. lo , 

. 

* 

t . .... • :. - . , . * f 

‘1 




.. 13 & C .' 

' 



* 

. 

* 


. 

- 




* 


, ... : ... 

. 

















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 325 - 


looking crocuses, their tattered blooms greyish in color 
instead of the tender bluish purple of the spring flowers, 
rustled uncertainly in the wind. Withered stems of the 
little plant the children called ’ragged robin’ stood for¬ 
lornly about bearing untidy seed tufts, and the stiff buck¬ 
brush leaves rattled in the breeze. 

She did not mind walking home from school if 
Henry Burton was too busy to bring her: she was not scared 
of the range cattle. 

n How do you like your new teacher?” demanded 
Walter Kerrigan of his nephew, little Douglas Burton, one 
day. 

"Fine,” said round-faced Douglas. “I want a 
scribbler with a horse on it," he added as an afterthought, 
and ran to pick it out. 

f, He’s going to marry her when he grows up,” said 
his mother. "He told us so last night.” 

"Well, now, that’s fineI" agreed Walter. "Think 
she’ll wait for you, Doug?" 

"Seems to me there’s a better way of keepin’ her 
in the family," suggested Henry Burton with a twinkle. 
"She’s a right nice girl, Walter." 

"Oh, I’m too old for the likes of her," said 

Walter. 

"You’re only two years older f n Ches Meade, an’ 















CHAPTER XVIII 


326 - 


he certainly hangs around enough, considering how long the 
girl f s been herel" said Emma with exasp eration. "You act as 
if you were fifty, WalterJ" 

Unruffled, Walter continued to count out eggs 
from a small case into a larger one, eyeing each one sharply 
for cracks. He showed no inclination at any time to compete 
with Ches for the favors of Betty Allen, in fact, as Emma 
had remarked, he seemed much older than his years and looked 
at thirty much as he did ten years later, nondescript, a 
little stooped. His old affair with Matel Prescott had been 
nearly forgotton by his neighbors, who had come to regard him 
as a born bachelor. 

Having thus easily got Betty Allen into the house, 
Griselda found it was a different matter to make Walter con¬ 
scious of her. Or, for that matter, to make Betty regard 
Walter as a contemporary of her own rather than of Griselda. 
The girl persisted in considering him middle-aged: to the 
end of her stay there, he was wont to refer to her as "that 
kid." 

Griselda did her best. 

"You’d better wait an 1 see Betty home from the 
dance tonight," she would observe. "That tough crowd from 
Maverick ’ll be there, I guess." 

"Well, if Betty 1 11 come home at a decent time..." 
Walter would begin. And Betty’s indignant reply would cut 


' ; t t 

■ 

* 

■ 






• • 

t :• . 

' < ■•-■■■ 

. 

t -J • on 

t ■- V' - ; ' .. . j ' . 7- 

• ■ • ■ , : \ oo o; 

. 

- 

* 

* t 

< - 

o: t 












CHAPTER XVIII 


- 327 - 


him short, 

"Just because you must have your sleep, Walter, 
you don’t need to think I’m coming home before the end. I’ll 
see myself home if I have to I" 

She rarely had to. Griselda became used to Walter’s 
return just after midnight, while Betty danced till three and 
four in the morning. 

But even though Bet-cy and Walter obdurately refused 
to see each other as future helpmates, Griselda found Betty*s 
presence in the house very pleasant. Through the girl's eyes 
she came to see the children of the community, the younger 
ones whom she still thought of as babies, as individuals. 

She realized with a little shock that she was still thinking 
of uhes Meade and Eileen Price, of Walter and Emma and Mabel 
and nenry, as the young people of Rolling Slopes, when, actu¬ 
ally they were long since adults. A whole new generation was 
growing up whom she scarcely knew, and she listened with in¬ 
terest to Betty’s accounts of them. The Grade Eight class — 
with Annie Patchenko always at the head. The Grade Six, with 
Eric Nordstaad and Jim Horner. The four beginners, all so 
different. J?rom Betty’s description, Griselda could fit three 
of these four into the families they came from. 

Solveig Norstaad, with long braids so fair they 
were almost white, flinging herself into the work with intense 
concentration, doing it carefully, according to the exact 














CHAPTER XVIII 


- 328 - 


direction. When complete, it was perfectly tidy, unmarked by 
smudges or rubbed-out lines, immaculate as her own small 
person in starched print frock and blue hair-ribbons... 

How like Engvald and Minna, thought Griselda. No 
other family here has that exact combination of traits, that 
passion for work... 

And there was ulga Patchenko, with untidy brown 
hair and shy, frightened brown eyes, ulga who did her assign¬ 
ment hastily and then drew cats and rabbits and horses all 
around the edges, for she was an artist, like her older 
sister, Annie. And such art, said Betty proudly. She would 
enter it in the school Pair — there would be nothing like 
it from other schools around, she was convinced. 

That was the ratchenkos, thought uriselda. untidy- 
with that sprawling house and the chickens scratching up to 
the door, but always the bright poppies and marigolds in a 
little fenced-off plot. The careless, happy-go-lucky big 
boys, re te and Mike and Stephan — no ambition beyond a job 
on the railway or on a farm, but delighted to play a fiddle 
or an accordian in the dance orchestra... 

Douglas Burton worked hard, reported Betty. He 
did his best and if it was not as good as someone else*s 
best, he did not worry about it. 

Just like Emma... 

But Ethel Horner did not quite fit in, she thought 











CHAPTER XVIII 


- 329 - 


Jim and Ted, yes — they were very obviously Albert and 
Maude, uood and honest, reliable and decent, Not the clever¬ 
est, but always among the best-liked. Where did Ethel fit 
in* Ethel, who sat quietly at her desk,.thinking things over 
before she started. She started late and worked slowly, and 
took the day’s work home every night to show her parents. 

Was there something sober and calculating in Ethel that did 
not form a part of any other member of the family? 

Children were interesting for that very reason, 
thought Uriselda. Emma — she had never understood Emma — 
had always thought her daughter had taken after Jasper's 
side of the family. And all the time, Emma was the very 
type and pattern of her own sister Jean... 

I f d like a granddaughter, thought Cfriselda. Now 
if Walter had only got married... If Walter and Betty...1 

Her mind was back to Betty Allen. More and more 
she longed for Walter to see where his own best interests 
lay. Betty was the very wife for him — good natured, gay, 
popular, with a streak of good hard common sense underlying 
it all. And if Walter didn’t look out, some else would snap 
her up] 

Betty Allen was enjoying herself thoroughly in 
her first year of teaching. She was enthusiastic about her 
school and about the community, and because she was jolly, 
sensible, and not too pretty, she was liked by both young 

















CHAPTER XVIII 


330 - 


and old. There were young people in the district and no lack 
of company, and dances and shows and parties. There was church 
and Sunday School when weather permitted, and picnics in the 
fine weather and skating on the river — for the prevalance 
of cars made little of a fifteen-mile trip to the river after 
the ice was thick enough to skate on. It seemed all that Betty 
had ever hoped for in the life of a country school-teacher. 

But then, she was in the habit of enjoying life. 

She was one of a family of six, brought up in a home of moder¬ 
ately comfortable circumstances and good principles. She had 
never known great grief of sickness or poverty, any more than 
she had idleness or luxury or discord. In her experience, 
family life was happy and people were kind and decent and 
appreciative. 

She was at first happily unaware of the many cross¬ 
currents that ran through the district, of deep and smoulder¬ 
ing dislike between neighbor and neighbor, of old animosities 
that were never forgotton. It was a shock to her to discover 
that Hordstaad, whom she knew as a reliable School Board chair¬ 
man and the strict, kindly father of three of her best pupils, 
never lost an opportunity to score off George Evans. The latter 
in turn was equally vindictive. He impounded Nordstaad’s cows 
when they wandered into his gate one day, and the whole affair 
came to Betty»s ears through a violent playground squabble^ 
between the young Nordstaads and the young Javans*. Further 





- ~ 

- 











* 


i . . v. ■ .. .. .. . ' 






* 









. 


' ■ 

.. ... ... . . . 

. 

. 


< ..' •. . -'. fJ 


t . . ' . 

. 






.. . . . . D:.i: £ . ■■ , hSi $' if 




4 


. 







■. 




... , . •. . ' 








CHAPTER XVIII 


- 331 - 


light was oast on it by Ches Meade, who, during Betty^ term 
at Rolling Slopes, spared no effort to keep himself under 
her eye. 

"Hear you've been havin' trouble keepin 1 the 
peace,” said Ches with a grin, a day or two afterwards. 

Betty admitted there had been a squabble. 

"Well, I'm glad to see old Engvald get it, for 
once," continued Ches. "He's played that trick on c-eorge 
often enough, an' on me, too." 

"I think it's too bad you can't all settle these 
things quietly," said Betty, and was annoyed by ches's laugh 
ter. ivirs. Burton cast a new light on the matter subsequently 

"That Evans will not keep up his fences," she 
said. "An* Ches is just as bad — he's got no excuse — he 
can set up a fence as good as anyone X know. Evans is a use¬ 
less creature if there ever was one — Doris didn't do a 
thing for herself when she married himl" 

"She got a husband!" said Henry Burton. 

Before Betty left the Burtons at Christmas, she 
had come to realize something of the tug and sway of con¬ 
flicting forces in the district. The knowledge was rather 
disillusioning to her: she was young and enthusiastic and 
wanted to believe the best. Yet she had to admit that there 
were lines of division, one lay between the more successful 
farmers and the near-failures. The Norstaads, Wilkies, Bur- 












CHAPTER XVIII 


- 332 - 


ton$, stood on one side of that line, the Horners inclined 
towards them rather than to the others — the Prices, Evanses, 
Jobsons, and Ches Meade# Another line divided the English 
speaking from the foreign-born# The Patchenkos stood alone 
on their side of it, because the two women of the household 
were so reserved# TiVen fat Mrs. Wietz was a member of the 
women*s club, in spite of scanty English, and the Nordstaads 
had long since made their choice, and elected to speak English 
in the home that their children might suffer no language 
handicap# 

Certain families were isolated to a greater or 
lesser degree for other reasons. The Kerrigans had a special 
position because of the store and the Post-office. The Wilkies 
were respected — Dave for his success as a farmer, Mabel be¬ 
cause she was an efficient housewife, a community leader, 
let at the same time, Dave was disliked for his domineering 
manner, his grasping nature, and Mabel was an object of pity 
because she had a harsh husband and no children. 

Betty found that her increased knowledge of the 
people of Rolling slopes was a disadvantage. It was difficult 
to avoid liking some better than others at any time: it was 
so easy to offend, or to imagine that she had offended. Her 
very popularity in the district made her a bone of contention. 

That year the women’s club sponsored a play in 
which Betty and Ches Meade performed leading roles. Play 


$.; Ci - 





v >.• ' , : . •: J,,£ Z&.L& ■ •>* 

* 

* 




. 

» 


- 


« ' : 


- : .. 











- : • 

* - 

: '.. . 5 - - . 


- - 

. 

: 


. . . 








. . 

. . 

< 


* 








[ 








. 
















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 333 - 


practices lasted from November to January, and until Betty 
went to live at the Aerrigans, she was dependent upon some 
other member of the cast for a ride to the hall. Ches Meade 
had been in the habit of picking her up. En route to the hall 
he collected other members of the cast, and Betty did not 
feel that his offer to take her constituted a personal obli¬ 
gation. Ches thought otherwise. He developed a proprietory 
attitude that exasperated Betty, amused the community, and 
irritated Griselda beyond measure. Several people actually 
asked her if she thought Ches was going to settle down at 
last, and did Miss Allen really like him? Griselda was thun¬ 
derstruck. 

"Like himI" she gasped. "I don’t believe any de¬ 
cent girl would look at him! Betty’s got more sense than to 
bother with the likes of him!" 

She could hardly wait to get Betty into her own 
house and away from the contaminating presence of Ches Meade 
Shortly after the play came to an end, Ches made his biggest 
blunder: he tried to assert over Betty an authority based on 
the assumption that they had ’been going together" all fall 
and spring. Betty immediately put him right, and when teased 
about him by others, laughed the matter off. The fact that 
she had laughed got back to Ches with some exasperation. He 
had too often made a joke of his neighbors for them to let 
pass any opportunity of turning a jest against him. His con- 














CHAPTER XVTII 


- 334 - 


ceit was hurt, and he awaited opportunity to turn the laugh 
against Betty, showing outwardly little sign of resentment. 

A box social was held in May, the first in years 
at Rolling Slopes, for socials had come to be considered 
old-fashioned. Betty, to whom these affairs were unfamiliar, 
was delighted at the prospect and talked Mrs. Kerrigan into 
attending for an hour or two. Griselda agreed, and prepared 
two well-filled boxes, secretly resolving that Walter should 
buy Betty’s. Ches Meade in the meanwhile had been tormenting 
Betty for a clue to identify her box. She refused to tell, 
and he was no wiser when the social began. 

Maliciously, Ches bid up the boxes that the young¬ 
er boys were trying to get, and suddenly found himself with 
a giggling thirteen-year old partner for lunch. He brightened 
up when Joe Griggs shuffled beaming across the floor to claim 
Betty Allen. She was a great favorite with the old man, for 
she listened patiently to his tales and often appealed to 
him to make minor repairs at the school. She sat listening 
with a smile at lunchtime, while Joe rambled on, forgetting 
for the moment to eat, 

"An 1 he jest fell off the seat in that cab an’ 
they couldn’t bring him ’round. An’ no one could stop that 
train — seems funny, don’t it, but none of ’em knew for 
sure jes’ what to do I So they come back to the smoker to 


ask me — I knew the conductor, you see — an’ he says, 





■ . 






t ■ 









t ' 




■ . 






* 
















■ 




- 

* 

; : .... xi is.*z v’: 




* 




5 


- 


, 


. , 


< 




* 

t 

* 




' 


. 


* 




. 

. 















CHAPTER Will 


- 335 - 


'Now, Joe,' he says.,..” 

At the other end of the long table, Griselda was 
doling out the contents of her basket, preparatory to sitting 
down to lunch with her son. She was extremely annoyed with 
him and with the fate that had given Betty as a partner to 
Joe, when she herself could just as well have had Joe, and 
Walter, Betty. 

"How did you'n Joe know to bid on these two 
baskets? 11 she demanded suspiciously, for the baskets were 
decorated almost alike. 

"Well, to tell the truth, we looked," admitted 
Walter. "We wanted to be sure of gettin' them." 

The compliment to her cooking was undeniable: 
Griselda was a little mollified. 

"It's a pity you didn't get Betty's," she ob¬ 
served. "Joe'll talk her ear off!" 

"I did," replied her son calmly. "Joe changed with 
me. She'd talk m£ ear offJ" 

It was more than Griselda could bear. "A good many 
men would be glad to eat dinner with a nice, jolly girl like 
Betty," she remarked sourly. 

"She chatters all the time," said Walter calmly. 

He cast a glance of friendly amusement down the table and 
added, "Do her good to listen for a change instead of talk'." 

"Well, I hope you aren't going to leave it up to 













CHAPTER XVIII 


- 336 - 


Joe to take her to the busl" said Criselda. The night bus 
passed within three miles of Rolling Slopes after midnight, 
and Betty was to leave on it that night for the weekend# 

"No. I f ll take her,” said Walter, and with that 
his mother had to be content. 

At the other end of the table, Joe f s tale had 
lasted on and on. 

"You folks nearly finished?" boomed Engvald 

Norstaad. 

Betty looked around. Most of those present had 
finished their lunches: the women were clearing up the re¬ 
mains of boxes and collecting their forks and spoons. She 
and Joe alone remained at their end of the long table. 

"Nearly finished, Mr. Nordstaad," she said plea¬ 
santly and Joe, embarrassed, finished his pie with hasty 
gulps. Then, as Betty began to collect the things and 
crumple up the papers, he went on, 

"That was an awful good lunch, Miss Allen. I sure 
enjoyed it." 

"Mrs. Kerrigan made most of it," said Betty. 

"She’s a good cook, and a mighty fine womanJ" He 
glanced across at Mrs. Kerrigan who had eaten lunch with her 
son and would now walk quietly back to the lonely frame house 
behind the store. "She misses her husband though — she’s 
failed some since he died. But Walter’s good to her — he’s 













CHAPTER XVIII 


- 337 - 


a good boy, Walter is* You wouldn’t find a better boy than 
Walter, Miss Allen1” 

Betty felt that the conversation was about to 
become personal* She hastily changed the subject* 

”You didn’t finish your story, Joe. About the 

train.... n 

Joe beamed, took up the thread of his tale exactly 
where he had left it. 

”An’ I looked at that engine —* ’tweren't the 
same kind as I druv in Arkansas, but I figgered I knew some¬ 
thing about it. So I eased off the throttle, an’ by golly, 
she glided into the next station as nice....” 

”Joe been telling you the latest instalment of 
his magazine?” interrupted Ches, leaning across the table 
with a grin. On the stage at the front the fiddles were tuning 
up for the dance: the accordian player tried out a few bars 
of music. 

’’The simplest Thing..... 

Just doodle-de-doo- 
Doodle-de-doo” 

Joe looked suddenly old and shrunken and his brown eyes 
were stricken. Ghes laughed, 

”That*s it — ADVENTURE ARGOSY or something like 
that — I seen it too, that train story* Dance, Betty?” 

”No thank you* I’m dancing this one with Joe — 
he’s my partner and Lila May’s yoursi ” 











uHAPTRR XVIII 


- - 


Ches, an excellent dancer, gazed at her in 
astonishment, knowing that Joe's idea of waltz, two-step, 
square dance all and was a jerky trot. But Betty was quite 
serious: she put her hand on Joe f s arm and moved away with 
him, and Ches stood blankly staring after her. Griselda, 
observing the little by-play, guessed what had occurred 
and was highly entertained. 

Not long afterwards Walter drove Betty down to 
catch the bus. But Ches Meade had made certain readjust¬ 
ments about the car: two miles from Rolling Slopes there 
was a breakdown, and Walter could not repair it. They 
walked the other mile, to find that the bus had gone, and 
walked back to rolling Slopes, arriving about the time that 
the dance broke up. 

No one would have thought anything of the incident 
if Ches Meade had not felt it necessary to call attention 
to the success of his joke the next week. 

"Been to any more dances since Friday, Walter?” 
he inquired affably, leaning through the post-office wicket 
while Walter was sorting the mail. Walter, glancing through 
the bundle of letters he was pigeon-holing, ignored the quip. 

"You*11 be as good with the females as you are 
with them mails I" persisted Ches. "Damn f if 1 could ever 
get ol» lizzie to break down when I wanted her tol" 



.. : : t . 3 ;"i I" 11 Oh or bs^l/m 


* 

■•: r' : . o ov,' :.:r;o o : , 

: •: • 3 £ 

■ 

.■ t l O - ■ 

<■ 

1 o. : ■ jI r:: . j; cf ro£ | 

c 

, 

. 















CHAPTER XVIII 


- 339 - 


Behind Ohes f s back the store was filling up 
rapidly: the school-children were arriving by twos and threes 
and the harassed Walter could see joe Griggs serving 
customers at the counter and getting dreadfully muddled as 
he always did when hurried. He made no reply to the banter, 
and Ches came out of the little window like a cork from 
a bottle. Old Bill Hilly promptly replaced him at the 
wicket, and Y/alter, with a sigh, abandoned the sorting to 
cash the hermit f s monthly money order and so get rid of 
him. 

Henry Burton and Hetty Allen came in, and Ches 
edged over towards them. 

"Hear you had quite a time the other night," 
he said, slightly louder than was necessary. 

"Oh, No," said Betty lightly, "the car broke 
down a little way from the bus, so I didn f t go after all." 

M, Tain*t the yarn £ heard," grinned Ches. "I was 
just tellin* YYalter that my ole bus always behaved respectable. 
Who would've believed it of ole Waltl I didn*t think he 
had it in himJ" 

"Had what in him?" Betty*s tone was deliberately 


even. 

"Come, come, nowl" None of the rest of us ever 
spent the night in a parked car with youi" 

The impact of a small hard hand against a bony 














CHAPTER XVIII 


- j540 


cheek was audible: Ches’s high-pitched remark had assured 
the attention of all* There was a moment’s breathless 
silence while his face whitened slowly and the few freckles and 
a day f s growth of fair stubble and the red mark left by 
Betty’s hand showed up clearly.... 

"H-h-hee-ah-hee-hee... 1 11 

The small, rusty chuckle came jerkily as long 
disused: its owner wagged a hairy head and showed for a 
moment his tobacco-stained teeth before he collected 
himself and turned back with a grunt to his business. 

History was made for the second time in five minutes. 

Never before or after was Old Bill Lilly heard to laugh. 
























CHAPTER XIX 


- 341 - 


ON THE SIDELINES 

In vain did Griselda try to talk Betty into 
remaining at Rolling Slopes the next year. The girl would 
not be persuaded. 

"Everybody f s satisfied with the school,” urged 
Griselda. ”Next year it'll be easier for you and you’ll 
know everybody...” 

”1 know them too well already,” said Betty with 
unexpected cynicism. ”By next year, they T ll be knowing 
me too well! And if Ches Meade puts about another story, 
perhaps they'll believe itI” 

"Don't you worry about Ches Meade and his stories 
said Griselda hotly. ”We know — everyone knows — how 
much truth is in them!” Boxing Ches Meade's ears is the 






. 

- 

. 









. 
























t „ . . mi 


* 
















. 







. 





























CHAPTER XIX 


- 342 - 


best thing ever you did for yourself 1 round here." She 
cuckled, and concluded, "Ches has been needing a right 
good clip on the ear for a long time — if ±»d known how he 
was going to turn out, ± f d T ve given him a few a good 
many years ago, instead of feeling sorry for him*" 

Betty laughed, but she did not 
change her mind. Griselda, the practical, did not com¬ 
pletely understand her. She saw only Ches with his mocking 
smile and prying eyes, bringing about Betty 1 s departure. 

But to Betty, Ches was not entirely^ cause in himself. ' 

He represented more a stage in her disillusionment, casting 
a shadow over the idealism that had lighted her outlook. 
Behind Ches stood the others — the decent people of the 
district, who, knowing Ches for what he was, could still 
tolerate him, laugh at his jokes when not directed against 
themselves, rheir acceptance of Ches made the rest of the 
community less in her eyes, and she had not expected them 
to lessen, thus to lower themselves from what she had taken 
them to be in the beginning. 

Griselda hoped until the end of June that Betty 
could be persuaded to change her mind. The district hoped 
so too. The overlapping farewells at the picnic were 
distinctly regretful. 

"Good-bye, Miss Allen. Guess we won’t be seeing 
you next year. We’re sure sorry you ain’t coming back!" 



t : "I :rc fir ::cv wre Bniii 


■ 




; l i .'.v 


i 

- * 

4 


; - , . ' , ? .... . .rco c." '.i % w. 




. 






* 

% 


■ 

' - - . ■' ' ' 

- 

. 

, . T , . .. ' .... '• :: ... • 1 ' * ■ ‘ ' • - 

l ■ 

. 

, " 

* 















CHAPTER XIX 


- 343 - 


"See you tonight, Miss Allen..." 

"... a lovely picnic, Miss Allen...I" 

"Never seen my old lady run so fast as she done 
in that race!" 

"...l f d stay an* help clean up the school, Miss 
Allen, but you know how it is — milking..." 

"Good-bye, Miss Alien!" 

The golden haze of dust was settling on the play¬ 
ground, and a long puffy cloud marked the homeward progress 
of cars and buggies down the hill. A few tired, sticky 
children, clutching prizes won in the sports, or the note¬ 
book or pressed flower collection that had occupied a place 
in the display, drooped, awaiting mothers who still talked. 

One by one they left and the cheerful hubbub 
subsided. Paper and candy wrappers littered the yard, the 
barn door sagged at one corner where a too-vigorous push 
had run it off the rollers. ±n forlorn silhouette, one set 
of jumping-poles stood bravely erect, its fellows sprawled 
in the sand-pit. 

.aetty sighed as she looked over the nearly deserted 
playground, ^riselda looked at her sharply. 

"Sure you don't want to stay?" 

Betty shook her head and vjrriselda said no more. 

1 wish this girl would stay, she thought. 1 wish 
Walter had a brain in his head* I wish Ches Meade had never 
set foot in Rolling Slopes* 








* . . , ' ; 

oa..: ' •• . . •. 




■ 


» 


i .. ..... .. c ' 

, ; r . 

* 

- 

0 


, 

: . ■ - 






.. 


'• 




• i 


■ 






i 



















uHAPTm XIX 


- 344 - 


She went on to reflect that perhaps the girl 
was right about it being a mistake to know people too well. 
People were changeable. The trices had never been at ease 
with ^riselda since she had helped Eileen. The friendship 
of twenty years had not been able to weather the fact that 
she knew as well as they did the details of the family 
tragedy. And neona oottle, now .Leona Vernon, when they 
met in jviaverick, greeted her casually and passed by quickly. 
Again she knew too much... it was laid down that you should 
help your neighbor, but was there no getting away from the 
fact that the neighbor resented being helped* 

"You want to come now, Betty* nenry’ll pick you 
up later if you've got anything to do." 

±t was Emma’s pleasant voice. 

"I’ll stay," said Betty hastily. "I’ve got stuff 
to collect here...." 

"Don’t you go cleaning up, now, Betty," said 
Griselda warningly. "Joe’ll do that." 

Griselda walked over to the car in silence. How 
many school picnics and concerts had she seen here at 
Rolling Slopes? A little straggling procession trailed out 
of the gate: the elder Mrs. Patchenko, her daughter-in-law, 
Annie and Paul, Olga and the little boys in the rear. 

Griselda leaned forward to address her son-in-law. 











■.X.:v c;' ~ O ■' GilX 
, ' : '■ ■ ' V cX-'ocX* ..1 

/- 

; 

. . . . ' 





. .. . ■>. •; :• . t X 




. . ... .'.• L' . . ■ ' . ;';XgX:.-' X : ~‘X or*! 

• .. : ,;N.X * in .: cj j >;;n? :j 

* . ' 

• ", - X r • 

♦ **, 

* 

. •:" ~ . • o o: . />oXX ; --' ■■ X.;..Cs • 1‘zC 

; i . ■ ' . .:: .. : ;" ' .-.. ix; X.;c X.?:.: 





.. . . . 


. « : 


'• . .. : ... . ■ .. ... . _■ , «X .. : . olfLiM 

. . . . . .... 














CHAPTER XIX 


- M3 - 


"You got room for that woman? Henry?" 

"I guess so — Betty ain’t coming. But they 
always walk over the lease — it’s not far." 

"Never mind," said Griselda authoritatively. 

"She’s walked it once today." 

"She seems an active old woman," murmured Emma, 
arranging the wrappings of the baby. 

Her mother looked at her with contempt. "I don’t 
mean the old woman. Can’t you see the other’s expecting? 

You with four children of your ownI" 

Emma dissolved into laughter. "I never saw 
anyone like you for knowing these things!” 

Griselda snorted, and Henry beckoned the peasant 
women over. They held back, pushing the children forward 
for the unusual treat of a car ride. Griselda addressed 
Annie. 

"Tell your mother and grandmother, child, that 
Mr. Burton wants to give them a ride, not you young’uns!" 

Annie interpreted, and after a question and answer 
in Ukranian, the two women squeezed into the back seat with 
Griselda. Mrs. Patchenko, although she had grown sons, still 
looked young. She was a gentle, merry, brown-eyed creature 
who smiled readily, and apparently rarely corrected any of 
her numerous brood when they required discipline. She was 
guided by her husband, by his mother, and by her children. 
















CHAPTER XIX 


- 346 - 


Docile and almost childlike, she sat now between the two 
implacable old women. 

The elder Mrs. Patchenko was a few years older 
than Griselda and still a handsome woman. Her skin, seamed 
by a network of tiny wrinkles, was tightly drawn over the 
prominent bones of her face: a face for a sculptor to admire, 
high-boned, Slavic, with wide-spaced grey eyes, sharply 
chiselled nose, and pointed chin. Under the broad forehead 
her clear, light grey eyes looked out bleakly and accusingly 
upon a world to which she could not adjust her thoughts. 

Years before she had come as an immigrant to Canada, and 
desperately poor. Thus she had never had time ^or opportunity 
to learn English correctly and fluently. She was a stranger 
to the ways of her adopted country and her heart was still 
in her homeland. A fanatical Ukranian nationalist, a 
supporter of the Hetman, she was intellectual, embittered, 
and completely uncomprehending of Canadian ways. All her 
hopes were bent towards the cause of the Free Ukraine. Not 
the least of her troubles was the fact that her easy-going 
son and his meek wife remained singularly unimpressed by 
the old woman’s zeal. Their life was perfectly satisfying. 

The railroad paid regular money, they had food and clothing 
and a school for the children and no compulsory military 
service, and a reasonable tolerance from their neighbors. 




.I'.Cq 


j 

















CHAPTER XIX 


- 347 - 


Like their parents, Mike, Peter, and Stephan had 
no enthusiasm for the old ways. They too worked for the 
railway, or did odd jobs for the neighbors, they performed 
well upon the accordian and the mouthorgan and violin, and 
played for local dances. Their grandmother had long since 
given them up in disgust, listening with pursed mouth and 
disapproving shake of the head to their rendering of 
"Birmingham Jail" or the lugubrious woes of "Frankie and 
Johnny". They took no interest in the Free Ukraine, they 
had forgotten much of the language, they hung around with 
Ches Meade and his cronies, idling around the store, the 
dance hall# 

Upon Annie, the old grandmother fixed her hopes. 
Annie was serious and contemplative, less sentimental than 
her mother or brothers. She listened with attention to the 
stories of her grandmother, spoke and read Ukranian quite 
well, was artistic and studious. 

Old Mrs. Patchenko was thinking of Annie as she 
climbed into the car after the picnic. Annie was dreadfully 
unhappy that Miss Allen was not coming back: she had 
followed the teacher like a shadow all afternoon. 

"I’m so sorry, Miss Allen... your pretty dressl" 

"For shame, Annie?" scolded the grandmother in 
Ukranian, and the dark-eyed mother looked unhappy. 














CHAPTER XIX 


- 348 - 


But the little sandy-haired schoolteacher laughed 
and scrubbed at the lemonade stain until it dried, a darker 
streak on the lilac-colored voile. 

"Never mind, Annie. You couldn’t help it. 

It’ll wash — just a cotton dress 1" 

Such short skirts, reflected the old woman. Not 
decent. And hair cropped like a boy’s.. A strange, wasteful 
land, this of her adoption, where children ran wild, and 
girls dressed to show all that leg... Annie, she thought, 

...a big girl now... her skirts should come down. 

Beside her the plump figure of her daughter-in- 
law quivered with a chuckle. The fat Sammy Burton, leaning 
forward on his grandmother’s lap, was catching at her neck¬ 
lace. 

"SammyI" Griselda pushed down the clutching hand. 
But the other woman laughed, and unwound a coil of the coral 
and silver. Sammy seized it, examined the bright beads with 
a second’s pouting concentration, dropped them and leaned 
back. With a complaining little murmur he rubbed the back 
of his silky head against his grandmother. 

Griselda as ever, sat up straight. Automobiles, 
she thought, like chesterfield suites and overstuffed chairs, 
made for sloppy carriage. Look at Emma I Slumped like that 
in spite of all the training she had.. And weight! There 
never used to be so many fat women, she reflected. Still 
















CHAPTER XIX 


- 349 - 


it’s Emma f s bones that have to carry it around, not mine I 

Sammy smelt of peppermint and milk, and perhaps, 
a little of fresh earth. Little children often did, even 
when they were clean... 

I wonder what this next little Patchenko will 
be, she thought. Girl I hope — those boys aren’t up to 
much, tagging around with Ches Meade •• Drat Ches.. if someone 
like Betty had turned up ten years ago f stead of that Mamie, 

I might have been holding Walter’s child on my lapl 
... Mabel! She didn’t stay long — Dave Wilkie’s no catch... 
With a sigh, uriselda recalled her straying thoughts, and 
fixed them once more upon the sectionman's family. 

This seems like a nice, clean, good-natured 
woman... Not too bright, an* maybe just as well. Life’s 
easier for a woman if she’s not too bright. Then you can 
agree with everyone and get along fine! That old woman’s 
a different proposition! She’s seen everything, an’ had 
a hard life — it always shows... 

For an instant the two pairs of eyes, the shrewd 
dark ones, and the bleak grey ones met. The glances unlocked 
with difficulty: each woman for the first time sensed 
the intensity in the other. Then the car jolted over the 
train tracks and stopped before the store. 

”Runnin’ a taxi, Henry?” inquired Ches Meade, 
as the four women got out.” You oughta charge by weight!” 

























CHAPTER XIX 


- 350 


He grinned and indicated the sectionma^s wife, 
who now had turned back towards her own home, but the tail 
of his eye slid mockingly towards the substantial figure 
of Emma. Oriselda welcomed the opportunity to deliver 
a rebuke. 

"That*11 do, Chesi she said sharply. "Time 
you learned to hold your tongue where women are concerned!" 

With a starchy rustle of her print skirts she 
vanished, and Ches stared blankly after her, at a loss, 
as always in her presence, for the glib retorts that usually 
came so quickly to his tongue. 

The house was cool and dark with the blinds 
drawn, and the silence within it was complete. Criselda 
entered with a sigh of relief, and, taking off her hat, 
she thought without pain, 

"The second picnic since Jasper died." 

Instantly she seemed to be looking at a whole 
vista of school picnics, a picture of each one small and 
bright and clear formed in her mind, like the vista of 
lighted candles seen when the light is placed between 
two mirrors that face each other. All the school picnics 
of the past sixteen years, all alike in her memory. Even 
the last two. Had Jasper f s going made no difference really? 
It had, of course, but the difference was an inner thing: 











CHAPTER XIX 


- 351 - 


it did not affect the externals of a gathering like the 
school picnic. Jasper had always helped to judge the 
sports ... And the sports had gone off very well today, 
under the joint management of Albert Horner and Engvald 
Nordstaad. 

"Fifty-yard dash for girls eight and nine!" 
had announced Mr. Horner at the top of his lungs. 

"That’s Solveig and Ethel and Olga.." 

"Olga! Hurry!" 

"Come on, young ladies! Don’t keep everybody 

waiting!” 

Flushed, anxious little girls teetering on their 
toes along the starting-line. Pink-and-white Solveig, 
tossing back her long tow braids, tipped with blue bows. 
Dark-eyed Ethel, in whom Griselda took an especial interest, 
for she had single-handed supervised Ethel’s unexpectedly 
early arrival into the world. Olga Patchenko in an agony 
of shyness, smoothed down her gay print skirt and looked 
sideways at the others. 

Olga would look like Annie, thought Oriselda. 
Gypsy-like... 

Ches Meade was official starter — he always was. 
Even if he was on bad terms with Betty he could not resist 
the opportunity to be in the forefront of things. 







& 






















CHAPTER XIX 


- 352 - 


"All ready? All behind the line? Move that foot 
back, Solveig... O.K... When you see the handkerchief drop, 
then run•... one•...two•..three..• l " 

The white token fluttered to the ground... a 
cheer... a flutter of print skirts... 

"Come on, EthelJ" 

"SolveigI" 

"Run, Olga 1" 

It was over. 

"Solveig first," announced Mr. Horner, "Ethel 
second, Olga third." 

"What didja get, Solveig?" 

"A blue comb." 

"Isn f t that pretty, now!" 

01ga T s dark eyes began to fill with tears at the 
discrepancy between her third prize of an all-day sucker, 
and the more substantial awards received by the others. 

The judges were quick to administer consolation. 

"Never mind, Olga," said Albert Horner. "Next 
year, you f 11 win the race -- you see." . 

"I t'ink you forget to give Olga the rest of her 
prize," said Nordstaad with a wink. "Iss two suckers for 
third prize when three people run, isn f t it?" 

"So it isi" agreed the forgetful Mr. Horner. 











CHAPTER XIX 


- 353 - 


"Red or yellow, ulga?" 


And there had been the cradle race, "Two and 
under]" The half-dozen sturdy youngsters set down in an appro¬ 
ximately straight line and deserted by their mothers. Eat 
Jessie rJordstaad, steady on her stout pink legs, leading the 
field. The young iuordstaads were always ahead in games and 
sports: Jessie had doubtless been coached by her brothers 
and sisters for this event since she could walk. She was 
closely followed by Johnny wietz, and a moment later, by 
oammy Burton. But just as Sammy seemed about to overtake 
his rivals, he had espied Griselda in the sidelines. Instant¬ 
ly he veered. 

"DammaJ DammaJ" 

A shout of laughter went up, and Griselda collected 
her grandson and bore him away to get his prize with all the 
others. 


Three o’clock, and the afternoon sun at its hottest. 
The men in their white shirts, wrinkled now, sleeves rolled 
up. Many a long dusty smear on trousers carefully pressed 
that morning. Crisp cotton dresses wilted: a steady stream 
of young and old patronized the lemonade barrel, presided 
over by Mrs. Kerrigan in the girls’ cloakroom. 

A few parents and neighbors, less hardy than the 


















CHAPTER XIX 


- 354 - 


rest, came into the school, seeking a spot to sit down and 
cool off. Mrs. Wietz and Mrs. Murpbey strolled around to look 
at the display of the years’ work. 

♦'My, it’s prettyl" 

"Yah 1" 

A step or two behind them, Mrs. Patchenko and her 
mother-in-law exchnanged gratified glances. The object in 
question was a drawing of a horse’s head, with flaring nos¬ 
trils and pouring mane. It was a poster horse, not a real 
one, but it was done with a dash of skill and life unusual 
in the work of a youthful, untrained artist. The picture was 
signed Annie Patchenko , and it occupied the central place of 
honor in the art display on the front blackboard. The two 
women looked at it for some minutes, murmuring softly in 
their native tongue. Meanwhile Mrs. Wietz had pounced glee¬ 
fully upon Hilda’s notebook in geography, with its neatly- 
lettered cover and brilliant maps. Mrs. Murphey was a little 
longer in finding what she sought: a somewhat sticky and 
bulging folder of pressed flowers. But she turned the grubby 
cardboard pages with as loving care as if she had never be¬ 
fore seen them, and had not spent serious thought two days 
before on how to persuade that knobby black-eyed Susan to 
adhere to the page it was so determined to part from.... 


Griselda herself had admired the picture of the 

















CHAPTER XIX 


- - 


horse: she could see it from her post at the lemonade barrel 
and something about the rhythmic swirl of the heavy black- 
and-white lines of the mane, the flattened-back ears and 
flaring nostrils, pleased her. The thing had a look of life, 
and the talent that had caught and imprisoned that quality 
on paper intrigued Griselda. She wondered about Annie Pat- 
chenko. 


Annie herself, walking home with the younger 
children over the lease, stopped on the top of the hill that 
overlooked their house. 

"Paul," she said in English. "Take the kids home. 

Paul accepted the charge with good grace. 

"You not cornin’?“ 

“I’m going back to help Miss Allen.” 

And she turned back towards the school. Her slim 
sunburned hands caressed the long string of red beads -- her 
prize for jumping. They were almost like the ones Miss Allen 
wore herself, only round instead of long. 

“I’ll wear them with a white dress,” she thought, 
"when I’m grown up...and a grey dress with beads on it, and 
a yellow blouse with long sleeves...I’ll give the horse’s 
picture to Miss Allen...I wish she wasn’t going away.... 
Everybody likes the horse...Mrs. Kerrigan said it was good.. 
I used to be scared of Mrs. Kerrigan but not now. Mr. Kerri¬ 
gan was nice...He used to say, ’And one more peppermint be- 

















CHAPTER XIX 


- 356 - 


cause she f s got brown eyes, 1 ..,' 1 

A big grey car swooped over the crest of the hill, 
and drew up before the store. Behind it, the dust eddied and 
swirled in the light wind, drifted away over the green fields, 
and sank lightly to rest. Conversation in the store and among 
the scattering of people on the step halted for a moment. 

"Who...?" 

"The ranch folks..." 

"His Royal Highness is with us again...]" 

"Is the missus with him?" 

Richard Hampton-Reid, who now descended and helped 
his wife out of the car, was still in his late thirties, a 
good-looking man. His manner was always courteous, always 
unconsciously withdrawn. The trait was not deliberate: he was 
unaware of it, and hence did nothing to correct it. Most 
people had the impression that he did not care: that it was 
all one to him if they came or went. 

He was, at the present moment, extremely glad to 
get back to the ranch, but he was quite unable to communicate 
the feeling to his neighbors, who looked now at him with a 
mixture of interest, scorn, and reserve. The barrier was 
complete between them. They did not realize the simplicity 
of his tastes, very like their own, perhaps. They smiled a 
little cruelly at the gibe, "His Royal Highness": one they 
no longer thought of making about Mrs. Hampton-Reid. 






















CHAPTER XIX 


- 357 - 


Nevertheless Victoria was far more deserving of 
such a term than her husband# She still had an unshaken in¬ 
ner conviction of the differences between herself and the 
vast majority of her fellow-creatures. But such was the 
charm of her manner that few people realized the fact, and 
she was well liked, even a little pitied by her neighbors 
at Rolling Slopes# 

She straightened her shoulders now, and looked 
with a smile at the watchers on the step# Instantly the 
smile was reciprocated, and hats were tipped that ordinarily 
remained on their owners’ heads. 

Victoria Hampton-Reid had been beautiful as a 
girl. Now, at thirty-two, she was breathtakingly lovely# Not 
even the difficult fashions of the day: the tight, short 
skirts, the inverted-bowl hats, could mar her beauty. No¬ 
thing could have disguised the lines of her tall figure, or 
spoilt the flowing grace of her every movement. Her black 
hair, in deference to her husband’s wishes, was unbobbed, 
braided in a great coil at the back of her head. The perfect 
oval of her face, creamy-skinned, unlined, was redeemed from 
insipidity by her fine dark eyes, and the too-wide, too-firm 
mouth. 

She turned and opened the back door of the car. 

"Do you want to get out and speak to the little 
girls, dear? Ethel is over there on the step.” 




1 












. ■ ■ V ; ■: >1 Oo o;; 

< 




10 






t 

' 





0 ‘ 








, 






1 1 




■i ' t" ~ : 




j , C ■- ,. ; .... 




. 



















CHAPTER XIX 


- 358 - 


The child scrambled out and stood blinking in the 
sunlight# She had been asleep: the warm flush still lingered 
on her downy, freckled cheek, peach-tinted with summer tan* 
Like her father, she was fair, with two thick pigtails of 
reddish-gold hair, and gentle blue eyes. 

Victoria adjusted her daughter’s round straw hat, 
and took her by the hand. Un the step the child drev/ away, 
and joined the group of little girls chattering there. Ethel 
turned eagerly to greet her: their summer friendship was 
very dear to both little girls. Solveig Nordstaad, unused to 
being left out stood by, hostile and watchful, waiting for 
an opportunity to recover her place. It soon came. 

"See my pretty handky... It’s a prize." 

"Ethel only got second prize," said Solveig asser¬ 
tively. "I got first prize. Olga didn’t get any, but they 
gave her two suckers." 

Edith looked from one to the other with her gentle 
confiding smile. 

"You should’ve come early," said Ethel, "iou couia 
have gone in the race an T got a prize too." 

"She couldn't get a prize," said Solveig. "She 
didn’t practice. I practised every day at school an 1 at home. 

But Edith was listening to Ethel’s whisper. 

"We got baby kittens in the loft..." 

"Why don’t you wear flowers on your hat?" demanded 




















CHAPTER XIX 


- 359 - 


Solveig, tossing her long flaxen braids. Her hearers looked 
at the wreath of tiny flowers encircling the pale blue straw. 
Edith’s blue eyes noted the pink-and-white striped ribbon on 
Ethel’s tan-colored straw. Suddenly her own neat black round 
hat with the regulation six-inch tail of navy cord ribbon 
and the elastic under her chin seemed odd — ugly, and dif¬ 
ferent. 

Solveig, with the quick instinctive cruelty of 
children, followed up her advantage. 

M I got patent shoes,” she said triumphantly. 

”You don’t I" 

Edith flushed miserably, and her pink mouth 

quivered. 

”Yes I have, my best shoes are patent...” 

Her tormentor giggled. ”Pay-tentl Pay-tentl Don’t 
you know it’s pattent?” 

Ethel stood looking from one to the other in be¬ 
wilderment, and only the intervention of the big boys pre¬ 
vented a storm of tears. 

”What’re you kids making so much noise for?” de¬ 
manded Eric Nordstaad, anxious to assert his authority over 
his troublesome younger sister and her friends. Solveig 
turned eagerly to her brother, certain of his support against 
outsiders. 

”She says shoes are Pay-tent 1” 




•. * . . '■ . 


; - . * ; - , . 

•'V J\. . -j ,■ or , 7 - : c\ 


•.-■.J .. v\. £cotfe f.rr.il ":- 

? •• : 

* 


. 

' 

. , - , t h , - 














CHAPTER XIX 


- 360 - 


Eric considered the problem briefly, reduced it 
to its proper place in his orderly scheme of things* "Pattentl" 
said he shortly, and turned away — a big, handsome lad with 
a broad, clear-skinned face and blue-grey eyes* His companion, 
Jim Horner, a year his senior, in turn took up the matter* 

"Some people say pay-tent, and some say pattent," 
he conceded* r, I guess both are right.” 

"Miss Allen says pattentl...." announced Solveig 
triumphantly* 

One of the men standing by laughed. "Atta girl, 
Solveigl Don f t you let anybody tell you different...!" 

Solveig, a little taken aback by the unexpected 
aid from this quarter, recovered enough to press home her 
advantage. 

"Everybody says pattent but you. You’re a baby— 

You can't talk right!" 

Ethel Horner came loyally to the rescue. "My 
mother says paytent #" she protested. 

There was a guffaw from the two or three men who 
stood by listening to the excited childish voices. Mith looked 
helplessly around, and her soft blue eyes began to fill. 

"Baby! ory-babyl" 

"Aw, leave her alone!" JAm norner’s voice carried 
weight among his younger schoolfellows. Solveig looked to 
Eric for support, found none, and was silent. Edith and Ethel 




















CHAPTER XIX 


- ?6l - 


resumed their chatter and made plans for a visit the next 
day. A moment or two later Edith's parents came out of the 
store, followed by Walter with a box of groceries. 

“Come dear, we're going now. Say good-bye to 

Ethel.” 

”In the back?” asked Walter. “There...” He pushed 
the box into place. “So long, Dick.” He was the only man in 
the district save Harry Wise, the old cowhand, to call Hampton- 
Reid by his Christian name. 

The grey car leaped ahead, swept up the low hill 
and was gone. Behind it the dust cloud drifted gently away 
to be lost over the green fields of grain. 

The school year was over: the long, hot summer 
under way all over the prairies. The months that were the 
children's holiday were also those that decided the fate of 
the crops. And at the end of June there was no hint of the 
hardships the next jjfew years would bring. The green fields 
promised a fair harvest: there was water in the sloughs and 
the creek, and the meadowlarks nested in the grassy strip 
between the store and the railway track. 

Griselda caught a glimpse of the car as it turned 
into the lease. 

“They're back,” she thought absently, and dismissed 
the Hampton-Reid's immediately, as she had already dismissed 
the picnic, and the schoolchildren from her thoughts. The 

















CHAPTER XIX 


- ?62 - 


younger generation, save for her own grandchildren, meant 
little to her now. Briefly, through Betty Allen, she had come 
to know something of them, and now Betty was leaving, and 
there was an end of uriselda's hopes for Walter. 





















CHAPTER XX 


- It} - 


ANNIE 

Rolling Slopes did not altogether forget Betty- 
Alien: a few people remembered her for many years* uriselda 
thought of her, sometimes wistfully, wishing that Betty and 
waiter had been able to take each seriously, sometimes with 
amusement at Ghes Meade ? s discomfiture* ibmma Burton main¬ 
tained that she never boarded a nicer girl. Annie Patchenko 
was determined to grow up to be just like Miss Allen* Ghes 
Meade remembered her with bitter resentment. She had made 
him a laughing-stock — she was gone and there was no possi¬ 
bility of revenge and no lack of people to point out how he 
had at last brought ridicule on himself by his habit of ridi 
culing others, in fact, in the history of Rolling slopes, 
Betty*s real achievements as a teacher, her very genuine per 
sonal worth, faded into obscurity before her one other great 








' . 


















• • • - .... .. . .... : 

* * 

t ' - - - « - - 

t : 

- 




. 

... . . 


. 

■ * 

„ 

• • *: 

\ , ■ V , . - 

*■ 

; 


[ .. ... ■' . . •• . .. ■ - 



























CHAPTEK XX 


- 364 - 


claim to distinction# She became "the schoolmarm who slapped 
Ches Meade f s face — right in the store J", and by and by she 
was part and parcel of the past. 

That was the summer of the great hailstorm, in the 

1 

middle of August when two weeks of burning sunshine was 
whitening the grain fields and cutting was ready to commence, 
the hail came. Before the streaked and greyish curtain of 
cloud ran a little cold breath of wind, an icy finger of warn¬ 
ing that shivered the standing grain and cast a chill upon 
the warm earth. 

"Hail, I t’inki" said Engvald Nordstaad grimly and 
waited for the second binder to catch up to him. "Unhitch! " 
Before the teams were unhooked from the binders the first icy 
drops of rain were mingled with the little bounding pellets 
of hail. 

To Mrs. Horner, nursing a fretful child, the storm 
came as a surprise. She had not noticed the darkening of the 
day until a few sharp gusts of wind pattered dust and big 
shapeless splotches of rain on the window panes. Then she 
looked out across the yard where the hens ran frantically to 
shelter. A dishevelled crow flapped his way aslant the wind: 
a few sharp-edged pellets rattled on the roof, rolled to the 
ground, vanished under hosts of others. The red poppy in the 
flower-bed snapped, the silky crimson petals floated away 
and were buried, as with a roar like thunder the heart of 













CHAPTER XX 


- 363 - 


the storm swirled aroung the buildings, curtaining with ice 
the world outside the windows* 

Three or four minutes it lasted, then slackened, 
became a heavy rain, a shower, ceased* Mrs* norner ventured 
outside* The Yard was nearly under water, drifts of ice 
slanted up behind the buildings. The garden a tattered ruin*., 
what of the grain? 

f, I can’t leave Ethel,” she thought, her eyes on 
the overflowing rain-barrels, her mind, dulled for the moment 
by the confusion of the storm, returning to the sick child... 
There was infantile paralysis in the province...many cases of 
it...several at Maverick... 

But inside the house the feverish child slept 
soundly, and the air was cool, almost chilly. Mrs. Horner 
sighed with relief. 

"I’ll send Jim over to the ranch," she thought. 
"They will be worried about Edythe. It’s just a little fe¬ 
verish upset..." The relief was so great that she could no 
longer keep her own eyes open. Albert Horner and the boys 
came in twenty minutes later with the news that things were 
not so bad as they looked — the storm had swung down the 
big coulee and missed the north end of the wheat, most of 
the oats. 

"Worst hailstorm we had in years," said Albert 
later. "An’ there was Mother, asleep on the sofal" 












CHAPTER XX 


- 366 - 


The storm was in fact but two miles wide. It missed 
the Wilkie^s and Burton f s farms altogether, took a swathe of 
the Kerrigan crop, all of the Price f s, two-thirds of the 
Nordstaad^s, all but a few acres of Ches’s, two thirds of 
George Evans 1 , and dissipated itself in a violent rainstorm 
ten miles to the south-east. As it was so late in the season, 
there was no regrowth. Those who were hailed out made the 
best of the situation, cut what remained of the crops for 
feed, and ran livestock in the fields for the winter. Nord- 
staad was insured, so his total loss was slight compared to 
that of his neighbors who had neglected this protection. 

On the whole, people were philosophical about the 
hail. It had come before: it would come again no doubt. And 
next year lay ahead. Maude Horner confided to Griselda that 
she thought she would put off her trip to England till next 
year, and it seemed to Griselda that the words were an echo 
from her own past. On impulse she said, 

"Don’t ez^ect too much, Maude, when you go. Things 
change so..." 

"I suppose they do," agreed the other. She looked 
startled, and Griselda recalled that it was less than ten 
years since Maude had left England. Ten years would not mean 
much change — not as much as forty had, for her. When Maude 
had gone, she sat for a little while, trying to adjust her 

















CHAPTER XX 


- 367 - 


thoughts and to keep a reasonable proportion between past, 
present and future. The whole panorama of Rolling Slopes 
refused to stay in focus now that she had relaxed her grasp 
of it. Years that had been full and busy telescoped together 
so that she could hardly recall them, isolated incidents 
stood out clearly and sharply without apparent significance. 
And people! Griselda could hardly recollect the features of 
Mrs. Olson, or Mrs. Jackson, who had been among her earliest 
neighbors, whom she had known well for some years. Good 
people, good neighbors, and their going had left no regrets 
with her — now, after ten years or so, just as their phy¬ 
sical forms left little or no impression upon her memory. 

A community full of ulsons and Jacksons would have been a 
good one, without the problems that continued to vex Rolling 

Slopes. It was the troublesome people that left their mark - 

the Cottles, Ches Meade: the odd, unfriendly ones like Old 
Bill and Miss Freddie and the Hampton-Reids, that one remem¬ 
bered. Why ? 

Griselda pondered the problem and came to the con¬ 
clusion that perhaps Betty Allen had answered it, Betty, with 
that streak of hard common sense underlying all her chatter 
and good fellowship. "Knowing people toowell," she had said, 
in effect, "makes friendship impossible." Griselda had agreed 
with her, reluctantly, it was true. She wondered if perhaps, 
knowing people too well destroyed one T s interest in them, 












CHAPTER XX 


- ?68 - 


rendered them stale and tiresome, so that the meeting cf 
them was a task that long habit had rendered dull, and the 
sight of them was but the eye encountering an object that 
familiarity had rendered meaningless. The thought depressed 
her and cast a fog over her memories of the past. In an 
effort to shake it off, she began to look around her for 
some new interest. 

It was no longer difricult to turn her eyes from 
community activities. For four years she had had little to 
do with them, and her interest had slackened. Having once 
accepted the role of a bystander she could not relinquish 
it, and did not particularly want to. People one at a time 
were all she felt she could manage now. Walter having proved 
himself in the last year, a particularly disappointing 
object of maternal solicitude, Griselda abandoned hope of 
seeing him married. Then her eye fell, with the old gleam 
of purpose in it, upon Annie Patchenko. 

That was late in the fall. Griselda, looking out 
of her parlor window, south-west across the ball-diamond 
where the dust whirled in a crazy dance with bits of paper 
and dry grass, out towards the southern tip of the lease, 
saw the Patchenko children trailing forlornly homeward. 

They plodded silently against the wind that whipped the 
long dark hair about Annie’s face, blew Olga’s brown mane 
in her eyes and flapped and tugged at their clothes. It 




- 




. .. ' t ' . •. . I V 

* ■ - . • , - , ' - • :■ • 

* 

■ 

, 










* 


' 

- 

. 

• • ' ' 

* 

j ; 

* .• 




. 




■ 










- 

. 

' 

















CHAPTEk XX 


- 36? - 


was a grey, leaden day, with heavy clouds lowering overhead. 
The air was chill, a cold rain seemed imminent, hut ever the 
clouds rolled up, rolled over, blew by,mingled on the horizon 
with blowing dust, and were gone, and the sky was overcast 
with others. 

Against this grey and desolate background, the 
figures of the sectionman’s children made a pathetic little 
picture. (Jriselda’s heart was touched. 

"Poor little things1" she thought. "They’ll miss 
their mother. That old grandmother is a tartar, 1*11 wagerl" 
And she went out and beckoned the children in as they passed 
near the back of the house. 

Mrs. Patchenko, the fat, placid, brown-eyed mother 
had died in childbirth but a few weeks previously, uriselda 
was doing the elder Mrs. Patchenko but scant justice in her 
thoughts: the grandmother although strict, was kind enough 
to the children and she had assumed a heavy burden in caring 
for her son f s household, ror there were two babies, eleven- 
month old Ruth, and the new-born Rose, and it was no wonder 
if the other three little ones were at times left to their 
own devices. They turned to Annie for comfort, and it was 
Annie’s suggestion on this occasion that they go to see the 
cattle drive start off from the southern lease. 

But the start of the drive had not been a bit 
exciting, and they had seen it for three years before, always 
the same. Two riders and a man with a wagon and team, the 
















CHAPTER XX 


- 370 - 


restless, bawling herd being urged out of the lease, on a 
side road...uld Harry Wise, always friendly to them, whose 
crippled leg and sixty years kept him on the ground now, 
was absent , supervising the departure of the cattle from 
the range north of the tracks. The children were completely 
ignored, and they turned homewards almost in silence. 

Griselda gave them cocoa and bread and jam and 
noted with approval that they all said "Thank you." The 
three younger ones, Paul, Olga, and Myron, sat quietly, eat¬ 
ing and observing, but Annie, is response to questioning, 
talked quite freely. 

"How are you getting on at school, child?" in¬ 
quired Griselda, and to her surprise, Annie f s eyes filled 
with tears. She sat miserably silent, trying to swallow her 
last bite of bread and jam. Paul clarified the situation 
briefly. 

"Granrna says Annie 1 s got to quit school an» help 

at home." 

Griselda 1 s sympathy was instantly with the girl: 
it was a curious compound of many factors. There was her 
own effort to get that school established: there was the 
memory of her own disappointment when Emma had refused to 
go on with the education for which her mother had been so 
ambitious: there was the recollection of the stern old 
Ukranian woman dominating her gentle daughter-in-law — 









CHAPTER XX 


-371- 


was it only a few months ago? And there was too the recol¬ 
lection of Jasper’s partiality for Annie, and Annie laying 
her bouquet of marigolds and golden-rod on Jasper’s grave, 
and Annie standing solemn-eyed on the cinders as the train 
drew in and Uriselda, stepping off, knew she had come home. 

Griselda made up her mind in the instant before 
she said, without committing herself, 

"What does your father say about it?" 

Annie was still incapable of speech, and ulga 
showed a tendency to mingle her tears with her sister’s. 

Paul replied, 

"Says he guess she’d better." 

The cocoa was all finished, and the bread and 
jam. Annie, embarrassed and unhappy, seemed about to collect 
her charges and go. Griselda sacrificed the lemon pie she 
had intended for supper to the urgency of the occasion, and 
with the young ratchenkos under her eye for another ten 
minutes, addressed Annie. 

"Don’t you want to leave school?" 

"No." 

Xhe lemon pie was going down with difficulty: the 
child was obviously overwrought. 

"And no wonder," said uriselda to herself, "them 
all against herJ" She recalled how highly Betty Allen had 
spoken of Annie: the picture of the horse’s head... 


The child 











. . : 


7 . - 7 ...... 


7 , - . : 7B o ■ 7 17 .... 7o 7'.; 0,0.7 o:c.7 




. 





;• t - . .oo 71, : o . ..: ...o- • 

■ ■ 

c t 






< . " 


. 

. 


I 




7 .. :.7 , ..... ’ 7 oj 








* 






. 




:• ■ :• -id.: • -..'■o,, . .■ aiq nm*i 94* 

. 

. 

, ■ ’ : ' . i c.i " ■: Ltl a 

. 














CHAPTER XX 


- 372 - 


had talent... 

"Don't cry, child," she said briskly to Annie. 

"I f ll speak to your father and grandmother. Maybe you can 
finish out this year at school after all." 

Speak she did, and effectively, reter patchenko 
was not hard to convince: he agreed with uriselda quite 
amiably that it was a pity that Annie should leave school, 
and that it would be a good thing for her to go on and finish, 
u-riselda was quite sure that he then went home and agreed 
with his mother that Annie ought to stay home and help with 
the care of the children. i‘he next day she paid a call on 
old mts. Patchenko. 

She dressed for the occasion with especial care, 
putting on a dark silk dress that she had bought nearly two 
years previously, when she and jasper had been planning the 
trip east. She selected the least plain of her hats, and as 
she pinned the jet and ivory brooch that she always wore on 
state occasions at her throat, she admitted to herself with 
grim amusement the real reason for this unwonted aplendor. 

"Might as well show her that I can back up my 
promises 1 make about the girl's schoolingl" 

She encountered the opposition she had expected, 
but it was of an unusual order. Mrs. ratchenko's command of 
English, always an unknown quantity, proved an obstacle that 
Griselda could not surmount. She had a feeling that ukranian 

/N. 











CHAPTER XX 


- 1>V> - 


woman knew more than she admitted, understood more than she 
was willing to reveal* Mrs. Patchenko sat with a puzzled frown 
on her brow, shaking her head at intervals, murmuring non¬ 
committally in low syllables that might have been any lang¬ 
uage. ner wide-spaced, light grey eyes never left uriselda's 
face, never lost their accusing expression. And uriselda, 
repeating her argument in the simplest language she could 
muster, began to lose patience, finally she rose to go, de¬ 
termined to come again when reter ratchenko himself was at 
home, or one of the older boys to interpret. And at that 
moment she caught an unmistakable expression of triumph in 
the pale eyes of the implacable opponent. It was fleeting, 
but it had been there, uriselda was angry. 

w She f s understood me all along] 11 she thought, and 
was about to speak angrily. The other woman, half a head 
shorter, stood silently, looking up at her. Her frail shoul¬ 
ders were a little stooped with age, under the high forehead, 
her grey eyes were bleak and wary, (iriselda looked at her 
steadily, in silence, looked away, noting that the room was 
immaculately clean. The nickel on the stove shone, the window- 
panes glittered, rhe two babies slept peacefully in the inner 
room, and on the back of the stove a large cooking pot bubbled 
gently. If old mts. Patchenko was hard on Annie, she was hard ■ 
on herself too. It could not be easy to keep house for the 
men, control the lively children, feed them, raise two babies, 














GHAPTEh XX 


- 374 - 


and keep everything so clean. If Annie had ambition and 
tougher fibre than her parents and brothers, here surely 
was the source of it — this thin, inarticulate, grey little 
woman, with the wide brow and melancholy, accusing eyes* 

•ihe angry words that uriselda had felt impelled 
to speak died unuttered. instead she said, 

"You people come out here where the law gives you 
good schools for your kids, and then you don l t use them, iou 
should keep Annie in school.' 1 

A look of consternation crossed the face of the 
other, She took a step forward, caught ^riselda by the sleeve. 
"The law’? Is it the law?" 

For a moment G-riselda was puzzled. "The law? Oh, 
yes, the law says you should send your kids to school." 

Mrs. 5 Patchenko attempted to look resigned, but 
there was fear lurking behind her eyes. 

"Annie..." she muttered. "All right..." 

She said a few words in Ukranian, broke off as 
first one of the babies began to wail and then the other. 

G-riselda went home, doubtful of the success of 
her mission. A few days later Walter asked her, 

"Did you threaten old Mrs. Patchenko with the law, 
if she didn’t send Annie to school?" 

"No such thingi" said Oriselda indignantly. "I 
just said it was a pity that they didn’t take advantage of 


\ ... - ■ i'C 

: s.R • . ;/ . • ; 

t ' • : -* - v J: f io to luce o, , .emr 

' 

. 

. • L 

. 

# 




( 

. « 

. 

- 










. 


. 








* 




* 


’ 


■ 

























CHAPTER XX 


- 373 - 


the schools that this country had by law!" 

Walter laughed. "Whatever you said, it scared her 
stiff# She expects the police out every minute, by what Pete 
told me." 

"Oh, for heaven f s sake...J Explain it to him, 


WalterJ" 


"I did, 

but they still think Annie has to go to 

school." 



"Well," said G-riselda thoughtfully# "It seems a 
pity to tell that old woman any different!" 

"That T s what I thought." agreed Walter. 

"And when all the other children here will likely 


go on to high school, Annie ought to have her chance too." 





~ 

l 

; 

t 

' - t 

1 

. . ..... . . ■ 

, 

t 

. 

, t 









CHAPTER XXI 


- 376 - 


THIRTY-FOLD 

Although the chances had seemed against Annie 
Patchenko T s higher education in 1929, she was the only 
one from the upper grades of Beti:y Allen f s school to 
complete high school. For that fall brought the news of 
disaster from the big cities, the money-markets of the 
world. Within a few months, the world-wide financial 
collapse, like a widening whirlpool, sucked in Western 
Canada. The wheat market crashed, and the farmers of 
Rolling Slopes, a handful among thousands, saw their 
accustomed prosperity vanish, their economy in ruins. 

The depression was upon them: their world narrowed and 
contracted and shrank until it was but the patch of 
prairie bounded by the flat circle of the horizon. 












: ' 












-- . * - - • ■ - • '■ 

- < 

. 

. 

« . . ... . c • 

: ....... 

. . - - - 

. . > 7 , ; 



























CHAPTER XXI 


- 377 - 


So ended a discouraging year. The hail had 
devastated many crops, and those which escaped suffered 
from drought. For weeks the wind blew steadily, rattling 
and prying about the buildings, sucking the life from 
the grain, the green from the leaseland. The dried, curled 
leaves of Griselda’s little hedge fell early, blew wildly 
around the tall white house, lodged in little piles, 
scattered in the gusts. Roadsides and pastures were 
brown in July, the creek in the leaseland fell lower than 
ever before, and the coulee bottoms were dry all summer. 
Late in October came a great duststorm, darkening the sky 
in mid-afternoon — the first of many. 

At the end of the season, as for years follow¬ 
ing, there was little sale for the grain that survived 
the hail and drought, low prices for the livestock. 

People who had bought land when prices were high, found 
themselves with heavy mortgage payments to meet and no 
income in sight. Those who had homesteaded in the 
beginning^kept their land and added to it, were compara¬ 
tively well off, provided they were reasonably debt-free, 
.but they were few in number, for the easy credit of the 
past decade had induced heavy spending, lavish instalment 
buying, counting always on the next year T s crop to pay. 

At Rolling Slopes, only four families weathered the 























CHAPTER XXI 


- 378 - 


depression, the Aerrigans, the Burtons, the Wilkies, and 
the Hordstaads. Most did not. Within the first two years, 
the Prices, the Evanses, the Horners, and Ches Meade found 
themselves submerged. 

1930, like its predecessor, was dry and windy. 
Even during the winter the dust blew from overtilled fields, 
blackened the snow-drifts and turned the winter landscape 
to arid grey monotones. The very land seemed to have turned 
against its possessors, determined to drive them from its 
surface. And some, who had not a firm grip upon their 
slice of the stubborn prairie, left, scattering to the 
north and west, east, and south as though driven before 
the wind. Rumors of better conditions elsewhere whirled 
in the air like withered leaves. 

"They say it T s not so bad at the coast — don J t 
have these cold winters an* coal to buy, an* lumber*s 
cheap... Eruit in your backyard..." 

Or, "I’m goin* to try the irrigation districts — 
they say there f s work to be had there, ’specially at harvest 
time... Grow all kinds of stuff there, you know..." 

Once again there was talk of the Heace River, 
of the north, where one could trap in the winter and make 
a living at least, where moose could be shot for meat, 
and wild fruit picked, and there was firewood for the 
cutting.•• 



i-r •' : 









uHAPTER XXI 


- 319 - 


Ches Meade was among those who abandoned their 
farms. His quarter-section of grey and arid soil was blowing 
heavily, like the acres of his neighbor nvans. The gravel 
showed on the top of all the little hills, the dust banked 
up in rippled billows along the roadside ditches, and 
crossed the road to lie in a long sandy sweep for many yards 
across Nordstaad's field. 

The big Norwegian was furious when some acres 
of his latest experiment — flax — were buried beneath the 
drifted soil from ohes j s and Evans’ summerfallow. He had 
more land than most of his neighbors, and had not overworked 
his fields. A tireless worker, he flung all his resources 
and those of his family into the struggle for survival 
and independence, and won. His dustiest field he sowed to 
grass, and increased his milk herd. -A few acres of alfalfa 
here, a hundred acres strip-farmed there, a long dug-out 
in the coulee to store water for the livestock...such were 
Nordstaad’s experiments during the dry years, and each of 
them contributed a little towards enabling him to hold his 
own. 

Have Wilkie and Henry Hurton followed his example, 
with variations of their own. Have rode out the depression 
on the proceeds from his poultry: a row of neat little 
chicken-houses went up along the edge of his barnyard, and 
each week he shipped out big 30 -dozen crates of eggs. ±n 












CHAPTER XXI 


- 380 - 


1931» his nephew, Tony Wilkie, came out from England, a shy, 
foreign-looking boy of eleven. Dave did not welcome the 
boy f s arrival: in a moment of ill-temper he let slip the 
reason. 

"...useless, no-good little Dago — like his 

father..•l M 

Which made abundantly clear xony Wilkie's status 
in his uncle's family. DUt Mabel was kind to the boy, and 
as xony proved himself an admirable poultryman, Dave became 
reconciled to the presence of his unwanted nephew. 

in the summer of 1931 it was obvious that the 
crops would again be poor - perhaps five or six bushels to 
the acre, xhat was the summer Dhes Meade left rolling Slopes. 
He did not advertise his intentions, rie had rented his 
farm to tieorge Evans on shares for the next year, and he 
had no set plans for the future. The grasshoppers leaped 
away in all directions through the weeds as he walked slowly 
down the railway track. Their jagged flight was a continuous 
dry clicking. . . the weeds ail bent to the south, faded, 
brittle, brown. • . Up ahead on the box cars half a dozen 
men sat or sprawled. • • ihey were always there. • • and on 
the big trains, fifty or sixty or more. • • 

The train pulled away from the siding at Kolling 
Slopes, entered the lease. A thin brown grass, cropped to 














CHAPTER XXI 


- 381 - 


the roots, covered the little hills. The dried-out crops 
were not so very different in tone: to the south the monotony 
of the whole was broken only by the thin silver spire of 
the windmill tower on the southern lease - the well that 
Joe Griggs had located with a willow fork, eastwards the 
grain elevators of Rolling Slopes jutted up, stark and 
angular, an ironic comment on the changed economy of the 
prairies, urain - the land had been forced to grow grain, 
to carry the grain came the railroad, to store it, the 
elevators. And now there was no grain, no market. . . 

Only a dried-out prairie, thought uriselda, 
watching the train out of sight as she did so often now. 
unly dusty farms, a railroad running deeper into debt with 
every mile, empty elevators, and people who stayed because 
they must. Because there was nothing else to do - the 
depression was everywhere and no one could afford to move 
... 

The train rounded a curve and slid out of sight. 

The sound of it mingled with the rush of the wind, the 
flapping of a loose shingle on the verandah roof. She would 
not see it again for two days - the train that had come once 
more to assume such importance in the lives at Rolling Slopes. 
It carried little freight now, little grain, a few cattle, 
it crept through a starved land, bare and withered in summer, 






















CHAPTER XXI 


- 382 - 


grey and bleached in winter, Yet the railway meant more 
than ever to those who lived along it. ±t was their link 
with the outside world: it had outlasted the automobiles 
that were steadily diminishing in number because people 
could not afford them... ihe railway proved that the 
outside world existed and denied their near-isolation. 

Griselda sighed. .Life was dull, she thought. 

Dull with a dullness that she had never known before, 
she felt again that she was adrift upon the prairie. . . 

And such a prairie - the parched leaseland, the scarred 
and drifting summerfallow, the shrivelled crops. Crop 
and fallow and pasture all alike, all lifeless. The 
hopeful land, the promise of the past — where had it 
gone? 

Impatiently she snapped on the radio. A twangy 
tenor voice floated out, 

"Home, home on the range* 

Where the deer and the antelope play 
Where never is heard a discouraging word, 

And the skies are not cloudy all day...” 

"Tcha*" snorted uriselda. She snapped the radio 
off again, just as Emma entered the room. 

"What*s the matter with wilf?” said Emma teasingly. 
"DonH you like him, Mother?” 

"They drowned the wrong kitten when they kept 
him ," said criselda with a vindictive look at the radio. 






., . v' 



• 





, 

i:..: o / 





■ 











. 

, 



. 


* 


, 



* 











- . 

* 

. . 

* 

: . . j} j ■ 

. . : . .. -■ .... • . ■ v” . 1 '.. 

* . * 

* 

. . . .. • 

. . . . J . , 

■ 

. ‘ ' ....... < 



















CHAPTER XXI 


- 383 - 


"Beats me why people bother with that contraption — seems 
like you i re all afraid of a little silence nowadays*" 

"You're not used to it, " replied her daughter* 

"Have you heard the new program — comes on at one o’clock?" 

"Yes," said lariselda, who was listening regularly 
to the program in question, muttering acid, sotto-voce 
comments the while, "That woman ought to be in a home for 
delinquent girls — that’s whatJ" 

Emma laughed and orriselda looked at her suspi¬ 
ciously. She was never quite sure how serious was Emma’s 
professed interest in the s soap-opera 1 . Emma might be just 
drawing her out — she had never, she reflected, known 
Emma too well * 

"What are you knitting*" asked isnima. 

"A sweater for Annie," replied Griselda spreading 
out the scarlet wool. 

"It's pretty," observed her daughter, "but it’ll 
make her look more like a gypsy than ever!" 

"Annie looks well in red*" said Griselda indignantly. 
"That old grandmother of hers makes her wear these dull 
colors and then she looks sallow. 

Emma laughed. "Now Mother 1 You’ve changed* 

Remember how you used to make ma wear dull colors and navy 
blue serge that didn’t do a thing for me?" 






4 . 

• ' ' •" 

.. .. ■ . 

. 

. . .. 








: 




: 






. 

« 

: 

, 

* 

- 

, 








. 





















CHAPTER XXI 


- 384 - 


"Made you look thinner j" said oriselda with spirit 
mina agreed cheerfully that perhaps it had been so. She went 
on to speak about the school and the Sunday School. 

"The minister^ district has been enlarged again - 
he may not get out here at all." 

"What J s that meant Church at sell creek only?" 

Emma assented. "I hate to see the Sunday School 
go — we could keep it up on our own, 1 suppose, how did 
you manage when it first started here?" 

" You«ve changed!" said Griselda. "Do you remember 
telling me before you got married that the community could 
run itself — you weren't going to bother about the church 
and club and all that?" 

The color heightened in Emma's face, making her 
look like an overgrown schoolgirl. 

"I guess i did," she admitted. "Things look 
different now, don't they/ ihere*s henry — jl must go." 

"Count that before you go," said Griselda, 
handing over the knitting. "Twenty-nine stitches — my eyes 
are bothering me." 

The scarlet knitting did bother her eyes, but it 
was a relief to turn back to it after gazing out of the 
window across the desolate fields, it was a relief too, to 
think of Annie: there might be a future for Annie such as she 



- . ,X ... ... .X 

* 

, 

s 

. 

. ■. .- ... - ■ ■ • - • '•"* ■'- - 1 

, 

: ■ 

» 

. 

. ; ~ ' ; -' ' • ■ 

; ; ; ... ' . .. : 'zcn 

. 

. 

* 

* •-■■■ ... • t 

. ? . . • •. ::v . 

. 

. .. . ,. ■ ... .... . i i: t . .. 9 ■ I 

.. . . . ■ J . : ' ... •. c .' .. .. 

....•: ' ' . 











CHAPTER XXI 


- - 


had dreamed of for Emma years before, jSmma had refused the 
future her mother had decreed for her, had thrown in her lot 
with rolling slopes, and had not regretted it. criselda had 
long since forgiven her daughter for the disappointment she 
had caused. All she thought of now was that it had been hard 
to get for Einma the education that the girl had never used. 

So far as Annie was concerned, it was ridiculously easy. 

The fear of the law, quite accidentally suggested to Mrs. 
Patchenko had settled the question. 

n Poor old ladyj" reflected criselda, neglecting 
to take into account the fact that Annie f s grandmother was 
not much older than she was herself. "She was scared — it 
did seem too bad, but it all worked out for the best." 

Mrs. Patchenko had notput further difficulties in 
the way of Annie's subsequent education, uriselda had spoken 
to friends in Maverick and found a home where the girl could 
work for her board and go to school, over the summers she 
worked and earned a little money for books and clothes: Ten 
dollars a month in wages went further than it would have done 
a few years before, criselda planned ahead, 

"If she could get a job at the ranch some summer .. 
learn a lot that she'll never get here in rolling Slopes...” 

The idea remained and grew, and two years later 
Annie did work for two months at the ranch, victoria, who 














' 






„ 






. 

' 

1 

. - - 

. . 

, 

k - t - • 

* 

- 

* 




- ....... 


. 


. 


■. 


■ ■ 

* 



















CHAPTER XXI 


- 386 - 


had seen the girl grow up, summer by summer, from a brown¬ 
skinned, dark-eyed, bare-legged child, was at first a little 
dubious about taking her into the household. She appealed to 
Griselda for a reference, and Griselda replied honestly, 

"Well, it was my idea — her asking you for a job. 
But I thought you could do with a girl, and she needs the 
job. You needn’t worry about taking her into the house." 

She paused, and her concern and affection for 
Annie gave her next words a note of appeal that was rare 
with her. 

"Seemed to me it would do Annie good to live with 
you folks for a while. She’s spent all her life out here in 
the country — here an’ Maverick." 

Victoria felt the implied compliment and realized 
its honesty, coming from this source. But more than that, 
she was moved by the note of appeal: so often, in her 
encounters with Griselda, it had been the other way around, 
with Griselda dispensing advice. 

"I do believe she is asking a favorJ" she thought, 
and the usual easy graciousness of her manner flowed back 
to replace the constraint she had felt for so long when in 

Mrs. Kerrigan’s presence. 

For by that time Victoria had lived at the ranch 
for over a year, and was reconciled to living there until 














CHAPTER XXI 


- 3«7 - 


conditions improved. The depression had struck heavily at 
the ranch: the dry weather reduced the grazing, and prevailing 
low prices kept the returns from cattle very small indeed. 

1932 had been a dreadful year, a windy year. Each summer day 
came regally into being, a splendour of color, of gold and 
crimson, rose and purple, flaming across the wide, wind-swept 
sky in the cool dawn. Red and angry the sun rose, and as it 
climbed, the colors faded and the tattered clouds began to 
move. No great rush of wind began the day, but intermittent 
gusts, pauses of stillness, little puffs and whirls of dust, 
a stronger gust, and another. Then the wind was up and within 
the hour a moving, dun-colored cloud hid the horizon in all 
directions, dark at the base, thinning at the top, until, a 
third of the way to the zenith, the blue sky showed, and the 
coppery sun. 

The Hampton-Reids had not been able to keep up two 
establishments. One had to go, and victoria had hoped in 1931 
that it would be the ranch. The days of the privately-owned 
ranch were over, she thought -- had been over when they came 
to the country ten years before. But Dick could not, or would 
not see it. The ranch meant so much to him. His interest in 
it had restored his health after the war ... what would losing 
it mean to him? The old obsessions might return. 

So, with a good grace, Victoria made her choice and 
came to live on the ranch. The house at the coast was rented 






: 

. 

. 


■ 








. 





* 


. 


. . t .■ 1- 

* 

X ... 

. 

.. ..' -■ I - ■ ; . ■ ■■■■ ■ : ■- 

- . ; ' 

■ 

, 

■ 

, 

.. 

■ 

— 






















CHAPTER XXI 


- 388 - 


and the negligible income from it went towards saving the si¬ 
tuation at the ranch, 

Victoria was not unhappy there but she was bored. 
Although she refused to take an active part in the women's 
club, she helped out with the Sunday School and with any 
matter concerning the school. She was a member of the School 
Board for two years, and thanks to her efforts, the teacher’s 
salary at Rolling Slopes did not fall below seven hundred 
dollars. It had taken two cuts since the days of Retty Allen- 
in fast since Dave Wilkie became Chairman of the board, in 
1931* He proceeded to put school affairs in order with a 
heavy hand, and the lowering of salary with the consequent 
fall in school tax rate met with the tacit approval of his 
neighbors. They did not like Dave, but they gave him full 
credit for being a good business man. Victoria’s attitude 
was considered unrealistic and totally unnecessary. Were 
there not teachers and to spare, willing and anxious to 
teach for six hundred, or five hundred, or even four hundred 
dollars a year if need be? Pick one of them — or let them 
bid for the school — lowest to get it. 

Thanks to Victoria, none of these schemes of econo 
my were put into effect, and the salary remained — nominally 
at least — at seven hundred. Depression, on the whole, made 
for good teaching, and the Hampton-Re^fids were a little sur¬ 
prised to find that their daughter's spelling and arithmetic 












CHAPTER XXI 


- 389 - 


improved materially while she lived at the ranch, even if her 
music suffered, and French was forgotten. She went into the 
same class as Ethel Horner, her inseparable friend, and Sol- 
veig JMordstaad whose white-gold hair was now cut short in a 
’bang’ above her clear blue eyes, and ulga ratchenko, who 
was so like Annie. The boys in the class were Douglas Burton 
and xony Wilkie. 

Edythe talked to her mother about the school, she 
liked Olga Patchenko because she could draw, and Solveig only 
sometimes... Douglas Burton was ’all right, i guess, Mother’, 
and she was sorry for Tomy. 

"Why? 11 asked Victoria. 

Tony, explained her daughter, was scared of his 
uncle. And he said never mind about her English accent — 
she’d get over it — he did. He used to have an English 
accent and the boys laughed at him and called him ’sissy’ 
because he couldn’t play baseball, until he had a fight with 
them because they threw a dead gopher at him and got blood 
all over his face.Q>Tony, it appeared, did not like blood. <rj) 

"Little savages I" said Victoria. She scrutinized 
them sharply when she met them for a few weeks afterwards. 
They looked like very ordinary children. But Tony was scared 
of his uncle, and Victoria did not find it hard to defy Dave 
Wilkie over the salary issue, reflecting meanwhile that she 
was glad she had not to deal often with him. With the deep 








; £.: - . - - 

^ \ 


* . 




; o ;■’/ i?i 






















CHAPTER XXI 


- 390 - 


furrow of ill-temper between his heavy sandy brows, his hulk¬ 
ing shoulders and close-set eyes, he was a formidable opponent 

Victoria kept Tony Wilkie in mind, and from think¬ 
ing of him, she began to think about other of the local chil¬ 
dren. The young Burtons were solid, reliable, decent lads... 

So were the young Horners, Jim and Ted. The young Nordstaads 
were perhaps more interesting, with something of their father 1 
driving energy. And Solveig promised to grow up a Norse beauty 
a true snow-maiden. The Patchenkos too were different, and 
she knew them the best of all. 

She was very kind to Annie while the girl worked 
there. She appreciated more keenly than uriselda the girl's 
artistic ability and was more in sympathy with Annie's desire 
to improve her talent. But like uriselda, she fully realized 
how little scope there ?/as for such a talent in the year 1933 - 
a talent utterly without training, one which might never a- 
mount to genius. Annie must, under the circumstances, be able 
to support herself. Victoria added her voice to uriselda's 
in urging Annie to select an occupation which would provide 
for her future. 

In the fall of 1933, Annie left nolling slopes 
to commence her nurse's training in a Calgary hospital. 
G-riselda felt a strong sense of satisfaction in the way 
things had worked out. She had planned for Annie*s education, 
and Annie was educated. She had hoped for a career for Annie, 





. 




t 

. 






- 

- 

5 . . ; - . . i n.s v. .. .C.os 

c • 

. 










. 


- 




■ . 








*. 

. . 




_ 

. . 







< 


- 

* 







• •• 








; ... . S - ■ 










. 

. 




. 

. 
















CHAPTER axi 


- 391 - 


and the girl was embarked upon her nurse's training. Twice 
she had introduced Annie into the right sort of homes, where 
she could learn something and at the same time be useful to 
others, ner concentration upon Annie had lasted for four 
years: for every step of the way she could see results. 

Inevitably there followed the thought that Annie 
no longer needed her. she had done her utmost to make Annie 
independent, and now she, too, was unnecessary to the girl. 
Pushing under the feeling of panic, akin to that which had 
followed Jasper 1 s death, uriselda looked around her, at 
Rolling Slopes, at those upon whom she had so decisively 
turned her back—how long ago? 







CHAPTER XXII 


- 392 - 


DEPRESSION 

The picture was far from cheerful. Rolling Slopes, 
after five years of drought and high winds was virtually a 
desert. The dry years had left their mark everywhere: the 
grass and grain grew thin and scant on slopes and in hollows 
of all the little hills, the last coats of paint had weathered 
and chipped on the buildings. Animals in the fields were 
gaunt and rough-coated. The fences of those same fields sagged, 
or lay flat where the blown tumbleweed and russian thistle 
had lodged in the wires and gathered a weight of drifting 
dust too great for the frail fenceposts to support. And all 
around, in the fields, along the roadsides, even on the lease, 
erosion had exposed the subsoil, laid bare the gravel, the 
stony skeletal of the land. 





■ 

t C . 

' 

- 

. 

. 

o' • 

J e <' 

. . ■ 










CHAPTER XXII 


- 393 - 


Other things had been laid bare too. Smouldering 
dislikes burst into open enmity with bitter words and threats. 
In 1933 Eordstaad accused ohes Meade and George Javans of 
stealing wheat from his granary. They denied it angrily, yet 
the accusation seemed likely to be true. Ches Meade was back 
from his unproductive wanderings and much the worse for them. 
Soiled, shabby, with little of his old jaunty assurance, he 
had now a furtive, hang-dog air that did not speak well for 
his honesty, ne had taken to hunting coyotes with a pack of 
four half-starved hounds that had raided Dave Wilkie 1 s chicken 
pens more than once. George Evans usually accompanied Ches on 
these hunts. He too had given up the struggle and was content 
to live on relief without further exerting himself, one win¬ 
ter they trapped skunks — their excuse for approaching their 
neighbors * granaries where these animals might be found. In 
vain Doris Evans protested her husband’s unsavoury occupation: 
the best she could do was to make him change his clothes be¬ 
fore he entered the house after half-a-day f s skinning. This 
operation was performed outside Ghes’s shack, which for years 
after was redolent of skunk. Ches and Evans were a most un¬ 
popular pair. 

Over the bad years, too, the real fibre of people 
became evident. Some hardened and toughened, others disinte¬ 
grated. There was little to look forward to. The inward life 
of the community was not that of its first years of isolation, 















CHAPTER XXII 


- 394 - 


twenty years earlier, when people were young and ambitious 
and full of hope, imow they were middle-aged, many of them 
apathetic, accepting the present because there was no future. 
Economically they slid ever further behind, some swamped 
in the morass of debts accumulated in the easy-money years 
of the f 20 f s, others, from solvency went into debt, from 
prosperity sank to the bare subsistence level. 

The old lines of division in the district changed, 
ran together to form a deep score that divided those on re¬ 
lief from those who still remained independent. Which side 
paid the dearest for its position is hard to say. 

The .trice *s went on relief early. They had never 
really gone ahead — now they ceased to try. And in 1933 Mrs. 
Price had the breakdown that might have been the result of 
inner turmoil. Griselda visited her, found her always the 
same, turning over the pages of a newspaper or an Eaton's 
catalogue with her calloused hands, glancing unseeingly at 
the pages, and whispering sometimes, 

"Bargains! Bargains I" 

She looked timidly at her visitors, greeted them 
as bidden by her husband. 

"Say f hello* to mts. Aerrigan, Mother...!" 

"Hello!" 

The voice was a mere whisper, the scared eyes 
were strained and wild, and only when the work-worn hands 












CHAPTER XXII 


- 395 - 


clutched the catalogue again was she tranquil. 

"Bargains! Bargains!” 

Griselda was dreadfully shaken. l\iot since Jasper’s 
death had she felt so alone. This poor, futile woman had been 
a part of Rolling Slopes nearly as long as she had herself, 
had been as nearly her friend as any woman of her own age 
ever became. Mrs. Price had depended upon Griselda in her 
time of greatest need. She would never need Griselda again— 
would never, perhaps, need anyone again. She had broken out 
of the tight ring of interlocking human joys and needs and 
sorrows. She was dead, without having died. 

Her husband too had aged. He followed Griselda to 
the door after each visit, his eyes mutely beseeching, a 
pitiful shambling old man. 

"It’s good for her to have visitors," he said, 
for by common consent this fiction was maintained. "Good of 
you to come — knew we could depend on you . Never used to 
think it would be like this — she was a smart, pretty girl-.-.. 
Never thought it would turn out this way...!” 

Griselda forgave him all his faults — all his 
blundering slowness, his pessimism, his grumbling, and his 
thick-headed opposition to school for girls. Blundering and 
thick-headed he might be; he had domineered over his wife 
all her married life, but was tender and patient with her 
now. That now, of all times, he should remember the ’smart, 















CHAPTER XXII 


- 396 - 


pretty girl T , spoke well for Andy Price* 

Again she puzzled over the Prices. Somewhere along 
the way she had discarded her old classification of people 
into f no-goods f and T worthwhiles*. The rrices fitted into 
neither ;$3 they were good, but spineless, well-meaning and 
helpless, where did such people belong in the scheme of 
things? And, for that matter, what was the scheme of things? 

The next year Mrs. price was sent to the asylum, 
and sriselda was relieved of the task of visiting her. She 
had always shrunk from it, but never thought of neglecting 
it, even though each visit hammered home anew the conscious¬ 
ness of old age, of change and decay, and one other thought, 
worst of all. 

"Suppose — 1 went like that...?" 

She aged rapidly in the early T 30 *s. Her abundant 
iron-grey hair whitened, and she grew somewhat deaf. An elec¬ 
trical hearing aid adequately compensated for her loss of 
hearing and she detested sympathy on that score, as on any. 
She was wont to declare with spirit that having her hearing 
aid was better than having the natural use of her ears. 

"This way, 1 can pull out the plug and cut off 
all the gabble and giggle if l*ve a mind toi And that radio 
that folks think such a sight ofi" 

She frequently had a mind to, for she admitted 
that she found a good many things and most people tiring. 














CHAPTER XXI ± 


- 397 - 


She lived to herself a great deal: something of the impatience 
and intolerance of her earlier years broke through the 
carefully-imposed discipline of years, and uriselda ceased 
to suffer fools kindly* When the conversation ceased to 
interest her, or if she disapproved of the turn it was taking, 
out came the plug and she retired into grateful silence. 

Apart from the loss of her hearing, she kept her 
health well until 1933• Then a perplexing dimness of sight 
was diagnosed as cataract and she underwent an operation that 
failed to restore the sight of the affected eye. She bore 
the disappointment philosophically, grateful that she still 
had one eye. But in 193& that too began to cloud. 

Griselda struggled with growing panic. She told 
herself that it was not so: that the windows needed cleaning, 
that it was the blowing dust that obscured the distant hills 
and greyed the world outside the windows. Yet she could not 
deceive herself, and the fog thickened over her sight. 

People’s faces became vague blurs of ligher color than their 
hair: objects were dimmed. She lost little things and could 
not find them: she had to stop sewing and to try to knit by 
touch — a skill that she had never acquired in her youth. 

Nor could she see for herself that the crop that year was 
better than it had been for seven years, that the land was 
green once more, that people’s faces were hopeful again and 
the lines of worry less deeply graven. 














CHAPTER XXII 


- 398 - 


n It won’t be a good crop ,' 1 said Emma Burton to 
her mother, "but it’s better than it’s been. If only we get 
rain in July, it’ll be all right." 

"I wish I could see it," said Griselda wistfully. 
"All I can remember for so long now is dust, and dried-out 
crops and the grasshoppers jumping ....This might be the 
last summer I’ll ever seel" 

"Nonsense, MotherI" replied Emma. "You’ll have 
your operation and be seeing as good as ever you did. And 
they say the dry years are really over for a spell —we 
might have crops again." 

She went away and Griselda stood by her front-room 
window looking out. She knew what was there: the road, the 
grain elevators, the rolling grassland to the west, the fenced 
fields to the east. But it no longer came sharply to her 
inner vision. That too seemed clouded like all she gazed on - 
the prim room behind her, and the yard outside, and the faces 
of the people she had known for years - even the faces of 
her own children. 

n I’ll never have that operation," she thought 
with sudden prescience. 

She turned from the window and stumbled against 
the chair she had forgotten. Her hand came down on the 
little table nearby — it held, but the plant on it fell 
to the floor and rolled in its pot. Griselda felt for it 



* 

' 







. - 






l • 


, 

t ■' - : V ; : 

* , *. 

, 

. 








, .. 

. ■. ' • ' ; .... . .:. t • '■ ■■ ... - • 












• 















. 




-- ... 




. 


. 


% 


5X X: 






z 






X 
















CHAPTERXXII 


- 399 - 


with her toe, bent to pick it up, and caught her forehead 
sharply against the corner of the window sill. 

It was too much. She burst into tears. 

Everything that had oppressed her over the last 
few years surged up in a great flood of bitterness and 
misery. She was alone, and helpless, and old. Old. 


She would have died rather than admit that she 
welcomed the coming of Mrs. Priddle. With the arrival of 
the housekeeper, the household entered upon a period of 
fluctuating warfare that lasted on and on, a perpetual 
drawn battle between two worthy antagonists. 

Mrs. Priddle was a T find T , probably the only 
housekeeper and practical nurse in circulation who could 
deal with the situation. A bustling, beady-eyed Cockney 
in her fifties, she was sufficiently devoid of delicacy 
and sensitive feeling not to mind Griselda ? s attacks. She 
bore with them ih impervious good-humor: her life had been 
hard, and she was shrewd enough to realize that a well-paid 
job like this was hard to get. 

Griselda, after a fashion, welcomed Mrs. Priddle 
even if she did not realize it. She opposed the engagement 
of the housekeeper, was barely civil to her for months, and 
at her worst, outrageously rude. But Mrs. Priddle was at 

















CHAPTER XXII 


- 400 


least a tangible force to beat against — real and human and 
articulate, the kind of opponent that Griselda understood. 
Here at last was opposition that might be reduced, instead 
of the burdensome weight of abstracts — sorrow and old age 
and human nature gone awry. Arguments with Mrs. Priddle 
occupied many a moment that she would have spent brooding. 

A triumph over Mrs. Priddle gave zest to a dull day, and 
varying suspicions of Mrs. Priddle to be investigated kept 
alert Griselda’s curiosity and interest, if her world of 
the moment shrank and dwindled to the four walls of the 
house, her memory was unusually active. She began to 
re-live the past, bringing up happenings of long ago, people 
long since dead. 

Her neighbors came to see her, and rarely a day 
went by that some woman on her trip to the store did not 
drop in. Mrs. Horner came often: she was Griselda’s favorite 
among the younger women. Mabel Wilkie came too, with her 
little son, whose birth after his parents had been married 
for fourteen years, was considered as something of a miracle. 
Certainly his mother considered it so: much of her girlish 
prettiness had returned, and for the first time in her life 
she had a pleasing animation of expression. Dave Wilkie 
too, big and burly and hard as granite as he had become, 
was wont to regard his child with awe, and his wife with a 



















... • . .• : ’ : 0:J O'OZO^ Slcfl^itSa .3 JzS&l 

. ■ : • .. ; o ■ 1.. : .: . ,.. t . .. e;. 

( 






, 

. 


t 










. 

* 


. : •: 


■ 


J: ..'? _ 


. 








.. V. 3 

- . 

» 


■ . VC d ^ ... : VO 




. 






- 


* 










. .. . 1 f.: ' t £ 

: 


t 




. 







. 


. 
















CHAPTER XXII 


401 


consideration that was quite new. A third person took a 
deeper interest in the Wilkies than might have been suspected 
Griselda felt herself absolved of an old guilt, now that 
Mabel Wilkie was happy. 

Olga Patchenko came occasionally. Pour years 
younger than her sister, she had succeeded to Annie’s place 
in the same household in Maverick, and was doing well at 
school. Doris Evans came too: with the passing of the years 
she had developed the look of her mother, anxious and harried 
The Evanses too had gone on relief quite early. Evans turned 
in his vouchers at the store with a furtively apologetic 
manner, and Doris, if it fell to her to do it, with her 
head high and a red spot blazing dully on her sallow cheeks. 

Yet Doris continued to cling to Griselda, perhaps 
because she had always known her and depended on her, perhaps 
because her friendships with other women had fallen off. 

With Mrs. Horner Doris was moderately friendly: towards Emma, 
she was now resentful. The Burtons had never gone on relief: 
they like the Uordstaads and the Wilkies had weathered the 
depression, older, poorer, tired, but with self-respect 
undiminished and pride unimpaired. 

Doris came quite often to visit Griselda, and the 
latter bore with her for a time, then pulled out the plug 
to disconnect her hearing apparatus. Oddly enough, Doris 













. 

. . 

■ - 

; 

... . . . • '• 


t 



• •" ; v ■■ ' i: ... 3 ; ’ . / 

t . '7-' .. : Oil • e a o'iiZ 

. 

: . 

{ - '• ' , ' t ■' - - ■ 

, 

. 


V 


' . ' ■■•.Cl. • : 

■» 

■ 


. 

. ■ . ' .. v l1 

■ 

■ , . 


-■ 















CHAPTER XXI1 


- 402 


did not seem to take offence, and the other analyzed this 
curious forbearance and was exasperated by it* 

"She's sorry for mel Her 1 Sorry for mei" 

The plug snicked out, as soon as Griselda fancied 
she detected a note of pity. In the fall of 1936, the 
situation abruptly reversed itself* George Evans, riding 
on a tractor with Ches Meade, was killed in its overturn 
on the steep grade of the road two miles north of the store. 
Ches had jumped clear, so went his tale, but George Evans, 
held by the flapping skirts of his loose coat, had been 
pinned under the heavy machine at the foot of the grade. 

They had gone too near the loosely-packed edge of the high 
grade in avoiding cattle on the road. 

But when a carload of men summoned by the frantic 
Ches raced to the scene of the accident, there were no cattle 
on the road. Ches, shaken by the tragedy, swore there had 
been, and there were tracks in the earth to prove it. None 
had seen Old Bill Lilly round up the steers and put them 
back into the lease whence they had strayed: he was mending 
the fence when the men arrived, his small, stooped, ragged 
figure bent doggedly to the task, his little glittering eyes 
never straying to the upturned tractor on the roadside just 
over the coulee. Asked if he had witnessed the accident, 
he snarled, muttered, "Nawf" and spat, turning abruptly away 














. . 

• 

• 

. 

: / Oc C •: to L 

. • . • •“ ' 1 ' . 

l 

*io -?. 7 &d ,u 

. 

. 

. 

.'. .. v.' 

. ■ ■ -T ■ 

. , ■ . . £ ' • 

ll:. a ; 


* 

J ..' id zo\ 


, •- 


;. ■; . . .. . . ■ 

, 

. ;■ .. . : ■ • ■.. “ ; ■ ' . . ■. 

• 









* 

. ■ 

, . 


' 


: 

* 


. , ... ■.. 



. 

' I 


* 

. 



, ..... 



i 

















CHAPTER XXII 


- 403 - 


from interrogation to shamble back into his shack* 

Ches’s account of the accident was accepted. It 
was, in fact, the truth, and only Ches’s reputation as a 
liar and prankster cast for some minds a fog of suspicion 
over the affair. Doris Evans, who had quarreled with her 
husband constantly during their married life, now indulged 
in paroxysms of grief. She poured out her woes to Griselda, 
who, patient for once, heard her out and uttered the 
conventional words of sympathy. 

She did not attend Evans * funeral service in 
the Bell Creek Church, nor the interment in the Rolling 
Slopes cemetery. Almost everyone else in Rolling Slopes 
went, even Mrs. Priddle, who departed, black-gloved and 
decorous, with admonitions over her shoulder. 

"Now don T t you go tryin' to work round the f ouse 
while 1 % gone. The coffee-pot T s on the back of the stove 
to keep ? ot for you, an f there f s a cup with the cream an 1 
sugar in it on the table when you want yer coffee...” 

M I»m quite capable of looking after myself, 
Priddle,” said Griselda icily. ”0ne would think I was 
deficient, the way you take oni” 

She raised a hand to disconnect the earphones as 
she spoke, intending to ensure that the last word was her 
own. But the door closed with a bang that gave the honors 
to Mrs. Priddle. Griselda looked indignantly towards it. 



























CHAPTER XXII 


404 


"That old Priddle.... 1" 

The muttered words lacked conviction. There was 
no satisfaction in such a retort unless Mrs. Priddle heard 
it. She sat quietly, thinking now about the funeral, trying 
to build up a picture of it in her own mind. 

The pall-bearers were Walter, Ches (in spite of 
Doris’s protests, he had been included when the Price boys 
made arrangements for the funeral;, the two Price boys, 
Doris’s brothers, Albert Horner, and Henry Burton.... 

That was all clear enough except that she could not recollect 
the faces of Bert and Jack price very well... Minna Nordstaad 
would be wearing her navy-blue hat... It was only two years 
old... Nordstaad had had a bit of crop in 1934 and done well 
on his venture into flax... Maude Horner, of course, would 
wear her old brown coat... short and shapeless as they wore 
them in 1928... That was the year Griselda came back from 
the east, the year after Jasper died, and Eileen Price 
got into trouble... Eileen....then Mrs. Price.... now Doris.. 

"What’s the matter with that family?" 

She had spoken aloud and the sound of her own 
voice surprised her. She thought vaguely about Eileen Price. 
Eileen had married, and her husband had done well, keeping 
his job throughout the depression. Doris, with a note of 
wondering bitterness in her voice, had told Griselda this. 









CHAPTER XXII 


- 40^ - 


Eileen had two children and lived in town. Eileen had 
broken all the rules and gotten away with it. How did some 
people manage thatv wondered G-riselda, pouring out her 
coffee. How did they manage to eat their cake and have it 
too, while others, who kept all the laws and the Ten Command¬ 
ments, and did their best by the Beatitudes, were continually 
perplexed, always anxious? 

Paradoxically there was a certain comfort in the 
thought of Eileen. Jt?‘or in 1933 » on one of her visits to the 
oculist, Griselda had seen Eileen. Or rather, Eileen had 
seen her — her vision was not very good, and she would 
never have recognized the girl with the baby carriage. But 
Eileen had stopped and spoken. 

"Hello, Mrs. Kerrigan," said Eileen. "I thought 
it was you when I came out of the store." 

Her voice was a little guarded, a little flat, as 
if, thought uriselda, she had not really wanted to speak — 
had forced herself to do it. She replied cordially, 

"You*re looking well, Eileen. What do you call 

the baby?" 

"Glenn,” replied the other. "My little girl T s 

Sharon 

She broke off, resumed abruptly. 

"I wanted to thank you for going to see Mother when 




- 













CHAPTER XXII 


- 406 - 


when — she was sick at home*" 

W I— M began Griselda, "she - she was — she's an 
old friend of mine, you know. Is she any better, Eileen?” 

Eileen shook her head slowly. Griselda's blurred 
vision could not quite distinguish the expression in her 
eyes. The pretty face was painted, the pouting mouth a vivid 
gash of red - that much she could tell. 

"I sure did my share towards putting her therei” 
said Eileen expressionlessly. "There's my car," she added 
in a tone of relief. "G-'bye, Mrs. KerriganI Say 'hello* to 
ol 1 Walter for meI He sure thought i was awful*" 

Deftly she manoeuvred the baby carriage off the 
steep curb, the motorman helped her lift it aboard, the red 
mouth smiled at him. The street-car clanged away. Griselda 
watched it out of sight - it soon became a moving blur among 
the others. 

In spite of her own anxieties, the discouraging 
diagnosis of the doctor, she felt cheered. A weight had been 
lifted by her encounter with Eileen, or at least shifted 
and eased. For at last, the pattern of defeat that had so 
long puzzled her, the pattern laid down somewhere, sometime 
in the past, for the Prices, had been broken. The old, 
discouraging pattern to which they had all, as long as she 
had known them, conformed, failures, taking failure for 


















CHAPTER XXlI 


- 407 - 


granted, following the line of least resistance. 

All but Eileen. Manners she had not, never would 
have. Walter would love that "Say thello* to ol* Walter 
from me"I But Eileen was no failure. She knew that Griselda 
had not seen her — she had been under no obligation to stop 
and speak, and admit — what she had admitted. 

Eileen had made her come-back. 


*ihe coffee was good, ^riddle could make good 
coffee, thought uriselda. She filled up her cup again, and 
so far as she knew, not a drop was spilled. 

"That f 11 show that old Priddle I can take care 
of myself I" said Griselda aloud. 

She sat down in the warm kitchen, facing the 
window that was a blur of light against the blurred darkness, 
and attempted once more to fix her mind upon the funeral 
that was at that minute going on. 


The little wooden church at Bell Creek was 
crowded. George Evans, who had never during his lifetime 
received the respect of his neighbors either for himself 
or for his achievements, was getting it now in full measure, 
if their presence now at his funeral could be construed as 
respect. His widow accepted it as such and the thought 



















CHAPTER XXII 


- 408 - 


brought a measure of comfort as the service proceeded. 

WE BROUGHT NOTHING INTO THIS WORLD AND IT IS 
CERTAIN THAT WE CAN CARRY NOTHING OUT.... 

"Nothing]" thought Ches Meade, fidgeting on the 
hard seat. "Nothing!.... This mighta been me....I" 

"—EVEN AS A SLEEP AND FADE AWAY SUDDENLY LIKE 
THE GRASS..." 

"Grass!" reflected Engvald Nordstaad. "Pastured 
going down badly... Maybe I try brome grass next spring..." 

His wife stole a glance at his granite profile 
and her kindly blue eyes passed with compassion to the bowed, 
shabby shoulders of Mrs. Evans. 

"Poor thing!" she thought. "That shiftless man — 
no loss he is... yet he was her man..." 

Again she looked sideways at her husband: a pillar 
of strength to her and to his family. 

"—FOR WE CONSUME AWAY IN THY DISPLEASURE..." 

"There’s no telling where the blow will fall," 
thought Maude Horner. "It might have been Albert, or Jim..." 

The service was over. The coffin was borne down 
the aisle, placed near the door, and those of George Evans’ 
neighbors who so desired filed past for a last look at him. 

"Wasn’t he — I mean — it fell on him...?" 
whispered a little grey mouse of a woman to her neighbor who 
had been in the latter procession. 

























CHAPTER XXII 


- 409 - 


"No. He looks all right...course you can T t really 
tell. Those undertakers..." 

Furtive glances were stolen at the discreet men 
in black standing inconspicuously in the background. 

W I don’t see how anybody could take a job like 

that!" 

"They say it pays well." 

"Probably the only job that has paid well in the 
last few years!" 

Smiles at the grisly jest were hastily smothered. 

Two and two down the steps came the pall-bearers... 

"It’s a real nice coffin." 

"Doris said if it was the last thing she did, 
she’d give him a good funeral." 

"...poor kiddies..." 

"Me, I’m going to be cremated. Less trouble!" 

The hearse slid away, black, glossy, gleaming, 
and behind it the cars fell into line, some battered and 
aged, all dusty, none new. 

The tangled, yellow-brov.il grass in the graveyard 
was dry and rustly underfoot: all around the fence the side 
of the coulee was grazed down and almost bare. A line or 
two of the service passed through Albert Horner’s mind as 
he stood hatless near the open grave. 












* . , 

. 


* 


















. 


. 










. : 




. 

, 

. ■ . • ' . . .. - 

- 




■." ;• , . t . • . . r 1 




: 






■" . : • v 


' 




* 














CHAPTER XXII 


410 


"...GRASS...IN THE MORNING IT IS GREEN...IN THE 
EVENING IT IS CUT DOWN, DRIED AND WITHERED..." 

"Grass.." he thought. "Of course we go back to 
grass... Stan and Roddy T 11 be in that rank, weedy stuff at 
Messines now... stinking mud... This is clean .... Germans — 
what are they doing there now? Hitler..." 

Old Mrs. Patchenko, standing near the grave of 
her daughter -in-law, shivered a little although the day was 
warm. She drew the black kerchief more closely around her 
face and glanced at her grandchildren, Ruth T n Rose, who 
stood solemn-eyed, hand-in-hand before her. They were dearer 
to her than all the world now: they were her very own, for 
she had raised them single-handed, after Annie left to go 
to school. They did not, of course, remember the mother 
who had died giving birth to Ruth, whose body lay under the 
nearby mound... Mrs. Patchenko shivered again, and an 
uneasiness possessed her. Superstitiously the old woman 
sought to account for it. 

"Is bad!" she thought. "A death by accident like 
that one.. More there will be perhaps.••.more graves here 
soon..." 

Her fine arched brows puckered as she envisioned 
the possibility of accidents on the railway — the hand-car— 

A stir broke the tense silence, a sound of sobbing. 





















CHAPTER XXII 


411 


"EARTH TO EARTH.. .ASHES TO ASHES...DUST TO DUST.. 

"Look!" whispered Ruth to her sister. "Chickadee! 

Rose barely turned her head. "Sparrow." 

"No!" 

"Yes!" 

A warning tap on the shoulder bade the little 
girls desist, and they sobered instantly, turning two little 
sunburned faces, exactly alike, two pairs of sparkling eyes, 
clear light blue and melancholy hazel, under identical pale- 
brown fringes, towards the grave and the flowers. 


The cars drove homeward. 

"I never thought there T d be such a turnout!" 
"Poor Doris!" 

"Ches seemed awful fidgety. I wonder..." 

"Dust to dust... Less dust off that quarter of 
George Evans’ in future, I bet...!" 


"It was a lovely funeral," said Mrs. Priddle, 
entering the kitchen. "I do wish you could T ave seen it!" 

"Don’t be a ghoul, woman!" retorted Griselda. 
"And it’s time you were busy with the supper. When I can 
see again, things’ll be different!" 

















CHAPTER XXIII 


412 


WHAT HAS BEEN AND WHAT IS 

Life at Rolling Slopes went on as though George 
Evans had never been. A few days after the funeral, Ches 
Meade was at the store, idling his time away as usual, boast¬ 
ful and malicious. He was crowing over the success of his 
latest joke: directed this time against Walter Kerrigan. 

Several days previously, ches had won an elaborate 
box of candy playing the punch-board in the store, it was 
the coveted prize and several of the younger men had been 
playing the punch-board hoping to win a gift that any of 
the local girls would have appreciated. Ches however got it 
with an expenditure of twenty-five cents, and took it away 
with him, his light eyes gleaming craftily. 







•• • 


' 








? - • 


. ■ _ 


. , ' .. 

. 

. 


' 






. .o . . t . .. q -- v. 


* 

.” - it ■ ■ • 


- 


■ 


. .r;r * . / - • - • 


- .. . - - ••• • 






u; 1;. ‘ ::: 1. :- ~ V 

" H 


















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 413 - 


Shortly afterwards, the box of candy arrived for 
Mrs. Priddle, bearing a sentimental message purporting to be 
from Walter. Walter himself carried the parcel over to the 
house, and Mrs. Priddle opened it immediately. The authorship 
of the joke was immediately detected, and neither Mrs.Priddle 
nor Walter was particularly disconcerted, Griselda alone 
was thoroughly annoyed. Her exasperation against her blind¬ 
ness was constantly channelled into a resentment of Mrs. 
Priddle, and for anyone, even the utterly worthless Ches, 
to link the housekeeper’s name with Walter’s, was an 
unbearable impertinence. 

She was not at all amused, and eventually she 
said to Walter, something that made him think she was taking 
the idea of mutual liking between Mrs. Priddle and himself 
seriously. He was horrified. 

"Good God — she has a face like a Pekinese pupl 
Why on earth would Ches ever think of it otherwise?” 

Griselda’s good humor was temporarily restored, 
and for a time she was almost polite to Mrs. Priddle, 
treating her with the condescending good nature that a 
handsome woman will often manifest towards a plain one whom 
she dislikes. 

During the winter she had the litrle stroke, that, 
although it did not seriously disable her, impaired her 















CHAPTER XXIII 


414 - 


memory. Henceforth she lived largely in the past, and 
her recollections of the last few years were oddly confused. 
It was doubtful whether she could stand the shock of her 
second operation, and it was delayed. Fortunately, she 
took her blindness for granted, and very rarely recalled 
that she was to have had another operation. She became 
more capricious than ever and frequently and embarrassingly 
spoke her mind. 

To the people she had known for so long, she was 
more important than she had been for some years. When she 
deliberately turned her back on the district, many of its 
inhabitants had sighed with relief. She had abdicated, 
she had not been forced out by any acts of theirs, although 
the will had been there. Some had wondered how long her 
voluntary retirement would last, and now they at last 

realized clearly that she would never again appear among 

y 

them. They began to regret her withdrawal, knowing that 
it was but the prelude to death, and that her death would 
leave a gap in the group of people who had first settled 
in Rolling Slopes. 

With Jasper Aerrigan it had been different. 

He had accommodated himself to others in the amenities of 
every-day living: he had not trampled on the toes of their 
prejudices. He had compromised, he had reconciled, and his 






















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 415 


mark on others outside his own family was slight. 

G-riselda was different. The stubbornness that 
had irked others in their encounters with her in the past, 
seemed in retrospect an admirable firmness. She had been 
always the same, upright, unyielding, dependable, a landmark 
of respectability, the prop of the weak who had appealed to 
her for aid. To her they owed much and they were now 
willing to admit the debt. That which in its own time had 
been coarsely stigmatized as "leading the district around 
by the nose", became with a perspective of twenty years, 
a wise leadership. People who had suffered and slaved through 
a depression of seven years, passing in that brief time 
under the acceleration of want and worry, from the arrogance 
of their prime to the sobriety of an apprehensive middle 
life, could appreciate the old age of a woman who had lived 
through all that they had endured, and more. The poorest 
among them could say, and mean it sincerely, 

"At least I f ve got my health to be thankful 
for...and my sight!" 

Griselda was not an object of unmixed pity. It 
was impossible to pity anyone who so stoutly resented the 
sentimental approach. She demanded a sensible conversation 
of her visitors: the onus upon them was considerable, for 
her failing memory put difficulties in the way. She was 


















UHAPTER XXIII 


- 416 - 


extremely likely to be talking of a time ten or twenty years 
back when her visitor was discussing the immediate present. 

"...And what do you think of our Premier*s latest?" 

"The man’s too good-looking to be very sensibleJ" 
said Griselda with emphasis: not till ten minutes later did 
her visitor deduce that Sir Robert Borden and not Mr. 

Mackenzie King or Mr. Aberhart might have been the Premier 
her hostess was thinking of.... 

So matters stood in the spring of 1937. 


uriselda was rocking on her front porch. With 
each forward tilt of her chair the loose board in the floor 
uttered a lugubrious squeak, but she did not hear it. The 
knitting needles in her stiff fingers clicked a nervous 
obligato to the slower rhythm of the rocking, and from the 
open door behind her, the sounds of housecleaning issued 
sporadically, uriselda sat as straight as the rocker per¬ 
mitted: she had aged and shrunken since her illness, but 
there was still an air of purpose about her erect, dark-clad 
figure. A ray of April sunshine, filtered and subdued by its 
passage through the stems of the leafless creepers, fell 
across her ivory face, the silvery whiteness of her hair. 

Recollecting something, she turned to the door 
and called vigorously, 


"Priddlej" 





















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 417 - 


There was no response: if there had been, she 
could not have heard it. She called again, raising her 
still strong voice authoritatively, 

"Priddle*" 

Mrs. Priddle scurried out, 

"’Ere now* Don f t you go get tin* all excited I" 

G-riselda swung around, as if trying to bring 
her dim eyes to bear upon the ample figure of the housekeeper. 

’’I’ll thank you to answer when I call, Priddle!" 

Mrs. Priddle sighed and connected the tiny plug 
of the earphones to the battery. Mrs. herrigan snorted 
indignantly. 

"Now, what did you want?" demanded Mrs. Priddle. 

"I-I-..." But she had forgotten. Attack was 
the surest refuge. "What are you doing, Priddle?" 

"House-cleaning*" 

"Be sure you clean out the linen-closet properly— 
properly now, priddle! And bring me out the best pillow¬ 
slips and the lace-edged runners -- all of them — And put 
fresh paper on the shelves — not newspapers, now, mind, 
Priddle*" 

Mrs. Priddle stood patiently by. 

"Be off, now*" concluded the old lady briskly. 
"Don f t stand there like a gowk, woman* You won f t last long 







- E 


. 










: : 

* 

' 

. 

. 




.. 

















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 418 


here if you don’t bestir yourself!" 

Mrs. Priddle dived back into the house, closing 
the screen door with pardonable violence. Griselda started 
at the slam. 

"That old PriddleI" 

She jerked out her earphone plug and retreated 
into silence. Her needles clicked once more: her mind 
wandered back and back. 

"Walter," she thought. "Ought to have married! 
Who’s to see to his things when I’m gone? Priddle — bother 
the woman — I suppose she does her best — I’m not sure 
she isn ! t setting her cap at Walter! If I could see better, 

I could manageJ ...Annie...I never see Annie any more now 
she’s a nurse...Mabel Prescott... No more brains than God 
give a goose ?/hen she was a girl but she’s turned out well... 
Jasper liked her." 

She started as Mrs. Priddle laid a pile of linen 
on her lap and plugged in the hearing aid, a liberty which 
Griselda always resented. 

" T Ere you are! I f ll put the other chair beside 
you to put ’em on. Feel!" 

Griselda jerked her hand away. 

"Why on earth did you bring all this stuff out 

here...?" 



















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 419 - 


But Mrs* Priddle had gone# Her charge muttered 
indignantly to herself and then began feeling through the 
linens, identifying each piece by the pattern of the lace: 
a recent accomplishment which had delighted her. 

Walter stepped on the porch and Griselda started. 

"You*re busy, Mother." 

" Someone has to look after things," replied 
Griselda ominously. "That Priddle!" 

Walter v laughed, patted her shoulder. 

"Mrs. Priddle f s all right, Mother. You know 
we couldn T t get along without her, could we?" 

The door snapped behind him and Griselda sat bolt 
upright in perturbation. Ches f s jest had glanced lightly 
off those it was aimed at, but it rankled with Griselda. 

No matter how often she was reassured that Mrs. Priddle 
had no designs on V/alter, she could not, since her illness, 
focus her thoughts and so arrange them to conquer her fears. 
When Walter emerged from the house, his mother spoke 
tremulously, 

"Walter •— you — those chocolates...?" 

"Now, Mother," said the storekeeper gently, 

"Don T t you get things all mixed up. Ches sent that box of 
candy to Mrs. Priddle and put my name on it for a joke. 

You remember Ches — Ches Meade — one of his jokes." 

Griselda drew a sigh of relief. 






. 

. 

. 




* 





. 



■ 















. 

* 


, 

. : ... ■ ; ... . .1 .. 2 U ":c. 

e 
■ 

. r.-.c3 

• • . o- . .:. ' i-G . »■' 

.... . .'. ' ' . .-2 : ; : o -. . ^ 

. 




... . 


• - .. . . 

i 

, 













CHAPTER XXIII 


420 


M 0f course I Just one of Ches f s jokes — time 
he outgrew them tool ...Now mind, Walter — you’re not to 
take Dan Meade in to town even if he asks you to^..J" 

Walter left her dwelling upon the vagaries of 
the Meade family twenty years before. She ran her hands 
through the pile on her lap, and was absorbed in happier 
memories immediately. The warm air lapped about her: there 
was no dust as yet, for the snow had lain late, and the 
season promised fairly... 

Again it was spring, the welcome' spring, after 
a winter of deep snow and bad war news. Again the land 
was green — under grass to the north and west, grain to 
the south. There was no dust, no railroad, no dark, 
jutting elevators, stark against the sky. Again she saw 
the children: dark-eyed, merry ? bouncing Emma, fussing over 
her trousseau, and shy, gangling Walter. Again Jasper 
ambled across the yard, lamenting his daily chore. 

"Time to go get Mamie... Seems to me that gal 
could walk a mile or two each day an’ wouldn’t do her a 
particle of harmI” 

"Now Jasper.• l " 

The buggy ratxled gaily along the road, across 
the lease.•• The schoolhouse as it was then.... 

A long ray of dusty sunlight slanting obliquely 

















CHAPTER XXIII 


- 421 


across the desks. A brown-covered Alexandra Reader — a stray- 
pencil in the aisle... A bluebottle humming in the window... 

Her stern face relaxed, and Griselda slipped 
into slumber. Her veined hands rested on the pile of linens 
and Mrs. Priddle coming to collect them, shook her head. 

"Well, I neveri Now why couldn*t she f ave done 
it sooner an f left me to clean the f ouse in peace?” 







. 




. 

, 

« : . 




.v. 1 . s W., J".' Ji 





















CHAPTER XXIV 


- 422 - 


A SPREADER uF GOuD TIDINGS 

She was still asleep when the Spreader of Good 
Tidings arrived# The Spreader was a Missionary* worker of 
one of those mushroom sects that continually spring up, 
gain a meagre foothold, and wither away again. For several 
days she had circulated in the district on this visit: she 
had made a previous round during the fall, so that she was 
not entirely unknown at Rolling Slopes# Most people tolerated 
her, laughed at her emotion and the extravagances of her 
T sermons*, but treated her on the whole with courtesy. 

She arrived at the store in good spirits, 
encouraged by her reception at the sectionman’s sprawling 
home and convinced that much of the seed she scattered in 











■ 








.. 


•- 


* 


‘I ... - : . . • - 








. . 




* . 

- . ' 

< • 

...... 


1 . .. . . . • . 







, 
























CHAPTER XXIV 


- 423 - 


this locality would bear fruit. Old Mrs. Ratchenko, with 
her austere face and severe dark clothing, the wide, wonder¬ 
ing, limpid gaze of Ruth 'n Rose during her lengthy 
exhortation, their reverently-bowed heads during her 
prayer, had all heartened the spreader's faith in her 
work. 

She scrambled out of her buggy in front of the 
store, a myopic-eyed, tired-looking creature of uncertain 
age with a perpetual uneasy smile. The men lounging on 
the step waiting for the morning train, shifted uncom¬ 
fortably when they recognized her. There was a shuffle 
towards retreat: only Ches Meade remained on the step, 
surveying the Spreader of Good Tidings with malicious 
contempt and the dawn of a grin on his craggy face. Then 
he too moved toward the door of the store, open today to 
let in more light as Joe and Walter took stock. 

"Lady to see you, Walter!" he shouted. 

"BrothersJ" said the Spreader of Good Tidings, 
addressing Ches and the open door. "Brothers! I want to 
have a little talk with you...!" She paused for this to 
sink in, and taking another step towards the dark interior 
of the store, continued, fixing her eyes intensely upon 
Ches, 

"I want to pass on to you tidings of joy and 




















CHAPTER XXIV 


424 


comfort and truthJ" She had reached the threshold, stood 
peering in through her heavy spectacles. "You want to 
listen, don't you, Brothers?" Previous experience had 
evidently convinced the Spreader that this question should 
be purely rhetorical, for she did not pause for a reply. 

"Let me tell you what peace, what happiness there 
is in being one of our little happy bandl Come, join our 
little group — small as yet, but great to come and more 
valuable than thousands in the eye of the .Lord, let me 
pray for you..•!" 

Abruptly she stopped: her eyes had become 
accustomed to the dark interior of the building, and she 
became conscious that she was addressing ches alone. Ches 
too was disconcerted by the discovery. He had missed the 
movement of the trap door in the floor at the back as 
they entered. He glanced around with consternation, and 
then hurried to the back door. 

"They must of went out the back..." 

But the only person in sight was old Mrs. Kerrigan 
on the verandah. 

"There you areJ" said ches in relief. "You go 
an' save her — she--uh—she'll be glad to see you. V/as just 
sayin'' she wished you'd come aroundi" 

He slipped back into the store and latched the 
door after him. The Spreader of Good Tidings, confused by 










: 




• ' ■ ' * ' ' 


, 

. . • • ■ • : ■■■' ' ' t - ■ - ■ • • 

' 

t • 

. 

. . t .. — . ••• : " 

; ... • . ■: C 'O/'j . .d did'\U.X :\T 

: 

■ 


- . ' r 

■ 


, 











* ■ ; ■; 








^ • • - ' 3 / 



i 


- 
















CHAPTER XXIV 


- 425 - 


the disappearance of her audience, walked up the verandah 
steps, and with a timid glance at the sleeping Griselda, 
rapped on the door, Mrs. ^riddle appeared like a Jack-in- 
the-box: the surprise was mutual. 

"Yer wastin' yer time 'ere I" said Mrs. Priddle 
when informed of the visitor’s message. "The old lady is 
stone deaf an* that difficult, an* Mr. Aerrigan is a busy 
man, an 1 I got this 'ouse to clean before she begins askin' 
me f ow many weeks it's goin’ to take I You better not stay!" 

"Sister," said the evangelist patiently, in her 
rather nasal tones. “The voice of the Lord speaks above 
all others! The moment of salvation is here and now..." 

"’Tain f t my f ome," returned the housekeeper 
doggedly. "You’ll ’ave to ask *er." 

The evangelist took an uncertain step away from 
the door, but before she started to leave, uriselda awoke. 
She sat bolt upright and turned her head from side to side 
as if to deny she had been guilty of leaning back in the 
chair, rhen she fumbled for her knitting, 

"PriddleI" 

The housekeeper linked the dangling cords of 
earphone and batrery. 

"Yes?" 

"Give me my knitting — what's all this?" 

"The linen — I’ll put it back on the shelves..." 



I . 7 ■ ? 

* 















CHAPTER XXIV 


- 426 


The Spreader of Good Tidings joined the conversation. 
"Good morning, dear sister in the faith]" 

G-riselda sat with a gathering frown on her brow, 
but undeterred the evangelist went on, 

"How wonderful it is that you have heard the voice 
of the Lord and wish to testify of your good tidings..." 

"Who are you?" demanded Griselda,"and what on 
earth are you talking about? Pridale, where did this woman 
come from?" 

"She just come..." 

"I am the Helper of the .Lord," announced the 
Spreader, "His Spreader of Good Tidings] Sister, are you 
prepared for the end? Let us pray]" 

But Griselda had got her bearings. Her own 
religion, strict and Calvinistic, had mellowed and broadened 
throughout her life: five years earlier she would have 
listened to the Spreader patiently, but her illness had 
severed the tight-drawn cords of memory, and she had in 
some measure reverted to the severe Scottish tenets of her 
early training, she rose to her feet, seeming for an 
instant to tower over the colorless figure of the other. 

"I don f t want to pray with you]" she said grimly. 

"I do my praying in church and by myself] I know who you 
are — one of those crazy evangelists going around the 





- <u 




- .. 












- 
















. - ..... : ‘ 

* 




. 








» 


: • ■ 

• .. a . -,... 











. 



* ■ 








i 

: 





i 








■ 

- - CZi.. 






















CHAPTER XXIV 


- 427 - 


country getting people all worked up over their souls when 
they ought to be keeping the Ten Commandments an 1 doing their 
daily work! lou ought to be doing something useful — 
raising a family, or earning your keep at honest work! 

Who sent you here?” 

The Spreader was incapable of reply, but Mrs. 
Priddle piped up, anxious to end the scene and settle her 
patient in tranquility once more. 

”1 seen j er come out the back of the store with 
Ches Meade.” 

“Humphj Mighta known iti” Griselda nodded 
significantly. “That boy an 1 his tricks — he 1 11 come to 
no good, xhe less you have to do with Ches Meade, my girl, 
the better it will be for you — 1 tain 11 1 fitting for a woman 
to be running loose around the country making such a 
spectacle of herself and peddling sentimental prayers around 
the community]” 

She shook her knotted finger in the general 
direction of the Spreader. 

”Take my word for it — you'll regret the day 
you ever took up with ches Meadei” 

She sat down abruptly, and spoke again in tones 
that were suddenly thin and tired and old. 

"I guess maybe ches could use a prayer or two, 



.. . • ; . ; ...: J- , • n.■ 

i 

1 ■ ... 

. 

. . ... : ■ . . . 

. 

» . ••; 

.. . • - : ‘ - - .. \ ’ .. .. m • 

, 

; 

- ■ 

..: ' .. . .... - . 

t 

« 

.. / . • , .' o\: J i; 1 ,m.: Mew vi 

. < ' . . ...... 

* 

. .. • v, ^soiiy huv r.x;i „ 5t 

i|$jO 









uHAPTER XXIV 


- 428 - 


no matter who says 'em* I’m sorry I spoke so just now — 
but i’ve done my own praying all my life, and I figure to 
keep right on, i don't intend to die yeti” 

"God bless you, sister, and bring you to a better 
frame of mind!" said the evangelist sadly, as she started 
down the steps, 

"Priddle!" said Griselda sharply, "Don't just 
stand therei Give that woman a cup of coffee and something 
to eat before she goesi" 

After a moment of indecision the Spreader of uood 
ridings followed Mrs. rriddle meekly into the kitchen. 

fifteen minutes later she emerged, and skirted 
with an apprehensive look, the severe figure of Griselda, 
still rocking on the verandah. The Spreader entered the 
store by the back way and found there, to her pleasure, an 
augmented group ready to address, xhey had brought down 
cases of eggs or cans of cream to ship on the train whose 
shrill whistle came faintly from the direction of Bell 
v^reek at this moment: they were waiting for the mail to be 
sorted and to make their purchases. 

The evangelist’s face lit up when she saw Mrs. 
norner and Mrs. -avans in the company, for she had been 
received with courtesy by these women on the preceding day. 

"Good morning, dear sisters!" she said advancing. 




! .... ; 

. . j 

. . • ■ .. . 

: .. j .. , ; t : . .".o', '• 

. 

. 

. 

* 

i 

. . ■ .. . ■ . 

•: •.. ■ .: ... . ;• • ■ 

. 

. 

: . • . . . . - a 

* 

. !: ' : .. .. . : / 

. 

• 5 


. 


. ' 

. • ■ - • 

l. '. . . o :■■■ ' .. :... , , . ■ .... v *: .' . ‘V. 




' 


, 









oHAJPTEn aXIV 


- 429 - 


"It is good to see your faces and to know that you will be 
with us in body as well as in spirit I" 

She glanced with satisfaction around the circle 
of listeners. There were two women, Mrs. Horner and Mrs. 
Evans; There were also Ches Meade, beaky and watchful, 

Joe Griggs with his sad little monkey face, Walter Kerrigan, 
pleasant and nondescript, and young Jim Horner and Tony 
Wilkie. The Evans children and Ethel Horner watched with 
curious interest, the group of adults looked embarrassed 
and nervous. 

"Brothers", said the Spreader mildly, gathering 
her listeners in with a comprehensive glance. "Brothers and 
sisters! And you too, little children in the faith!" 

Fifteen-year old Ethel Horner flushed scarlet at 
the insult of being included in the latter group: her 
brother grinned faintly. The Spreader continued, her tone 
gathering intensity: 

"I want you to listen for a minute — just a 
minute — to tidings of good. I want to pray with you and 
for you, and for all poor sinners of this community and of 
this country, and of this world, who have not yet repented 
and shunned the broad way that leadeth to destruction! 

Let us pray! Let us first pray that your hard hearts may 
be opened, that you may be inspired to shun all luxury and 















v... J V 










; 




. 








t 


t 










CHAPTER XXIV 


- 430 - 


worldlinessl Prayer will restore your spiritual health I 
Prayer will heal your sorrows -- yes, yours, dear sister 
in adversity, and yours, poor fatherless childrenl" 

Her voice was high and sustained in pitch: her 
gaze travelled with strange fixed intensity from face to 
face. The tension that had steadily mounted in the group 
broke as the little Evans girl burst into loud sobs. Her 
mother attempted to hush her, but her own nerves were at 
breaking point. Her weary lined face twitched, she bit 
her lips as the evangelist resumed her exhortation. 

n Let us pray! Prayer will bring what your hearts 
most crave — healing for your wounds, spiritual health, 
salvation. Salvation is open to you all — I want every 
one of you — every one — you, and you, and you, poor 
child, who feel already the urge to be saved. I want each 
and every one -- you brother, and you — every man of you, 
every-" 

“Listen, sisterI” said Ches harshly. “You want 
every man of us —— yeah —— we can all see that I There T s 
better ways of gettin’ yourself a man than prayin’ !“ 

A moment f s shocked silence was broken by a murmur 

of reproach. 

"For shame!“ 

“Ches! Don’t!" 













. 


- 

,, • ... Y - ^ ■■ 

* 

* 

• _ 

! , 

. 















# 


- 




, 





CHAPTER XXIV 


- 4^1 - 


The evangelist flushed crimson, a deep wave of 
color that crept over her sallow face and ebbed. She strove 
to speak — the words quivered on her lips and could not 
make themselves heard. Her audience had shrunk back from 
Ches in disgust, and now he stood the closest to her, sneering 
and arrogant with pale blue, darting eyes. 

Suddenly she straightened, drawing back her narrow 

shoulders. 

"The .Lord forgive you, friend!" said the Spreader, 
and the words rang with strange force in the silence, for 
even the sobbing child was still. "The .Lord forgive you — 
as --as i do;" Her voice faltered and broke, her sallow 
face contorted pitifully, and she wept openly. 

Lhes, taken aback, would have retired quietly from 
the scene. Hut Doris Evans, handkerchief in hand, stepped 
forward. 

"How dare your" she cried passionately, "How dare 
you — you , speak so, Ches Meader lou led my man astray — 
you and your rotten hounds, and your rotten hunting! You 
took him away from his home and his work! Maybe you killed 
him — how do 1 know* Maybe it was one of your rotten jokes 
that made the tractor overturn! maybe he f d be alive today if 
it wasn f t for you!" 

Ches shrank as the accusation rang out. His face 
whitened and his eyes widened in horror. 










- 








: 


->. > 7 < I 








■ 













oHAPTEH XXIV 


- 432 - 


"No*" he said, in a half-whisper. "No* 1 told 
him to stay to the middle of the road an* to hell with the 
steers and he laughed an' pulled over onto the shoulder — 
1 told him..• i" 

Still no one spoke, xhe evangelist was getting 
into her buggy: it rattled away to the south, ohes went 
out, closing the door quietly. He mounted his horse, 

Ousty with the long, wise face, who had been in his too 
brief prime a good animal, and jogged slowly up the road 
and over the track. 











CHAPTER XXV 


- 4^3 - 


A MYSTERY OF THE PRAIRIE 

The late, heavy snowfall had melted, bringing 
much-needed moisture to the ever-thirsty land. Beside the 
grade, the deep ditches were full of muddy, brownish water, 
and along the track a long pool extended nearly to the 
sectionman T s house, un the verge of the shallow water, 

Ruth T n Rose splashed and played. Side by side, red sweater 
and blue, they bobbed and dipped, and poured the cloudy 
slough-water from an old dipper into a lardpail, peering 
intently into it as they did so. 

A puff of wind shivered the glassy surface of 
the water, a long-legged bird sidled and bobbed. A meadow¬ 
lark warbled on a post by the roadside and Ruth f n Rose 













CHAPTER XXV 


434 - 


looked delightedly at each other. 

"Meadowlark!" 

"Put him in our book!" 

And they bent to their dredging once more, intent 
upon finding the first tadpoles of the season. 

Ches rode by, receiving but a passing glance from 
the little girls. They were, with one exception, the last 
to see him alive. 

Half-an-hour later the Horner T s battered old car 
crossed the wooden bridge over the big coulee. Ches f s 
horse was tied to the fence, near the spot where George Evans 
had met his death, and Ches himself, lay just within the 
lease, his red windbreaker making a vivid splash of color 
against the brown grass and the sodden willow leaves. The 
naked willow twigs with their little buds plumping out 
in the warm air tossed above his craggy high-boned face, 
turned up to the blue sky. His pale-blue sightless eyes 
had a look of intense amazement, and just within the circle 
of willow bushes a lean hound, whimpering in a trap, indicated 
the reason why Ches had dared to trespass upon the domain 
of the crazed hermit of the lease. Old Bill T s bullet had 
killed him instantly. 

Old Bill was without difficulty apprehended by a 
policeman from Maverick. Battered, shrunken and furtive, 
he was taken away, the shrivelled little claw-like hands 




V 


; 


i 

. , 



* 



. 

. 

... .. - ' ■- 

. 

. 



' 



• 

< ■ 



. 














. 


- 

. 


/" ‘V t . *J. 

. 









. 

' 






. 

mi! 

■ 








CHAPTER XXV 


- 4J-5 - 


that had not for forty years been out of reach of his old 
Mauser, handcuffed together. All he was heard to say was 
"He come back... I seen him...comin T back...I M 
The official search of Old Bill’s unsavory shack 
revealed his store of bullets, his snowshoes and moccasins, 
his traps, his unspeakable mattress and blankets, and the 
source of his monthly money-order. The latter was a lump 
sum which had been deposited in an eastern bank in uld Bill’s 
name over forty years previously, and as he had been drawing 
on it at the rate of fifteen dollars a month since then, 
it was nearly exhausted. 

One more discovery was made which gave weight to 
the legends that were growing up about the hermit. A twenty- 
dollar gold piece was found, wedged in a crack in the floor 
of the shack under the encrustation of years. For some weeks 
the popular pastime for the youth of Rolling Slopes, and 
some of their elders, was a treasure hunt at Old Bill's shack 
The shack itself was dismantled, the earth around and under 
it, spaded up, but without results. 

Old Bill himself was adjudged insane and committed 

to the asylum. 

The news was startling enough to keep its hold 
upon C-riselda’s failing memory. Mrs. Priddle was the first 


to burst in with it 













. 











. 

* ( ' 

, 

■ 

. 




■ 

' 

. 








. 











CHAPTER XXV 


- 4^6 - 


"What do you think now?" she gasped. "Ches Meade’s 
been shot — Old Bill shot him up there at the bridge...I" 

"Something like that was bound to happen to uhes," 
said Griselda calmly. "Likely he isn’t the first one that 
Old Bill’s shot, either. He’s carried that gun around for 
forty years — bound to use it some time or other!" 

She disconnected her hearing aid as a sign that 
the interview was over, and sat musing. Uhes Meade was dead. 
She had been a woman in her thirties when uhes Meade’s aimless 
life began. He might have been expected to outlive her 
that long. Yet he was dead. The lank, slouching form would 
lie in the graveyard on the hillside before she would. The 
light, prying eyes were closed for ever, the malicious tongue 
that had been instrumental in driving Miss Freddie and Betty 
Allen from Rolling Slopes, was silenced. And that which had 
animated the whole had passed like a wisp of smoke in the 
wind, and who would regret it? Ches had ever played upon 
other people’s weaknesses, dragging to light the things they 
would have kept hidden, exposing the little follies, the 
personal secrets. Scoffer, belittler — his death lightened 
the atmosphere. The reasons for his being what he was 
would never be fully known: they were rooted too deeply in 
his obscure past, in his obscure soul... 




* 





, . 















. 

. 


. 












..A: • r i 

« 


. 









. 










: 




v 

; 












CHAPTER XXV 


- 437 - 


Old Bill was a different matter. He had never 
been one of the community. Rather he was a part of the 
landscape, identified with his corner of the bare and 
rolling lease, with the deep, winding coulee and the 
weather-worn wooden bridge that led the road across the 
steam-bed there. He belonged to the dull-toned autumn 
grassland, the barren winter prairies, and when the dry 
and dusty years sucked life from the fields and range alike, 
Old Biliks stunted, slow-moving figure might have stood 
for a personification of Depression. His grizzled, unkempt 
hair, his scowling, clay-colored features under their thick 
coating of dust and grime, his furtive, yellow-brown eyes 
and padding walk were all long familiar at Rolling Slopes. 
Long familiar, long ignored. Those who knew him were so 
accustomed to him that they did not realize what an extra¬ 
ordinary figure he was: in fact it might be said that 
they had never seen him. He had come regularly under their 
glances of amusement, disdain, or exasperation, but there 
had been little or no acceptance of him as a human being. 

He was an obstacle in the road, an impediment in the post- 
office wicket, the evil old watchdog of the lease, an 
animated clod of the coulee-bottom, but not a fellow being. 
And then, suddenly without warning, he was Death, who had 
lived among them all those years... 











CHAPTER XXV 


- 438 - 


For all these years, mused Griselda, they lived 
almost side by side, Ches and uld Bill. All these years — 
ever since Ches came to tolling Slopes# And suddenly one 
of 'em murders the other, and probably no one*11 ever know 
why. A mystery#.. Uoodness knows there’s enough of mysteries 
in the bush and the mountains, and on the sea: it stands to 
reason the prairie has its mysteries too. Unly you never 
expect the people you’ve known for years to turn out part 
of a mystery... 


une day when the excitement of Ches Meade's murder 
was several months in the past and the treasure hunters 
around Uld bill’s lair in the willows had almost given up 
hope, a couple of the younger lads were prowling about the 
scene of these happenings. They had started home across 
the pasture when the eye of one of them fell upon Vanloder•s 
Well, sole remaining trace of one of the early ranches near 
Maverick. The old well had long been boarded over, and this 
year newer and longer grass grew at its edges than had grown 
there for some time. With the idle curiosity of boys, they 
strolled over and pried up a board to look down the long- 
disused shaft. The water level had sunk during the dry 
years: the glimmer of it could be seen about fifteen feet 
down, and sticking up out of the water were bits of rusty 



• - l : •• 

. ■ , . . T . 

. 

'■ 1 • 

*■ * ’ * 

. 


. 

V 

' 






. 

. 

* 

- 

■ 

* 

. 

... . i 0.r f/X; *U £ C L .U ■■ ■ i>r^J 'IWO 





. 


■ • ..... t - ■ 










CHAPTER XXV 


- 439 - 


iron, instantly an idea sprang to life. 

"If we could get it out...I" said Ted Horner. 

"We better hurry," said his friend, the practical 
Harald Nordstaad. "That car of scrap iron is goin f to be 
moved out pretty soon — been sittin 1 on the siding for 
months•" 

Farmers all over the prairies had been selling 
scrap metal for the past two years: each week, carloads of 
it went out to be shipped to Japan from the West Coast. But 
the demand had ceased: it was doubtful whether the small 
quantity on the sidings at Rolling Slopes would ever be 
collected. Nevertheless the boys were sanguine. 

"A chain — an' a hook..." 

"Mebbe I c f n get a horse — might be something 
big down there!" 

They parted, to return the next day with an assort¬ 
ment of chains and hooks, a patient horse, a hastily-rigged 
windlass. They set to work. 

Out of Vanloder’s Well there came in succession 
an iron wheel, heavily rusted, a length of logging chain, 
an iron whiffletree, a bit of an old harrow, and a section 
of a hayrake, its wide-curved teeth all sprung and bent so 
that it caught on the rotted boards on the side of the well 
as it came up. The horse pulled valiantly, the improvised 



— 

. 

. 


' 


■ 

* 



.... 



I 

, 


* 






■ ; : :•£. •* , :>**«..•. ' 

■ 








CHAPTER XXV 


440 - 


windlass creaked and groaned, and suddenly with a rending 
of timber, the iron came out. impaled on the rusted teeth 
of the hayrake was a certain amount of what had,a long time 
ago, been a man. 

Vanloder's Well was cleaned out thoroughly, and 
the rest of the skeleton brought to light. The skull with 
a bullet-hole in it, was otherwise reasonably intact: in 
the lower jaw there still gleamed a gold tooth. Steve Acker 
had not left Rolling Slopes after all in 1908, and Old Bill's 
long-continued hostility towards prowlers was, in part, 
explained. The actual details of Steve Acker's violent 
end were never made clear, for the crazed hermit was as 
inarticulate upon the matter as the hills and slopes among 
which he had committed two slayings. 

If his presence had given significance to the 
spot he had called his home, his departure with the Police 
had not diminished that significance. The treasure hunters, 
spurred on by the discovery of Steve Acker's body in the 
well, renewed their eager search for the hoard of twenty- 
dollar gold pieces they were convinced was somewhere to 
be found. The fences of the north-east corner of the lease 
suffered in consequence, and finally Harry Wise in exaspera¬ 
tion set fire to the willow glade, the swamp-grass, and the 
remains of Old Bill's shack. The following spring brought 



.. ,, . 

. 

II 

. 

. 





* 

. 

+ 

* 

. 
















CHAPTER XXV 


- 441 - 


up the new grass on the blackened coulee, the willows sprang 
up bushy from their roots, and melted snow lay in the hollow 
of the swamp. Old Bill might never have lived his forty 
years of violence and squalor in the peaceful spot. 

Vanloder’s Well was filled in by Jim Horner, who 
was pasturing stock in the coulee bottom east of the bridge. 
Eor it seemed by the fall of 193 & that the depression was 
indeed over. There had been a fair crop, there was a fair 
market, and people looked optimistically into the future 


once more 















- X 


- 




. 

. 

. - . ’ l ■ * ...... ■; : \ ; 

< .. Jb. L i. JLJVw e.* LOhclafiy 

, 

. •: y 










' t ■ 

. 
















CHAPTER XXVI 


442 - 


LULL 


By August of 1939, it seemed certain that the 
good years had come again. Harvest at Rolling Slopes was 
in full swing, and the crop was fair. ±n the fields along 
the high-graded road that ran north and south past Kerrigan 1 
store, two combines, Burton’s and Wilkie’s, made steady 
rounds. Since the depression that had brought in the use 
of the combine, and of the header to catch what grain could 
be garnered from six or eight-inch stalks in the parched 
fields, harvesting was a simplified matter. Three men 
constituted the crew: two for the combine itself, one for 
the truck. Little threshing was done now in the district. 

Albert Horner's shabby old truck turned up the 
short road leading to the elevators. The smell of autumn, 




. 

- 

. ■■■ r ■ , ■ ' 

■ 




: 






■ 


' 










CHAPTER XXVI 


- 44 3 - 


of grain dust and drying vegetation spiced the air about 
these angular towers, and their shadows lay black for yards 
along the dusty ground, across the tawny weeds. 

Ethel Horner scrambed out of the cab of the truck, 
shook out her skirt and smoothed a wrinkle. 

"Why didn’t you tell me to let you out at the 
corner?" demanded her father. M Been shorter to walk." 

"I forgot," said Ethel vaguely. "It»s nice — 

I don 1 1 mind a little walk. ±»11 be at the corner before 
you get the load dumpedi" 

She waved to the elevator man, and started to 
walk back to the corner, humming a tune that was always 
played now at the dances. 

"When 1 grow too old to dream, 
l f ll have you to remember... 

When I grow too old to dream..." 

But the high notes of the air were too high for 
her contralto voice: she started again on the alto, proud 
of her ability to do so. Victoria Hampton-Keid had taught 
the little girls to sing in parts at Sunday School, six 
or seven years before. Ethel was proficient at taking the 
alto now, with Edythe Hampton-deid or Solveig Nordstaad 
as the soprano. The tune ran on and on in her mind as she 
walked down the dusty road. 



























. 
















. 

* 

» 

' 




' 

. 

. . "> • ■ 1 • ■- 

. 

.' ' ■ 1 X 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 











CHAPTER XXVI 


- 44 4 - 


Ruth f n Rose Patchenko, rearranging the domestic 
life of an ant colony with a stick, giggled when she spoke 
to them, and did not reply, but after she had passed there 
was a murmur, an answering murmur, and a merry burst of 
laughter. 

"Silly little kidsl" said Ethel aloud. Evidently 
Ruth »n Rose were not impressed by her new dignity. Eor 
Ethel was seventeen, and very conscious of the fact, it was 
the only age to be. 

She pulled off the tight red tarn she had worn to 
keep the dust out of her hair, and shook out the loose, 
thick waves, it was pretty hair, and Ethel herself, a taller, 
younger edition of her mother, was a pretty girl. Her face 
was rosy and a litule freckled: her eyes round and dark and 
very bright. With her trim figure, light step, and birdlike 
turn of the head, she was rather like a robin. 

She flicked a speck of dust from her black skirt 
and looked straight ahead of her at a point about ten feet 
in front of her shoes. Thus she was able to glance up with 
the charming tilt of her head and neck as a truck drew to a 
standstill beside her. 

Eric Nordstaad, like his father, never wasted 


words, 


“Where are you going?" he demanded from the cab 


window 



i 


■ 

. , : ■ : V. v - - s ■ Z>-'~ ~ • 

— 

. 

, 

, 

r; ■' ; v: . 1 . . - r . 

. 

. . .. - ■ ' - • ; ■ ■ 

. 

. ; • - 

, 

* 

. 

. - - - ; — • • • 












UHAPTER XXVI 


445 - 


"To see Mrs. Eerrigan." 

"How long are you staying?" 

"Not long — an hour or so." 

"Want a lift home*" said Eric, ignoring as he 
was intended to the fact that Albert Horner, with at least 
three more loads to haul, could quite well drive his 
daughter home. Ethel hesitated as though debating an 
entirely new idea. 

"Why, yes*" she said, "I would like a ride." 

"Two loads from now..." He paused to calculate. 

"Be ‘bout an hour an* a quarter?" 

Ethel nodded. She made no effort to leave, and 
Eric did not indicate that he was in a hurry to move, isiot 
until the roar of Horner f s truck leaving the elevator was 
heard did he start his engine. 

"G-oin 1 to the dance?" he shouted. 

"Yes." 

He nodded, waved, and the truck slid away. A 
moment later Albert Horner passed his daughter without picking 
her up. He turned the corner and drove on, reflecting that 
it might be a waste of money to send Ethel to High School and 
Normal. The notion passed. 

"The only one of the kids I f ve been able to do 
anything for," he mused. "Won T t hurt her to have a bit of 













,. 










. 

♦ 

■ •. 

- 

. 











. 

■■ 

„ 

. 

- 

* 









* 















CHAPTER XXVI 


- 44 6 - 


education, even if she marries Eric.” 

The idea — not a new one — that the two families 
might come to be linked by marriage ratjier appealed to him. 
Eric at twenty was a good farmer, a good manager, a thoroughly 
decent lad. His wife would have things easier than her mother 
had. 

"Especially if this depression breaks," he thought. 
"A run of good years might see us out of the hollow, even 
if we don’t have a war some time in the next ten years... 

This ’itler talks too big for -is boots... The boys’d have 
to go... " 


Ethel had almost reached the store. She was quite 
reconciled to the visit now and loitered dreamily along, lost 
in her own vague thoughts. 

"People always want what they haven’t got," she 
decided sagely. "Jim wants me to go to school because he 
couldn’t. He likes fair hair because we’re all dark... 

He likes Edythe’s hair better’n he does Solveig’s — that’d 
make Sol mad if she knew! ...Eric..." 

Burton’s truck passed her with a prolonged toot 
and she looked indignantly after it. 

"That Toml Showing off•.•1" 

This visit to Mrs. Kerrigan had not been Ethel’s 












CHAPTER XXVI 


- 44 7 - 


own idea. Her mother had insisted upon it that morning. 

"You can go down with Dad in the truck," she said 
briskly, "and come back before supper!" 

"But, Mother...I" 

"Now no nonsense! She’s asked about you two or 
three times and I promised you’d go over before school started 
A visit means a lot to her. If I was as old as Mrs. Kerrigan, 
you’d like to think someone cared enough to call on me, 
wouldn’t you?" 

"All right, Mother." Ethel paused. I can see 
the road from the front room, she thought. When I see Eric 
go down with a load, I’ll start to walk... 

"I’ll get ready," she said agreeably. "What shall 
I talk about? She’s so forgetful." 

"Just anything," replied her mother. "Doesn’t 
matter. Tell her about your plans for next year and what 
you do at school, and talk about Annie Patchenko. She always 
asks about Annie." 

"She called me Annie when I was there when she 
was sick last month." 

Maude shook her head. "I know..." I can’t believe 
it, she thought. She was always so good to me, and so 
energetic and always took such an interest in everything and 
everybody... And now they say she won’t live more than a year. 













CHAPTER XXVI 


- 446 - 


I can’t believe it.... 

No such serious thought was in Ethel’s mind as she 
drifted in leisurely fashion into the store, and greeted 
Walter, with whom she was a favorite. His face lighted up 
when she told him she had come to visit his mother. 

f, Now you run on over I" he said heartily. "She’ll 
be pleased to see you, Ethel — you’re a real favorite with 
Mother, and it’s kind of you to visit her like this." 

Ethel thought so too: it was gratifying to have 
her kindness acknowledged, if only by Walter, who did not 
really count. Her own family had an exasperating way of 
treating her as if she were still a little girl. 

She crossed the little yard, no longer as tidy 
as in past years, when Mrs. Kerrigan was active enough to 
rake the scanty grass and burn the dead curled leaves that 
now were falling from the jagged hedge. 

Mrs. Priddle’s face cleared when she saw Ethel. 

"Well, come in, childJ I’m that glad to see you. 
She’s that difficult today, an’ a visitor is just what she 
needs to take her mind off me. 1 dunno what worries her 
sol" 

Ethel choked back a giggle. The old stale jest 
of the box of chocolates that Ches Meade had perpetrated 
before his untimely end, had outlived him. The community 




























.... 

































. 












. 



. 












. 










CHAPTER XXVI 


- 44 9 - 


still smiled at Griselda T s recurrent suspicion that Mrs. Priddle 
was setting her cap for Walter. 

”••*that difficult I” lamented Mrs. Priddle. She 
paused significantly before opening the inner door. 

"You won’t excite ’er, now, Ethel?" she pleaded. 

"The things I puts up with from ’erl Twenty years I been a 
practical nurse off an T on, an T no one ever talked to me 
like she do!" 

She opened the door, scuttled ant-like across the 
carpet towards her charge with a small shriek of horror. 

"DearJ DearI What a mess we’re ini Just look 
at your knitting! An’ your sweater all buttoned up crooked 
tool People ’d think I never took care of you I" 

"Keep your hands to yourself, Priddle!" 

Griselda’s voice was unexpectedly vigorous. She 
pushed aside Mrs. Priddle f s efforts to arrange her costume 
and sat, perfectly erect, with her grey-stockinged legs and 
slippered feet half-covered with a woollen afghan in spite 
of the warmth of the day. 

She did not respond to Ethel's greeting, and the 
housekeeper hastily linked her hearing apparatus with its 
battery. 

"Seel" she cried shrilly. "You've got company. 

Don’t you wish you’d let me tidy you up a bit?" 




' 










e 




















' 

* 

. ' 

f 

, 




. 

. . 

- 

, 




' 










« 


i 


:.r f- 











CHAPTER XXVI 


- 450 - 


"Don 1 1 shout, Priddle 2" said Griselda Calmly. 

"You do get so excited! Who is it? Oh, it's you, Ethel? 
Come over here, child." 

The imperious tone was softer, the almost sight¬ 
less eyes looked to one side of the girl and past her. 

"Sit here," said Mrs. Pridale officiously. 

"Right here. ±’11 get some tea, shall I?" 

"You might just as well make yourself useful, 
Priddle," replied Griselda drily. 

The housekeeper scuttled away. 

"That old Priddle!" said Griselda vindictively. 

"I declare she’s more trouble than she T s worth. I intend 
to fire her when I’m better! I never did like housekeepers!" 
She sat gazing disapprovingly into space. 

"How are you feeling?" ventured Ethel. 

"I get tired," said her hostess. "If only I could 
see what I’m doing — this knitting —" 

She fumbled beside her and held up a grey square 
of ragged knitting, uneven with dropped stitches along the 
edge. 

"What — what is it going to be?" 

Mrs. Kerrigan tossed it aside disdainfully. 

"Oh — Priddle tells me that all the women in the Club are 
doing them — they make them into quilts or something for 













: 

. 

. c; . w 



C 





















* 

. 


. 




. 


* 

» 

. 










■ 


‘ • ■ 










. 










• - .. 


. ' . 






. - . 
















CHAPTER XXVI 


- 451 


the Salvation Army. I do get tired of it, but the things will 
be finished soon. How T s your grandmother, Annie?" 

"It’s Ethel, Mrs. iierrigan." 

"Of course you are! 1 forgot... Your mother said 
you’d come. She said you'd seen Annie." 

"Yes," said Jithel. "She has a new brown suit -- 
she looked nice. Oh -- you've got her graduation picture 
over there!" 

"I never saw it." said the other. "She'll look 
fine in a nurse's uniform, Annie will. She's a good girl... 

I wish I had Annie here now instead of this silly old woman!" 

She seemed to have forgotten her visitor, and 
sat rocking and humming. 

"Annie said she might get holidays in October," 
volunteered Ethel. "She‘s coming back here for a week." 

Mrs. ^riddle bustled in with a tea-tray. She 
drew up a little table and picked up a couple of squares 
of knitting, each with the needles in it. She held them 
out with a resigned shrug, and turned to G-riselda. 

"Ready for your tea?" 

"You’ve taken your time, ^riddle," said the old 
woman coldly. "Y/hen I’m well again, things’ll be different..! 
’Twasn't this way when you lived here, Annie!" 

"It’s Ethel, Ethel Horner," snapped Mrs. Priddle. 





e 

. 




. 















. «. 


.. 

. 










i 

. 

. 

, 

. 

: . » - 

R|| 









CHAPTER XXVI 


- 4^2 


"Of course., I forgotl" She seemed to shrink when 
she was corrected, to become suddenly older and frailer. 

Ethel was almost angry with the injured housekeeper, but 
Mrs. Kerrigan recovered and spoke briskly. 

"Where’s your mother, child* Maude never comes 
near me any more." 

"She was here yesterday," said Ethel. "She stayed 
all afternoon, Mrs. Kerrigan." 

"Of course! I remember now." And indeed she seemed 
brighter for a moment. 

"She says you *re going away this fall, Ethel — back 

to school?" 

"Yes." 

"Hm-m-m..• Well, that T s good — girls should be 
able to take care of themselves... But don’t stay at it too 
long, child. Girls should get married — 1 was married when 
I was your age, Annie. How old are you now?" 

"I’m Ethel... I’m seventeen." 

"Well — I declare! I thought you were Annie... 

So you’re seventeen... That’s too young! Girls have a lot 
of silly ideas at seventeen. I had a lot of silly ideas — 
thought I wanted to get married. j.t’s a good thing 1 didn’t." 

She paused, and went on as if thinking aloud. 

"I cried when my wedding dress was lost, and my 









CHAPTER XXVI 


- 4^3 - 


chest that came from China*.. 11 

Ethel was interested. A wedding dress of fifty 
years ago — a chest from China? 

"How did it get lost — your wedding dress?" 

"The men dropped it into the water when they had 
to portage," said the old woman dreamily. "It was teakwood 
and too heavy to raise, so there it stayed at the bottom 
of the river, i think they dropped it on purpose — they 
hated that chest because it was so heavy... A silly little 
river called the Wakaw. All those places in the north have 
ungodly names... All my linen and my wedding dress. They 
say teakwood lasts a hundred years buried in the mud — my 
chest will outlast mej" 

She laughed, and Mrs. Priddle took advantage of 
the pause to put the teacup into the veined hand. 

"Be careful*" said Griselda sharply. "What was 
I saying, child — I seem to forget so, these days." 

"Your wedding dress," said Ethel, "I thought 
you met Mr. Kerrigan out west?" 

"So I did — he was clerk at the next trading 
post, and later on for my brother." 

"But how did you know — 1 nean, you had your 
dress made?" 

"Goodness me, of course I didl I knew ±*d get 
married —- girls always did in my day and they counted on it, 










. . • 



c : 

! ' • v 

* 

* 

» ^ 

’ 

. 

* 

* 


, e 
















CHAPTER XXVI 


- 4M - 


and got things ready. We didn‘t care who knew it either. I 
don’t hold with girls nowadays — scared to admit they’d like 
to get married. Vi/hat d’ye suppose God made you for?” 

She paused, exhausted by her own vehemence, and 
Mrs* Priddle shook her head. 

"Excited,” she whispered reproachfully, and aloud 
she said soothingly, 

"There, there! Ethel’s only seventeen yet and she’s 
got plenty of boy friends, I hear. Maybe she won’t get to be 
a teacher at all, eh, Ethel?" 

Ethel fidgeted, crimson-faced. Before she could 
reply, Mrs. Kerrigan spoke again* 

" Boy friends ! Nonsense! I don't like that term. ! 
Either she’s got a beau or she hasn’t!" 

Out came the plug of the earphones with a vicious 
little snick, and Mrs. iverrigan retired into a difiant si¬ 
lence. 

"Oh, dear’." said Mrs* Priddle aloud. "She do try 
my patience something shocking! I declare, if Mr Kerrigan 
wasn’t such a pleasant-spoken man an’ so considerate, I’d 
go — I’d leave this very dayl” 

She seized one of the knitted squares and began 
to pull it down, jerking out the crinkled wool savagely. 

"What are you doing?" gasped Ethel. 

"Starting T er off again," said Mrs. Briddle calmly 






( 
















- 


* j. 

















CHAPTER XXVI 


“ 4^5 - 


as she re-knitted a firm row and rolled up the loose wool, 

"She knits it up an* I ravels it out — she forgets what 
she T s been doin' 1 an* it T s so T ard to keep *er amused.” 

"PriddleI” said the old woman suddenly. "What 
are you doing?” 

The housekeeper jumped guiltily. 

"Just tidying up your knitting a bit,” she shouted. 
"I thought for a moment she T ad f er phones on,” she muttered 
to Ethel. "Somethimes you’d swear she could see an* ’earl" 
"Leave my knitting alone 1” snapped her patient. 

"It never feels the same when you T ve been tampering with it. 
And I want some new wool. I hate this kinky stuff — where 
does it all come from?" 

She felt about on the table for a cookie and 
munched for a moment. 

"Poor stuffI" she said emphatically. "Priddle, 
if you can T t bake good , don f t bake in my house — that’s 

all I ” 

Mrs. Priddle cast up her eyes to the ceiling and 
was silent. Ethel plugged in the hearing apparatus. Eric’s 
truck had just gone for the second load. When it returned, 
she would leave. 

"Tell me about the trip west," she said gently. 
"I didn’t know you came by boat." 

"Yes," replied the other. "I went to the trading 








- 


' ■ i 






V ...-y 


• ? . 



? ... ,1a 


















* 








. 






. 





.. t : . , 












CHAPTER XXVI 


- 456 - 


post Fort Tukikume — it was north nearly to the Athabasca — 
to keep house for my brother.. .± waited three months in Win¬ 
nipeg for the ice to go out...' 1 

” f Ave some more tea?" 

Mrs. Kerrigan passed her cup. "Fill it up, do I” 
she said crossly, "I never seem to get much tea when you pour!” 

"How long did your trip take?" 

"I forget - a long time. We went by York boat down 

the rivers — eight men rowed, and going upstream they had to 
drag it up the swift water with ropes..." 

"It must have been interesting,” said Ethel. She 
eyed her hostess, white-haired, aged, peremptory, who had been 
a young girl, only nineteen, and had taken a long trip by York 
boat through the unknown wilds with the fur-traders nearly 
sixty years before...long before she, Ethel, was born, and 
before her father and mother were born... For a moment she 
was overwhelmed by the assurance that the past had all been 
real — as real as the present... She felt small, and alone, 
and unimportant. 

"...not sorry i left,” Griselda was saying. "I 
like it here... It was too cold in the north... I was glad 
to leave and come out to Edmonton, and then to Calgary, and 
then here. The store. This country was new — I’ve seen it 
grow up..." 

She chuckled at some inner amusement, and added, 







CHAPTER XXVI 


- 457 - 


"I’ve had an interesting life, an* now I*ve got 
time to think about it, l f m surprised how interesting it was. 
i doubt that you young *uns — any of you — *11 have as in¬ 
teresting a life as some of us old folks had. Things is too 
easy for you nowl" 

She leaned back, a little smile on her withered 
face, and disconnected the earphones. 

Mrs. Priddle sighed with relief. 

"There — she*s offi She'll sit like that till 
supper, an f I can do my work in peace an* quietj" 

"Is she asleep?" asked Ethel curiously. 

The housekeeper shook her head. "I don't think so. 
She just dreams like, an* sometimes she says a word or two 
like she was answering a question — creepy it is, to T ear 
T er." 

"I ? ll go now," said Ethel. "Shall I say good-bye?" 

But the housekeeper advised against breaking into 
the memories in which the old woman had submerged herself. 
Ethel bade Mrs. Priddle a decorous farewell, and ran back 
into the store for the few purchases her mother had requested. 
Then she started to walk home, slowly, for she was thinking. 
The visit had altered the current of her thoughts: she, Ethel 
Horner, who was seventeen and pretty, was not, somehow, as 
important as she had been, two hours before. Ethel Horner was 
no longer at the very centre of things: she was now at the end 











CHAPTER XXVI 


- 458 - 


of a long line of girls, who had all been seventeen once, 
but were now older or middle-aged, like her mother, or old, 
like Mrs. Kerrigan. And yet they had all been seventeen 
once... maybe all as pretty, with a boy waiting at the 
corner. 

Nordstaad»s truck that had been delayed at the ' 
elevator put on a spurt, turned the corner and caught up 
with her. Ethel climbed soberly into the cab. 

As it was not a mail day, business at the store 
was slack. Half-an-hour after Ethel had gone, Tony Wilkie 
drove up in the truck and opened the cab door for Mabel. 

He was now seventeen, still slim and small for his age. 

His brown face was deeply tanned and he looked.healthy. 

But his dark, haunted eyes were unhappy, for Tony was still 
unable to meet the requirements of life on his uncle f s farm. 

He lived in dread of Dave Wilkie f s ready wrath, his loud 
voice, his scolding tongue. Today, with the truck to handle, 
while Dave and Stephan Patchenko worked the combine, he was 
doubly nervous. He disliked the heavy truck, feeling it 
was always trying to get away from him, and had no confidence 
in his own ability to manage the hauling. 

Mabel Wilkie entered the store and perched her 
son on the counter. The little boy, now nearly four, wriggled 
down and evaded her outstretched hand, as he ran back to the 







■ 

. .. . . .. :: .. . 

* 





, 



t ; : ~ : - 

■ 

, 


. ; 




. 

• ; . _ V ■ 


■ 

. 




£ 

. 







■ 

. . 




,, rs ’ . ’ 

• 


< 




. 

c 

- . 



• 

. 




* 

. 




. 

i 

_ 







CHAPTER XXVI 


- 4^9 - 


door. But he was too late: Tony had gone with the truck. 
The child remained pouting in the doorway, a ridiculous 
miniature of Dave v/ilkie, with the close set grey eyes and 
shock of fair hair. 

Mabel ordered her groceries, then she too went 
out at the back to speak to Mrs. Kerrigan, hauling her 
reluctant son by one hand. Tony was just leaving the 
elevators. 

Ahead of him down the road walked the youngest 
Patchenkos, hand in hand. Very nearly of an age, very 
nearly of a size, Ruth *n Rose were never seen apart. Their 
brief print frocks, one blue, one pink, fluttered about 
their bare, scratched brown legs, and their bushy, light- 
brown hair blew in the wind. 

Tony, who knew these two of old, having gone to 
school with Olga and Myron Patchenko, pulled up beside them. 

"Want a ride?" said he, arguing quite rightly that 
a minute or two lost on this trip would make no difference 
as Dave knew that Mabel was going to the store and would not 
expect them back quite so soon. 

Ruth r n Rose gazed at him consideringly, light 
blue eyes and limpid hazel beneath identical shetland-pony 
fringes. Then they looked at each other. Riding in the 
trucks was forbidden by their grandmother: even now they 
knew she watched them from the low kitchen window. 





* 

• 

. 

. 



• . . • ... .... ' - « 






* 

' 

. 

. 




. 

. .. 

.. 

J-.... ■ ,J> OTot V s o , • 1 ; ' O :. O 


- . ■. - - : 

. 

• 

: ; ... t 

. 

\ 

.! j - J • .... - 1 •• 


■ 


■ 



. 




* -"O' fe : .' ' to: ; .. 

. 


. 

! • i 

. , 01o 1 ........ 1 




CHAPTER XXVI 


- 460 - 


"Jump in," said Tony and the little sisters with 
another exchange of mischievous looks, scrambled up. 

"Going to the store?" he inquired. 

The answer came piecemeal. 

"Yes." "For coffee." 

No more was said on the brief trip and the little 
girls climbed out the truck soberly and marched with dignity 
into the store. Tony followed, exchanging with Walter and 
Mabel a smile at the expense of his late passengers. Ruth 
f n Rose, their errand forgotten, began to play with Davie 
Wilkie, and not until Mabel left could Walter get them to 
state why they came. 

Albert Horner drove up for gas as Ruth f n Rose 
left the store. He looked after them, and Walter, as 
he hung the hose back on the pump, followed his gaze. 

"Kids do grow upl" he observed. 

"Yes — and we do grow oldI" 


Inside the tall, shabby house behind the store, 
Griselda awakened from her nap. She had not seen Mabel Wilkie 
after all for Mabel, on learning that the old woman was 
asleep, had not stayed. And Griselda had forgotten that 
Ethel had been there. 

She awoke lively and exhilarated, with words upon 
her lips. Mrs. Priddle, hearing her speak, entered and heard, 







CHAPTER XXVI 


- 461 


"... so many things I had to do first.” 

”Did you call me?” asked the housekeeper. 

”And I waited twenty years for a settled home!” 
said Griselda. Her tone was friendly and conversational. 
"And as long after we came here for us to take this trip.” 

Uneasily, Mrs. Priddle realized that the hearing 
aid was not connected. She linked the little dangling plug 
and wires, and spoke again. 

"Did you call me?” 

Griselda started violently. "For heaven f s sake! 
Where did you come from — following a person around!” 

"I T eard you speak...” 

"What of it, woman?” demanded Griselda angrily. 
"Do I always have to be speaking to you?" 

The animation went out of her, and she said 
vaguely, "I was dreaming....! could see again, an* hear the 
sea..•" 

Two tears ran down her wasted cheeks. "Bring me 
the big sea-shell,” she said, and sat silently caressing the 
smooth, pearly lip, the rough spiny bulge of the shell until 
Walter came in from the store. 










CHAPTER XXVII 


- 462 


END UF AN ERA 

There was silence in Mrs. Xerrigan’s parlor after 
her son snapped off the radio. 

"Well, 11 said Walter aimlessly at last. "Nothing 
new. I guess..” 

”1 can’t believe it I” Maude Horner’s voice shook, 
her workworn hands twisted nervously in her lap. "It doesn’t 
seem long since Albert went to the war, and now...” 

She looked at her husband with a sort of desperation, 
and by common impulse they both glanced out to the ball 
diamond. It was Sunday afternoon: ball game by now should 
have been well under way. But there was no game. The men 
and boys who usually played stood around by twos and threes, 









... 


C 

. 

. 

,.« 

l 

; 

. 

t ■ . - . . ' I ' . i ■ ‘M . : \ Lu ... I ' 

















CHAPTER XXVII 


- 463 - 


or sat on the steps of the hall, talking... 

Mrs. Priddle, who had paused in the doorway to 
listen to the news broadcast, stood bewildered, her black, 
shoe-button eyes blank. 

"Me daughter..." She gulped and began again. 

"Me daughter T s got three little ones an' livin' in London— 
if they should start bombing like they done before..." 

Emma Burton had so far said nothing, but her gaze 
had gone to the ball-diamond even before the Horners looked 
that way. She looked at Mrs. Priddle now and spoke, 

"Mother. 

"I T 11 go," said the housekeeper, and began to 
climb the stairs. She pattered across the upper hall: they 
heard a murmur from the sickroom. 

"She's awake i" said Emma. "I f m going up — you 
better come too, Maude. It won’t hurt her, you know, an* 
she might know you. She f d want you to come." 

For Griselda Kerrigan was dying. Whether or not 
she knew it, her family could not tell. In her lucid moments, 
since her seizure a few days before, she was so much her 
old self that they could almost believe that in a day or two 
she would get up, active, imperious, to resume the pattern 
of her daily life as she had lived it in the prime of her 
health and vigor. 











CHAPTER XXVII 


- 4(64 - 


Maude Horner followed her broad friend up the 
narrow, varnished stairs. 

"How can these things happen so suddenly?" she 
wondered. "The war-again- and she is dying, my old friend..." 

It all seemed impossible, war and death, here in 
this house that had always been the same for the twenty years 
since she came to (Janada. And twenty years had dissolved 
in a flash while a man spoke thousands of miles away and 
announced that a war had begun... 

Walter Kerrigan was tiptoeing up the stairs behind 
her: Albert followed him to the foot of the stairway and 
stood looking up. 

Griselda was very much herself at the moment. 

She was scolding Mrs. Priddle. 

"What’s that? Don’t mumble, Priddle1 What did 

you say?" 

Mrs. Priddle f s answer was indistinct. 

"The war? That was over years ago — before Emma 
was married.. •" 

"It’s another war..." began the housekeeper. 
" Another warJ Do you mean to say someone’s gone 
and started another war?" 

Walter turned on the landing and came downstairs 

again, and the two men stood at the foot of the stairs looking 












CHAPTER XXVII 


- 465 - 


out of the glass pane in the front door. In spite of himself, 
Albert Horner smiled. 

"Pity your mothere ’adn’t the raisin’ of ’im," 
said Albert. "’E’d never started a war then, bloody little 
swine I" 

The murmur of voices above was continuous for a 
minute or two, then Maude Horner descended the stairs alone. 

11 ’Ow is she?” demanded Albert. 

"She knew me," replied his wife. She took his arm. 

"We’ll go now, Walter..." 

Outside the house the air was warm and dry, good 
harvest weather. Three of the younger boys were playing 
catch on the ball diamond. Maude gave them a perfunctory 
glance and her eyes filled with tears. 

"Albert," she said. "How long — before the boys 
have to go?" 

"Quite a while." 

"She was just the same," murmured Maude. "She... 
she doesn't want to stay in bed! And Mrs. Priddle’s dread¬ 
fully upset -- she was nearly crying. Mrs. Kerrigan got 
after her — ’Stop fussing, woman1’..." 

"Of course." 

"And then Mrs. Rriddle said that again — about her 
daughter and the bombing. Mrs. Kerrigan said, "Well, send 







CHAPTER XXVII 


- 466 - 


for her, PriddleJ Don T t stand there sniffling — send for 
her! There f s plenty of room here for her! Bombing indeed1" 
H She's still 'erself,” said Albert* 


Upstairs in the tall white shabby house, Uriselda 
had relaxed her temporary concentration upon the vexatious 
realities of life, it was a relief to lie back and rest: 
she even for the moment ceased to resent her inability to 
move more than her head and one arm. She had a vaguely 
satisfied feeling that she had settled some problem for 
somebody — Maude Horner? PriddleV It did not seem to 
matter: there were always people with problems and they 
always came to her, and she usually could help them. 

She turned her head once or twice on the pillow 
and began to investigate her new and startling ability to 
interpret things in her life that had driver before made 
sense to her. Bit by bit, year after year, things were 
coming back, with meaning . It was very interesting, to call 
up people, dead or alive, to see them before her, and to 
be able to understand them. Their actions had purpose, 
their deeds, which had seemed perverse, foolish, or wicked, 
were reasonable. Uddly enough, the dead were clearer than 
the living -- they were not clouded by themselves, the 
blundering selves of those who came and went in the room, 















. 

; 

* 






’ 

* 




. 

■ 

V 

- 




. 




. 


< . ...... o:-J 






















CHAPTER XXVII 


- 467 - 


hung over the bed talking nonsense into the hearing-aid 
that she insisted on keeping plugged in. 

"How are you feeling now?" 

"Drink your nice milkJ" 

"Remember me...?" 

Griselda had answers to all these questions. 

Unsaid, but sensible answers. 

"I f D FEEL FINE IF YOU DIDN’T KEEP ME IN BED ALL 

THE TIME]" 

"NICE MILKl IT’S HORRIBLE 1 TAKE IT AWAY AND 
BRING ME A GOOD HOT CUP OF COFFEE J" 

"I’D REMEMBER YOU QJJITE WELL IF..." 

If you wouldn’t obscure yourself talking, question¬ 
ing, doing... Doing what? 

"Things that don’t matter 1" said Griselda aloud. 
"What did she say?" asked Emma T s voice with a 
note of anxiety. 

"Did she say something?" That was Walter. 

"Mother spoke -- I didn’t catch what she said." 
There she goes again, thought Griselda, amused. 
Worrying againj What’s she got to worry about, Emma? She’s 
never had anything to worry her because she hasn’t lived 
any more’n a cabbage in the garden -- staying here in one 
place all her lifeJ At her age, I hadn’t even begun to settle 
in one placej 







CHAPTER XXVII 


- 468 - 


She pitied Emma for a little while, but recollected 
suddenly something she had meant to tell her daughter. That 
the one thing the younger woman had ever done that really 
mattered was to bring up her children to tell the truth. 

I should tell her that, reflected Griselda... 

Emma’s corporeal self, spoon in hand, fat, fussy 
and concerned, intruded upon Griselda’s half-dream. Griselda 
tried to reject the spoon, failed, swallowed what it contained, 
and, in disgust, abandoned Emma, real and corporeal. She 
dipped again into the past. People came — the dead — Jasper 
Kerrigan. 

"He looks the same," thought Griselda. "I don’t 
know why I worried so about him always trying something new. 

I should have seen earlier that he never held a grudge, never 
said an unkind word to me, and me so snippy at times...He 
always stood by me...I Thinks the sun rises ’round you’ 

VTho said that?” 

For a moment or two she struggled with her memory, 
caught and pinned down the fleeting vision. 

"Mrs. Cottle..." She seemed to see the other woman 
quite clearly -- very clearly. "Is she dead?" thought Griselda. 
"Dead and gone? Dead or gone? Makes no difference really — 
it’s the same thing in a way." 





t .0 L : ... 10. 

» . . .. .. .. 

■ 


. . ' ■ .:. ' . 

„ 

. 

. 

. 













CHAPTER XXVII 


- 469 - 


Mrs. Cottle was no longer blurred and shapeless. 
Sharper at the edges, her image was clear to Griselda, 
distinct, with a dignity of sorts. The dignity of a woman 
who knew when to go — when to let go? There was almost a 
twinkle of fun in Mrs. Cottle’s eye., the fantasy faded. 

Had Leona Cottle ceased to be ashamed of Mrs. Cottle? 
As Griselda lay wondering, the medicine took effect. She 
slept, with the tang of the sea in her nostrils, the rush 
and hiss of waves in her ears. 

Outside the tall house the wind gathered force. 

The little pile of withered leaves that Walter had raked 
together for burning and forgotten, rustled and stirred all 
over. A tiny whirlwind rushed across the yard, lifted and 
twirled the Heaves, tossing them madly with fragments of 
dust and blades of dry grass, spun them over the skeleton 
hedge, into the roadside ditch, over the road and away. 

Across the stubble field it whirled, daring erratically, 
to blow itself out in the far distance... 

An era was coming to an end. 





•• • L '' - 

■ 

. 


. 






^ - < ' 




■.'o’ u ... .. 



: 




• 



- 









, 
























B29757 














