For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



Library of the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 


Gish, aimer Samuel 

A study of the history of the 
Eockey Mountain House area. 












For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


imi* 

mwMmm 
















SivGl20;MJC ' 

T :ir -''J:: U A xn-i'c;:\A vO 




a 01SA0 .'A' AAi AOt AlAiiA/M 

■ ; ; 3ffvt J X'-TODC .:)SoxW I 






. . - gin, £ ails 9 . if ■ 9X08 : 

: 


•u ... J 




















































UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 


have read and recommend to the School of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis entitled "A STUDY 
OF THE HISTORY OF THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE AREA’*, 
submitted by Elmer Samuel Gish, B.Ed., in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Master of Arts. 



Professor 


Professor 



Date tkh 





: ' ' . ■ 

. 

. . 

' 

. 










ABSTRACT 


The first part of this thesis traces the 
history of the fur trade in the Rocky Mountain House 
area from 1799, the year in which the original trading 
post was built near the mouth of the Clearwater River, 
to the abandonment of the last fort in 1875. For many 
years Rocky Mountain House remained the most south¬ 
western post in the Saskatchewan District, having been 
retained by the Hudson’s Bay Company after the Union 
of 1821 to accommodate the Blackfoot tribes. 

The second portion describes the period of settle¬ 
ment as well as the economic and social development of 
the community. Finally, the gradual emergence of Rocky 
Mountain House from a village to a town is outlined. 


oooooOooooo 











A STUDY OF THE HISTORY 


OF 

THE ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE AREA 


A Dissertation 

Submitted to the School of G-raduate Studies 
In Partial Fulfilment of the Requirements for the Degree 

of Master of Arts 

fry 

Elmer Samuel G-ish 
Edmonton, Alberta 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyofhistoryofOOelme 



*b 

\ 95 ^ 
# SI 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Chapter 1 Page 

A TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEY OF ROCKY 
MOUNTAIN HOUSE AREA IN 1810 . 1 

Chapter 11 

THE PROBLEM OF THE FORTS .. 9 

Chapter 111 

LIFE AT THE FORTS . 28 

Chapter IV 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 

BEFORE THE UNION OF 1821 . 4l 

Chapter V 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 

AFTER THE UNION OF 1821 50 

Chapter VI 

MISSIONARY WORK AT 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 71 

Chapter Vll 

EARLY SETTLEMENT 88 

Chapter Vlll 

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 108 

Chapter IX 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF 

COMMUNITY LIFE 130 

Chapter X 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 

IN LATER YEARS 155 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 167 

APPENDICES 171 
















.. 







* 






















PHOTOGRAPHS AND MAPS 


1. The Last Fort.27A 

2. The First Three Churches.87A 

3. Typical Pioneer Buildings.92-A 

4. Typical Pioneer Buildings.92B 

5. Old Town.IOIA 

6. Old Town Today.IOIB 

7. The Hamlet and the Village.I03A 

8. The Town.I03B 

9. The Last Spike.II2A 

10. An Early Crop.I22A 

11. The Atlas Mill and Lumber Yard.I26A 

12. The Nursing Home and the Hospital.I39A 

13. The Old Confluence School House.I43A 

14. The First Village School.I43B 

15. The Beach at Crimson Lake......I48A 

16. The Pioneer Ranch at Crimson Lake..I49A 

17. The David Thompson Bridge and the Ferry.X6lA 

18. Aerial View of Rocky Mountain House:* Book Pocket 

19. The Location of the Forts: Book Pocket 

20. The Rocky Mountain House Area: Book Pocket 


oooOOOOOOooo 



































CHAPTER ONE 


A TOPOGRAPHICAL SURVEY OF 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE AREA IN 1810 

Rocky Mountain House has been a popular name in the 
history of western fur trade, and its use to designate several 
different posts on the east side of the Rocky Mountains has 
probably caused readers of Western Canadian history as much 
confusion as Fort des Prairies, a generic term successively 
or simultaneously shared by various establishments in the 
Saskatchewan District* There were five posts which at some 
time or other were called by the name of the mountains. (1) 

SI These establishments belonged to the North West Company. 

The most notable Rocky Mountain House was the establishment 
near the confluence of the Clearwater and the North Saskatchewan 
Rivers, but there was also an important Mountain House situated 
on the west bank of the Athabasca River between Brule Lake and 
Jasper Lake, a short distance above the mouth of Moose Creek 
and, it would appear, on or near the site of Miette station 
on the Canadian National Railway. This fort, more generally 
known as Jasper House, was built about 1800, and bore a relation 
to the Yellowhead and Athabasca Passes like that which the 
original Rocky Mountain House maintained to the Howse Pass. 
Another Mountain House was erected by William Henry closer 
to the Athabasca headwaters near the mouth of the Miette river 
in the vicinity of the present town of Jasper. This post was 
also known as Henry House, but was on a different location 
from that of the present Henry House situated lower down the 
Athabasca River on the Canadian National line. A fourth Rocky 







2 


Mountain House stood on the Peace River, though it was better 
known as Hudson's Hope, David Thompson, who visited this 
place in 1804, gave its location as latitude 56° 12* 54"N., 
longitude 120° 38' 03” W. Finally, the fifth fort so called 
was built in 1800 by John Thomson (2) on the Mackenzie River 
(2) A clerk in the North West Company, 

below Fort Simpson, "N. of latitude 62° and somewhere about 
Longitude 123°, in view of the mountains." (3) 

*(3) Elliott Coues, NSW LIC-HT ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE GREATER 

NORTHWEST, (New York: Harper, l897)Vol.2, p,642, footnote 5. 

Eventually the name Rocky Mountain House applied only 
to those posts, and later to the town, which were located near 
the forks formed by the North Saskatchewan and its great trib¬ 
utary, the Clearwater. Though Thompson in his "Narrative" 
occasionally called it Clearwater House or "Riviere I'Eau 
Claire House", this fort seems never to have had another name 
that came into general use. Acton House was built by the 
Hudson's Bay Company about half a mile from the original North 
West post, but it appears to have been abandoned in 1821, and 
had always been overshadowed by Rocky Mountain House. 

Peter Pangman was the first white man known to have 
seen the mountains from this region of the Saskatchewan District, 
but his impressions of the country do not appear anywhere in 
print. Fortunately, Alexander Henry the Younger left a brief 
account of the westward view from the hill on which Pangman 
stood, as well as an informative description of the area in 
general. From Pangman's Pine, about four and a half miles 
above the mouth of the Clearwater, Henry viewed the winding 






■ 

. 

■ 

. 


■ 

■ 

. 

- 

' 

. 

. 

■ 







- 3 - 


course of the North Saskatchewan River, the most important 
geographic feature of the Rocky Mountain House area. The 
primary source of the North Branch is Snow Dome in the 
Columbia Ice Field, where it begins as an icy cascade 6000 
feet above sea level, but swells rapidly as it gathers 
numerous mountain streams into its channel. The Howse River, 
which arises near the historic pass known by the same name, 
the Siffleur River, the Clina River and the Ram River, con¬ 
siderably increase the volume of the main artery as it descends 
in a north-easterly direction, and then almost due east from 
Skunda Creek until it meets the Clearwater where it turns 
abruptly to the north. The forks formed by these two rivers 
marked, at the turn of the nineteenth century, the focal 
point of the south-westernmost fur trading region in British 
North America. 

The Clearwater, which derived its name from its 
extremely transparent water, is a lengthy tributary and 
during a swift and tortuous course drains a large area into 
the North Saskatchewan. It arises in the mountains near Mt. 
Willingdon, not far from the headwaters of the Red Deer and 
Bow Rivers, but taking the opposite direction from the latter, 
it follows a north-easterly course until it reaches a point 
about one mile due west of Butte where it is deflected north¬ 
ward to the Saskatchewan. The Clearwater was not used as a 
waterway but an old Piegan trail followed its pine-studded 
banks for some distance upstream. Thompson used this path 
on several occasions during his explorations to the south. 

In the late autumn of 1800, accompanied by Duncan McG-illvray 


. 















' 


■ 

: ; ■ U 

. 

... 

. 

. 

- 


• • 

. 

. 












, 

. 

. 

. 

. 


■ 

' 

. 

' 

. 






- 4 - 


and four other men, he set out on horseback up the Clearwater 
trail, and eventually reached the Bow and Spitehee Rivers 
which he partially explored. (4) 

'(4) J.B.Tyrrell, DAVID THOMPSON 1 * * * 5 6 S NARRATIVE (Toronto: Champlain 

Society. 1916) 

The more important channel was, of course, the North 
Saskatchewan itself for it provided the traders with a canoe 

route to Fort Augustus and Fort Edmonton, as well as a con¬ 
venient passage through the mountain barrier to the west. 

The original North West fort stood on the north bank of the 

Saskatchewan about one and a half miles above the mouth of 
the Clearwater, on a site formerly covered with "aspen and 
pine". By 1810, however, much of the surrounding brush and 
wood had been cleared by axe and frequent fires, revealing 
to Alexander Henry "a grand view of the Rocky Mountains, 
lying nearly south-west". (5) At this point the distance be- 

(5) Coues, op. cit.. p.7Ql. ~~ " ~ 

tween the river banks was 250 yards, and during highwater the 
whole bed was flooded. In its ordinary state the channel 
"was only 30 yards wide, and interrupted by a strong rapid, 
where the water [rushed] among some large stones, forming a 
cascade whose perpetual roaring | made j it a dismal neighbour 
in this solitary spot." (6) According to Henry*s journal 

(6) Ibid. O.701« ~ ~~~ 

this was the first true rapid, though not the last, to be 
encountered above the forks, and navigation by canoe became 
more dangerous and tedious as one proceeded upstream from the 











. 




< 

, 

• * 


. 

. 












- 

. 

. 

























. 






































- 5 - 

fort. Canoes usually had to travel with half cargoes en 
route to the Kootenay Plains, and often the traders found it 
necessary to use pack-horses to convey their supplies. 

The Journey was actually less arduous in winter as 
dog sleds could move over the frozen river quite easily, 
except when piles of broken ice obliged the travellers to 
take to land. Henry the Younger used "a kind of cariole 
made by stretching a wet parchment of mooseskins over a few 
timbers, to which it was well secured with a line.” (7) 
m Ibid, p J ?f7 . — 

Ensconced in this vehicle with a buffalo robe to cover him, 
the rider enjoyed considerable comfort, and the climb was 
not so noticeable as when one had to paddle against the swift 
current. 

About half a mile above the fort a light gray stone 
(some of it tinged with yellow and white) was visible in the 
precipitous banks; this stone was used to sharpen ’’axes and 
other tools” and was found to be as excellent as European 
grindstones. Further upstream near the location of Pangman*s 
Pine, nature provided a white clay of fine quality which was 
used for whitewashing the buildings. The banks of the Sas¬ 
katchewan satisfied still another important need; three 
hundred yards below the fort, coal was tumbling into the 
river where the strong current undermined the bank. In other 
places the river had uncovered solid beds of coal which were 
"several feet thick for several acres". Often it was mixed 
with "earth, clay and stones", but in its pure form the smith 
used Saskatchewan coal in his forge, where, combined with 









* 

t 

. 

' 

* 

■ 

. 

. 


... . - .. .. , • . : v l ■ - . 

' 

- 

. 




. 

. 

. 

. 

, 




- 6 - 


"equal proportions of charcoal made from birch or aspen", 
it produced sufficient heat to mould or repair axes and other 
implements. (8) 

T8T~'ibidrr~p rtoi « ~~ ~ ~~ ~ 

Below the forks the North Saskatchewan was full of 
shoals and islands some of which were wooded, but the river, 
being wider here, was evidently fairly navigable, though the 
current was swift. Henry travelled down it in a boat with 
six other men in October, 1810, on his way to meet David 
Thompson who at that time was near Boggy Hall (9) just below 

(9) A former North West post abandoned in 1808 owing to the 

depletion of beaver in the area. 

the present Blue Rapids. The country on both sides of the 
river he described as "dreary"; "thick woods (of pine and 
willow) and burnt tracts occurred in many places, with ... 
small ... plains at intervals." (10) There were many vestiges 
TToT Coues. p.651. 

of beaver as well as the dung and sporn of "buffalo, moose, 
red deer, cabbrie jantelope and grizzly bear", (ll) The 

(11) Ibid, p. 653 V ~ 

latter beasts were so numerous in the Rocky Mountain House 
area as to be a nuisance to the hunters, for often the bears 
devoured the carcasses of the buffalo before the meat could 
be conveyed to the hunting tents. Henry*s supply of furs in 
November, 1810, consisting of "720 beavers, 33 grizzly bears, 
20 buffalo robes, 300 muskrats, 100 lynxes," (12) provides 

(12) ' fbi'i, p.660. 

further evidence of the type and quantity of wild life that 
inhabited the country surrounding Rbcky Mountain House. 

































- 7 - 


The region of the upper Saskatchewan, particularly 
west of the fort, was heavily wooded, though small meadows 
occurred at intervals and bogland was common. The wood was 
chiefly pine of several varieties, hut aspen, willow and 
birch were also plentiful. Henry speaks frequently of "a 
Rocky Mountain pine" which was used extensively in building 
as the wood was soft, easily worked and when well seasoned 
acquired a yellowish hue with a "smooth glossy surface". 

This region was noted also for its white spruce which was 
later used by the Hudson*s Bay men in the construction of 
the plain but serviceable York boats. Henry mentions another 
tree which he called "juniper or epinette rouge"; it was 
frequently found on bogland, but being scraggy served no 
constructive purpose. 

Among the pines there grew a kind of horse-tail, 
four inches high and very thin, which was nourishing food for 
the horses but this plant was useless for winter foraging "as 
it became so brittle that when the horses scraped away 
the snow with their hoofs, they broke the grass into small 
pieces". (13) The problem of feeding the horses during the 

(13) Ibid. p77QQ7~ I ~ ~ 

winter was indeed a constant worry, especially when snow was 
so deep it prevented the animals from foraging for the long 
coarse grass in the swamps. 

Pine is known to thrive on barren ground, and Henry 
even then recognized the inferior quality of the soil describ¬ 
ing it as "in general sand, covered with thin black mold which 
: he did not suppose would answer for agriculture." (l4) A 

(14) ibid~.7oo. ~ mm 











. 










- 8 - 

local supply of fresh vegetables, foodstuffs too bulky to be 
brought in from elsewhere, would certainly have relieved the 
monotony of their meat diet, but climate and sparse soil had 
combined against the horticultural efforts of the fur traders. 
Although gardens were frequently started, they "never produced 
anything worth the trouble". In that frosty and barren country 
potatoes were the only vegetable that ever reached maturity. 
Little did they dream that early varieties of grain and veg¬ 
etables together with new farming methods would some day make 
agriculture a productive industry in the Rocky Mountain House 
area. In the opinion of Alexander Henry this austere land, 
through which the waters of the upper Saskatchewan had cut a 
valley more than 150 feet deep, was useful only as a habitat 
for the beaver and other game so essential to the welfare of 
the fur trader. 


000000O000000 


. 

, ' \ , . 

. 

. 

. 

* 

- 

. 

' 

. 












CHAPTER TWO 


THE PROBLEM OF THE FORTS 

The task of determining the correct number of trading 
posts in a certain area, and their precise locations, is ex¬ 
tremely difficult unless the ruins are still visible. At 
Rocky Mountain House there were long periods when no journals 
were kept, and therefore it is possible that unrecorded 
removals took place when sanitary conditions became bad and 
buildings deteriorated, when firewood could no longer be 
easily gathered, or, perhaps, when frequent threats of 
Indian attack prompted the traders to seek a stronger defensive 
position. A number of places near the North Saskatchewan 
have been suggested as possible sites of old trading posts, 
but some of these are undoubtedly the remains of "whip saw" 
pits or Indian graves. There is, however, some evidence to 
support the assumption that at least three separate posts 
were built near the mouth of the Clearwater River during a 
period of seventy-six years. 

The North West Company was the first to establish 
a fort on the upper Saskatchewan, probably early in the fall 
of 1799, and in October of the same year James Bird of the 
Hudson*s Bay Company erected Acton House close by. After the 
Union of 1821 **Rocky Mountain House*', a name originated by 
the Canadians, became the official designation of the single 
trading post kept open in this region, but one cannot assume 
that it was Acton House which was vacated under the new organ¬ 
ization. Francis Heron, who was in charge of Edmonton House 
for a number of years before the coalition, frequently used 







„ . ■: . 
v > 

' • • ■ 










i 



' 











H 




. 

















. 


k 























- 10 - 

"Mountain House" in referring to the Hudson’s Bay post, and 
Anthony Feistel, who kept the Edmonton Journal during the 
outfit of 1820-21, also used both names. Indeed, several 
months before the news of the coalition reached Fort Edmonton, 
the term "Acton House" had disappeared altogether from the 
pages of the journal. 

Considerable confusion naturally arises from the in¬ 
discriminate use of one name in connection with two different 
establishments, making it difficult to decide with complete 
certainty which fort continued in operation. It is known, 
however, that "in the Athabaska country, predominantly the 
land of the North-West Company, the English posts gave way 
to the Canadian", and "on the Saskatchewan the Canadian posts 
gave way to their English rivals." (l) If the reorganized 

U) A.S.Morton, A HISTORY OF THE - CANADIAN WEST (London: 

Thoma,s Nelson & Sons Ltd., n.d.) p.466. 

company followed this arrangement without variation, then 
the post that was retained on the upper Saskatchewan must 
have been Acton House. On the other hand, if this was not 
done, it is possible that an exception was made in the case 
of Rocky Mountain House which for two years after the Union 
was under the charge of former Northwesters, Chief Traders 
John Rowand and Joseph Felix la Rocque, who, if they had any 
choice in the matter, would probably have elected to keep the 
Canadian fort. (2) 

T£T See Appendix A for ""List of Men in Charge of Rocky Mountain 

House After the Union of 1821". 

Not until 1864 and 1866 do Edmonton and Rocky Mountain 
House journals reveal that a new fort was under construction, 








. 






. .( 





























11 


but a different post might have been built sometime during 

one of the intervals for which no records are available, (3) 

__ 

(3) The Hudson's Bay Company Archives in London have only 

the following Rocky Mountain House journals: 

(a) 1828-29, kept by Henry Fisher, clerk, 

(b) 1829-30, kept by Henry Fisher, clerk, 

(c) 1830-31, kept by Henry Fisher, clerk, 

(d) 1836-37, kept by John E. Harriott, chief trader. 

(e) 1866-68, kept by John Sinclair. 

Considerable building activity was going on throughout the 
winter of 1830-31. During this season Henry Fisher, clerk 
in charge, refers frequently to the construction of a "New 
House", a "trading shop" and an "Indian House", but his entries 
give no indication as to whether an entirely new location 
had been selected at this time. Dr. Hector's journal tells 
us that in 1858 Rocky Mountain House was situated about half 
a mile from the mouth of the Clearwater River, clearly on a 
different site from that of the original North West post 
which was nearly a mile further upstream. Though the Archives 
Department of the Hudson's Bay Company could find no definite 
information relevant to the location of Acton House, there 
is a possibility that this post stood in a corner of Mrs. C. 
Brierley's farmyard, (about 200 yards below the North West 
fort) where a depression containing stones and decayed logs 
used to be visible. It is equally possible, however, that 
Acton House was situatedion the same spot as the fort which 
Dr. Hector visited in 1858, and which was temporarily aban¬ 
doned three years later by Joseph Brazeau. 

The first fort, (4) like subsequent posts, was sit- 

(4) There is some variation in the estimation of the distance 

of the original fort from the mouth of the Clearwater 
River. D.J.B.Tyrrell states that this post "was situated 













12 


on the north side of the North Saskatchewan River, a mile and 
a quarter above the mouth of the Clearwater River”. (DAVID 
THOMPSON'S NARRATIVE OF HIS EXPLORATIONS IN WESTERN AMERICA, 
p.190.) Elliott Coues, on the other hand, states that Rocky 
Mountain House "stood on the left bank of the North Saskatchewan 
1-|- m. above the mouth of the Clearwater r., and 3 m. below 
Pangman's tree". (NEW LIGHT ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE GREAT¬ 
ER NORTHWEST, p.640.) The latter undoubtedly accepted the 
distance mentioned by Alexander Henry in his journal: "About 
Lg- miles, or as I measured it, 23 minutes walk on the ice, 
below the fort, on the S. side, is the entrance of the Clear- 
water river, 56 yards wide fr o m bank to bank. .." Coues. p.702 . 

on the north side of the Saskatchewan River, presumably to 

lessen the danger of surprise attack by the.warlike Blackfoot 

tribes from the South. "David Thompson's observations placed 

this house in lat. 52° 22' 15" N., long. 115° 07' 00" ¥. (5) 

(5) Elliott Coues, NEWTlGHT ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE 

GREATER NORTHWEST. V.2. p.640. 

but Alexander Henry states that it was situated in latitude 
52 ° 22' N., longitude 115° 17' W. (6) 

T 6) ibid.-p/rooT" 1 ~~ 

Alexander Henry the Younger left us the following 
information concerning this fort's position: "Our establish¬ 
ment stands on a high bank on the N. side of the river; ... 

This spot was formerly covered with aspen and pine, which 
have been cut down for the use of the place, leaving a large 
open space. Frequent fires have aided much in clearing away 
the wood and brush, so that we now have a grand view of the 
Rocky Mountains, lying nearly S.W., and apparently running 
from W.N.W. to nearly S.S.E. Opposite the fort the river is 
180 yards wide, while the distance from the bank on which the 
fort stands to the opposite bank is 250 yds; at high water 
the whole of this space is covered, and flows with a strong, 
rapid current. The channel in its ordinary state, as it was 
















' 













13 - 


when we arrived last fall, was only 30 yds. wide, and inter¬ 
rupted by a strong rapid where the water rushes among some 
large stones... This rapid is the first interruption of any 
kind in approaching the mountains. There are many below this 
which can not properly be termed rapids, being merely sloping 
beds of rock and gravel. n (7) 

(7 ] Ibid, p.701. 

Several hundred yards above Mrs. C. Brierley’s farm¬ 
yard, and closer to the river, there exists a site, now part 
of a productive field, on which the original fort probably 
stood, for it corresponds fairly closely with the above de¬ 
scription. However, the bank is not as high as one would 
expect; perhaps erosion and the construction of a road bed 
along the north side of the river have worn it away to a con¬ 
siderable extent. Although the rapids may have moved over a 
period of 140 years, they still exist and, like those in 1810, 
form the first major break in the current above the mouth of 
the Clearwater. When the virgin soil in this vicinity was 
turned up sometime in the 1920s, there was some indication 
that buildings had stood here many years before but unfortu¬ 
nately exact information concerning the remains is no longer 
available. (8) 

(8) Interview with Russell Brierley, son of the late Chester 
Brierley who broke this land. 

Different opinions have been expressed in connection 
with the origin of this post. According to Dr. J.B.Tyrrell, 
"Rocky Mountain House was built by the North-West Company in 
1799 under instructions from John McDonald of Garth, who was 
























- 14 - 


living at that time at Fort George/ 1 (9) and Elliott Coues 
(9) J. ~B. Tyrrell, p.190. 

states that H it was built by John McDonald of Garth in 1802/'(10 
TlO) Coues, p.640. 

Morton, in his HISTORY OF THE CANADIAN WEST, does not mention 
John McDonald of Garth in connection with the founding of the 
original fort, but asserts that it had been built under the 
instructions of Angus Shaw shortly before his retirement, (ll) 

(11) A.S .Morton. A HISTQRY~~QF 'THE "CANADIAN WEST", London, p.4667 

Duncan M'Gillivray took charge of Rocky Mountain House in the 
autumn of 1800, using it as a base during his search for a 
practicable pass through the Rockies. (12) 

( 12 ) Ibid. p.4(d6. 

In the course of his journey from Gordon House to 
Edmonton House in 1799, James Bird of the Hudson*s Bay Company 
made the following entry in his journal on September 7: ”... 

Met a man who was sent from Buckingham House to inform us that 
Mr.McDonald of N.W.Co. had arrived there the 5th Inst. & that 
he intends to build near the Rocky Mountains." (13) James 

(13) H.B.O.Archives. B.eo/a/q. 

Bird makes no further reference to John McDonald*s plan to 
build near the mountains in this year, but on September 14 
he writes that "some Canadians who went up to build last 
Summer 1799 after remaining there near a month were reduced 
to the necessity of returning to this place for want of pro¬ 
visions". (14) It is apparent from Bird*s journal that the 
Il4) Ibid. ~ ' ~~ ' * 

Hudson*s Bay Company was well aware of the North West Company's 
activities on the upper Saskatchewan, and that both companies 


































. 

. . 


. 












- 15 - 


were penetrating this region almost simultaneously. 

It was not until 1802 that John McDonald of Garth 
made his appearance at Rocky Mountain House, succeeding the 
ailing M'Gillivray as wintering partner in this district. 
McDonald, who proceeded to enlarge the fort and strengthen 
its fortifications, was again associated with the post in 
1807 while David Thompson was making preparations to cross 
the Rocky Mountains. 

In the autumn of 1810 Alexander Henry the Younger 
was sent from “Terre Blanche’ 1 to take charge of the Mountain 
House, and as his party approached from the South he noticed 
that it was well adapted for defence “as the blockhouses com¬ 
manded the fort for some distance”. (15) Smoke was rising 
HbV Coues. P.70ir 

from within the stockades and groups of whites (16) and Indians 

(l6) Thompsons Columbia brigade had been intercepted at 

this point by the Piegan. 

viere loitering near the gate. In addition to the usual 
bastions and high stockades ”a number of loopholes were made 
in the shop and garret, bearing directly upon the Indian Hall”. 
This precaution made it possible for the traders, if a quar¬ 
rel should arise during the bartering, to destroy a large 
number of Indians before they could leave the building, and 
the guards in the bastions could fire upon the rest as they 
retreated toward the gates. 

The plan of Rocky Mountain Rouse was probably simi¬ 
lar to other trading posts, containing within its rectangular 
palisade living quarters for men and officers, a kitchen, a 
blacksmith shop, storerooms for furs and provisions, and a 






_ 

. 

. 

, - ' 1 

. 

. 

. 

. 


! I : ■ 










■ 




. 




. 


. 














! 




. 











- 16 - 


trading shop adjoining a long Indian Hall. (17) These build- 

(l7) There are no dimensions available for Rocky”Mountain 

House buildings, but the Indian Hall built at lower 
White Earth House under Henry’s instructions was 70’ x 
20'. (Coues, p.6l6). This post, also called New White 
Earth House or lower Terre Blanche, was situated at the 
mouth of White Mud Creek, and it was from this fortthat 
Alexander Henry travelled overland to Rocky Mountain 
House in the autumn of 1810. 

ings were constructed from local spruce and pine. Logs of 

appropriate lengths were prepared with axe and adze, while 

square beams and crude boards were manufactured by means of 

a large "whip saw” operated by two men, one standing in a 

pit and the other on ground level. Local clay i^ras used to 

fill the chinks in the walls, and roofs were daubed with gum 

and then covered with mud and pine bark until not a drop of 

rain penetrated them. 

Henry immediately set his unwilling men to renovating 
the whole establishment which, as usual, had fallen into a 
state of disrepair during its abandonment. ’’The rotten old 
coverings of the houses” had to be torn off and replaced, de¬ 
caying buildings had to be repaired and new ones built. Planks 
also had to be sawn so that the gates of the palisade could 
be mended. All the men, including Henry himself, lived in 
tents while the houses were being completed. By the middle of 
November the third and last house was finished, and after the 
accumulation of ”chips, wood, dirt and snow” had been cleared 
off the floors, the men for the first time since their arrival 
in early October felt the security of a solid roof above them. 
The fort gates were finished by the beginning of December and 
the bastions had also been put in some order, though in Henry’s 
critical opinion ’’they were wretched buildings for defence”. 




■ 

■ 

1 p 

* • 

< . 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ . 

. 

, 

. 

. 







• 









. 



... 

• . ' ; ' /" ; .... V ;«:■ L. i i 






- 17 - 


He complained also of the chimneys, every one of which smoked, 
rendering the houses hardly less uncomfortable than the tents. 

Acton House, which was also frequently referred to 
as Mountain House, was a competitive post situated close to 
the North West fort. This post was probably given its original 
name in honour of its founder James Bird, who was a native 
of Acton in the County of Middlesex. Actually little inform¬ 
ation is available concerning the establishment itself, as 
there are no records for Acton House, but the Edmonton jour¬ 
nals refer to it frequently. 

James Bird arrived at Fort Edmonton from Gordon 
House on September 8, 1799, and his journal contains a number 
of references to the preparations which preceded the founding 
of Acton House, as well as to the activities of the Canadians: 

Sept.11 ”... Sixteen men getting ready to go off in one 

Boat & Canoe to Build near the Stoney Mountain..." 

Sept.12 ”... Sent off 4 men in a canoe to accompany the 

Canadians to where they are going to build near 
the Stonney (sic) Mountain..." 

Sept.13 "... at 8A.M. nine men embarked in a boat loaded 

with 30 pieces of Trading goods to proceed up the 
river to Where the Canadians intend building near 
the Stoney Mountain." (18) 

(18) H.3.0.Archives. B.60/a/5. 

Finally James Bird himself set off in the afternoon 
of September 14 toward the Rocky Mountains with six men and 
a number of horses, in company with a party of Northwesters. 
Apparently they travelled overland in a southerly direction 
until they were in sight of the banks of the Red Deer River, 
and then went west until "the snowy Summits of the Stoney 
Mountain like vast heaps of white Clouds appeared in view." 

On September 24 James Bird writes: "... at 7A.M. we set off 










- 18 - 


and at 9 arrived at the side of the Saskatchewan river, rode 
across and encamped near the place where we intend ■building../' 

By the beginning of October the construction of Acton 
House was under way. James Bird, however, did not remain 
long enough to see much of the fort completed, for on October 
5 he makes the following entry in his journal: "Employed get¬ 
ting ready to return to Edmonton House as my presence seems 
to be no longer necessary here, the amazing bad accounts we 
had received of this place both from Indians & Canadians oc¬ 
casioned my coming up in case any difficulties should have 
taken place..."(19) Two days later Bird "embarked with three 
(19) Ibid, 

men & an Indian in a Canoe for Edmonton House", and it appears 
that he was never again in charge of the post. 

Trading during the winter season must have been sat¬ 
isfactory, for on May 14, 1800, "G-ilbert Laughton and nine 
men in a boat & two parchment Canoes carrying 46 bundles of 
Furs and eight bags of pemmecan arrived at Edmonton from Acton 
House after a tedious passage of nine days owing to the amazing 
shallowness of the water ..." (20) 

T20) Ibid. 

Alexander Flett took charge of the new post in the 
summer of 1800, but it is evident from the lists in the York 
Factory account books that Acton House was not operated from 
1802 to 1805. In the latter year John Peter Pruden took 
charge of this fort and kept it in operation ,in spite of the 
hostile Blackfoot, for two years. 










. 



7, ; 


<’■ 



















■ 




■ 

7 X. " 






























- 19 - 


James Bird arrived at Edmonton House from Oxford 
House on September 22, 1806, to ’’hear of fresh massacres 
among the Indians & even that an attack on Acton House was 
threatened...” Two men and an Indian were immediately instruct¬ 
ed to visit the fort to discover whether its people needed 
any assistance. They arrived back on October 3 "with the 
agreeable intelligence that Mr.Pruden and his men were all 
well and everything safe”, though seventy Blackfoot Indians 
had been at the post, and in such an unfriendly mood that 
"Mr.Pruden was under the necessity of Trading articles from 
them of little value and paying them better than he would 
have done under other circumstances”. (21) 

T 21) H, 3,C .Archives , B . 60/a76. _______ _ 

Acting upon instructions from James Bird, J.P.Pruden 
remained there during the summer of 1807 until he had gather¬ 
ed the furs from the Indians who were in the habit of taking 
their catch to that place. He then abandoned Acton House 
and retired to the "North Branch” (22) to push forward the 

(22) k ‘North Branch" ref era "t’cHa post established by the” 

Hudson’s Bay Company at the mouth of the Brazeau River 
in 1807. 

building, attend to the Indians and acquire some knowledge 
of that part of the country. It appears that "North Branch" 
was the only Hudson's Bay post that was operating above Edmon¬ 
ton House during the outfit of 1807-1808. 

Acton House remained closed during the next two 
years but there is evidence that it was again opened in the 
winter of 1810-11, for Alexander Henry mentions that the 










- - 

■ 

■ "" ■ ’ « , : ' 

V ' : , : ' ' 


’ 


‘ 

. 

. 

* 

, 

* ... 

. . : 

. 




■ 

. 








' 














, 


: 






■ - 









20 


"H.B. people" had come "to winter alongside of" him and the 
following entry in the Edmonton journal confirms its re-estab- 
lishment: 

1810, Nov. 1 : "Bent off Mr.Macfarlane with one man for 
Acton House (which it has been found nec¬ 
essary for the season to resettle) to assist 
Wm. Flett who is in charge of that place and 
to give him every instruction the new system 
( 23 ) of conducting the trade requires..." 

( 23 ) "The reorganization of the Hudson's Bay Company under 

the guidance of Lord Selkirk's brother-in-law, Andrew 
Wedderburn (Colvile)." A. S. Morton, p.422. 

Though the trade was not always gratifying, the post was re¬ 
tained until 1813, principally to accommodate the Piegan. By 
keeping the Piegan chiefs in a friendly mood during the spring 
and summer of 1811, William Flett and his men had done much 
to assure the safe return of Joseph Howse who had been trading 
in the country of the Flathead Indians. 

In the summer of 1819 the Hudson's Bay Company re¬ 
luctantly reopened Acton House to satisfy the Muddy River 
Indians whom the Northwesters were endeavouring to woo by 
building a post on the west side of the Rocky Mountains near 
their territory. (24) During the ensuing season the beaver 

(24) H.3.G.Archives. B.60/a/l8. 

trade remained good, though the quantity of other furs had 
greatly diminished, and it was decided to keep Acton House 
in operation through the winter of 1820-21. But with rumours 
of coalition in the air, it is likely that competition between 
the two mountain posts had by this time lost much of its orig¬ 
inal vigour. 

The first descriptive account of Rocky Mountain House 
after the Union of 1821 was left by Paul Kane, who visited it 




















21 


in 1848 during his wanderings through the North-West. He 
also painted an interesting picture of an Assiniboine Gamp 
with the outline of the fort visible in the background. Im¬ 
pressed by the appearance of the establishment, the artist 
wrote: "This fort is beautifully situated on the banks of 
the Saskatchewan in a small prairie, backed by the Rocky 
Mountains in the distance... It is built like most of the 
other forts, of wood, but with more than ordinary regard 
to strength, which is thought necessary on account of the 
vicious disposition of the Blackfoot tribe..."(25) 

( 25 ) Paul Kane, WANDERINGS OF AN ARTIST (London:1859; Toronto, 

1925) p.287. 

In the winter of 1854-55 Henry John Mo'oerly was in 
charge of Rocky Mountain House, and his reminiscent account 
again stresses the formidable aspect of the fort: "Mountain 
House was surrounded by the usual 28 foot (26) pickets, with 

(26) Pickets were usually less than **28 foot" high. This may 

be a typographical error. 

a block bastion at each corner and a gallery running all a- 
round inside about four and a half feet from the top, each 
bastion containing a supply of flintlocks and ammunition. 
Within was a square formed by the officers' houses, men's 
houses, stores and general trading shops, a square between 
this and the pickets for boat-building, with forges and 
carpenter-shops, another square for horses and a fourth 
for general purposes. 

"There were two gates, the main gate on the north 
and a smaller one on the south side leading through a narrow 












■; 



' 


■ 





j 
















22 


passage the height of the stockade into a long hall. In 
this hall, amid speech-making, the Indians were received, 
the calumet passed and two glasses of rum of medium strength 
were given to each Indian. They were then turned out and the 
gates closed against them, the only means of communication 
being through two port-holes some twenty inches square open¬ 
ing through the stockade into a small blockhouse through which 
the trade in rum was conducted." (27) 

(27) H. J.Mo'oerly and W.B.Cameron, WHEN FUR WAS KING” (London: 

Dent. 1929) Chap.Vlll, p.34-55. 

Three years later Dr. Hector of the Palliser Expe¬ 
dition arrived at the same place, which by that time was in 
a very ruinous condition. Though primarily interested in the 
geological formation of the area, he made various references 
to the fort itself, describing it in the following terms: "It 
is a roughly constructed group of log huts, consisting of a 
dwelling house, stores, and workshops, and all surrounded by 
a palisade. The woodwork is very old and rotten, and the 
whole place is tumbling to pieces..." (28) 

(28) Journals, Detailed Reports, and Observations Relative to 

the Exploration by Captain Palliser, of that Portion of 

British North America ... (London 1865) on.62-63. 

According to the observations of Dr. Hector this post 
stood on the north bank of the river, which was 150 yards wide 
at this point, and about half a mile above the Clearwater 
River in latitude 52° 29* N and longitude 115° 2* W. (29) 

l29) Papers Relative to the Exploration by Captain Palliser ~~ 

of that portion of British America ... (london. 1859) n.25. 

Three years after Dr. Hector’s visit, the difficulties 
involved in procuring provisions and dealing with the Blackfoot 




























- 23 - 

Indians made it impossible to maintain the post any longer, 
and Mr.Brazeau, who had been in charge of Rocky Mountain 
House since the fall of 1855, retired to Fort Edmonton with 
his staff early in the spring of 1861, 

In 1930 the late Chester Brierley ploughed up the 
remains of a trading post several hundred yards below the 
cairn and on the same side of the Saskatchewan River. Nails, 
spikes, large hinges and chimney stones were unearthed, and 
the presence of charred logs led Mr. Brierley to conclude 
that the buildings had been destroyed by fire. (30) It is 
(30^ Interview with Russell Brierley. Ferrler, Alberta. 

possible that an unrecorded establishment once stood here, 
but the place marked by the stones which still lie in the 
field corresponds closely to the site described by Dr.Hector 
in 1858. 

In 1864 the Hudson*s Bay Company was once more mak¬ 
ing arrangements preparatory to the reopening of the post, 
and early in the new year Mr. Hardisty and a party set off 
for Rocky Mountain House. H Pacquette & Wm. McLeod, Carpenters, 
were sent up with Mr.Hardisty to build the New Fort at the 
Mountains... ** This last establishment appears to have been 
situated less than a quarter of a mile above the older fort 
which was inhabited while the new buildings were under con¬ 
struction. It is not known when the traders moved into their 
new quarters, but the carpenters were still working on them 
in 1867. (31) 

(31) H.B.O.Archives. B.164/2/5. 










« 




, 

. 

. 

. 

. 







__ .■ . 






. 










- 

. 

. 












. 



































- 24 - 


Captain Butler visited Rocky Mountain House in 1870 
while commissioned by Governor Archibald of Manitoba "to 
establish some civil authority in this western district, and 
to enquire into the cause and extent of the epidemic of small¬ 
pox among the Indians." 

The fort then stood in a level meadow which was 
cleared of trees although dense forest lay around it for 
some distance. In his interesting account of the area Butler 
writes: "The Mountain House is perhaps the most singular spec¬ 
imen of an Indian trading post to be found in the wide terri¬ 
tory of the Hudson f s Bay Company. Every precaution known to 
the trader has been put into force to prevent the possibility 
of surprise during *a trade*. Bars and bolts and places to 
fire down at the Indians who are trading abound in every di¬ 
rection: so dreaded is the name borne by the Blackfeet." (32) 

(32) William F. Butler. THE GREAT LONE LAND (London: lS73)p.2Sr. 

In January, 1872, the same post was visited by 
Deputy Surveyor W. S. Gore during the course of his survey 
of Hudson*s Bay Reserves in the North West Territories. In 
a letter to Donald A. Smith, dated November 25, 1873, Gore 
left the following laconic description of the Company*s prop¬ 
erty: 

"500 acres fronting on the north bank of the Saskatchewan 
River. Valueless for farming purposes being a mossy 
swamp covered with Spruce and Tamarac, however, as at 
Pigeon Lake a few acres surrounding the Fort are good. 

The Fort is new and substantially built but there is 
very little trading done there now the "Blackfeet" are 
finding a market nearer their hunting grounds." (33) 

T33) H.B.C.Archive~5.T57l3T~ " ~~ . 











' ■ . •- 

■ v ' . i .' I; : 

1 o . 

. 














. 


















. 






1 






















- 



tri 









- 25 - 


Finally in 1875 Rocky Mountain House was permanently 
abandoned. Correspondence between Richard Hardisty at Edmon¬ 
ton and Commissioner James A. G-rahame at Fort Garry reveals 
that they were discussing the possibility of rafting at least 
one of the buildings down the Saskatchewan River to Fort Pitt, 
providing the cost of transport "would not exceed $200.00", 
but it is not known whether this difficult project was ever 
carried out. 

With the departure of the fur traders the fort was 
left to the whims of the Indians who may have been responsible 
for the fire which demolished the greater part of the estab¬ 
lishment in 1882. J.B.Tyrrell (3^) visited the site in 1886 

(3^-) Dr.Tyrrell was mistaken in his belief that the post he 
photographed in 1886 was the original fort, and this 
error is retained in the inscription on the cairn, p.88. 

and his photographs of the ruins indicate that only four 

chimneys, two bastions, and one building were standing at 

that time. (35) 

Td5~) Tyrrelir^DAVID ~THQMPSQ¥^ .^ 

Enough of it remained, however, to remind the pio¬ 
neers of the twentieth century that a different kind of 
frontier movement had preceded the arrival of the homesteaders. 
This vestige of the fur trading era gave the newcomers a 
feeling of continuity with the past, which they were proud 
to acknowledge and determined to preserve. The local news¬ 
paper reminded its subscribers of the historical background 
of their region; the Pioneer Society held annual picnics in 
the shadow of the two remaining chimneys, and the citizens 
of the growing village insisted on retaining the name "Rocky 




























. 









. 









- 26 - 


Mountain House”, instead of accepting "Lochearn" which 
certain railway officials had tried to foist upon them. 

As the years passed it became apparent that the old 
fort would disappear altogether, unless someone assumed re¬ 
sponsibility for its preservation. Displaying characteristic 
interest in the history of their community, the village coun¬ 
cil and the local branch of "The Native Sons of Canada" 
solicited the aid of the Historic Sites and Monuments Board 
of Canada, which eventually provided for the erection of a 
cairn dedicated to those resourceful traders who had been 
associated with Rocky Mountain House. 

On a pleasant November afternoon in 1931 a large 
body of citizens, in company with the Honourable J. E. 
Brownlee, Alfred Speakman, member of Parliament for Red 
Deer, Mr. D. Duggan Conservative leader in the Alberta Leg¬ 
islature, and certain other visitors, gathered before the 
chimneys to witness the unveiling cermony. Rev. C.E.Reeve, 
pastor of the local Anglican Church, presented a brief 
account of the post T s history, at the conclusion of which 
Premier Brownlee made several fitting remarks and then, 
attended by Mayor Kirby, unveiled the cairn. 

The chimneys, however, remained in a ruinous state 
for eight years after the dedication, a,nd no effort was made 
to renovate them until Mr.Kirby, the postmaster in Rocky 
Mountain House, undertook to bring the matter before the 
proper authorities at Ottawa. When the Hon. James A.MacKinnon 
visited the town in the autumn of 1938, Mr.Kirby showed him 










































- 27 - 

the ruins of the Hudson's Bay Fort and urged that they be 
preserved. In the winter of 1939 Mr.Kirby appealed directly 
to the Historic Sites and Monuments Board through one of its 
prominent members, Mr.Justice Howay of New Westminster, B.G., 
and money was immediately made available for the renovation 
of the chimneys. On September 13 of the same year an inter¬ 
ested group of men, consisting of Judge Howay, Mr.C.H.Snell 
of Red Deer, W.E.Payne, K.C., and a representative of a 
Vancouver newspaper, arrived in Rocky Mountain House to in¬ 
spect the work that was being done on the old Hudson's Bay 
fort. (36) Mrs. C. Brierley also made a substantial contri¬ 
bution to the project by donating to the Board sufficient 
land to include both the cairn and the chimneys. A sturdy 
iron fence now encloses this interesting plot, and visitors 
may enter the grounds through a turnstile gate. The people 
of the Rocky Mountain House area are justly proud of their 
historic landmark which is the only fort site in Alberta 
with chimneys still standing. 

'( 36 ) ^Mountaineer*'. Rocky Mountain House. Sept. 13. 1939> 


ooooooOoooooo 






. 








. 





■ 










x-i 










' 




' 


, - . . ' ' : ■- " ' ■ •' 

-;; , .. .. ' •: ' ■ - - - : ' • 






' 








\ 

















-27A- 



This cairn, dedicated to David Thompson, was erected 
in 1931 by the Historic Sites and Monuments Board. 


THE LAST FORT 



Only two chimneys remain of the formidable establish¬ 
ment which was abandoned in 1875* 





















CHAPTER THREE 


LIFE AT 'THE FORTS 

‘Trading was the paramount activity at all posts, hut 
if an establishment were to have any degree of permanence, 
the officer in charge and his men had to be concerned about 
such matters as maintenance, defence and the procuring of 
food. Details of such activities at the first Rocky Mountain 
House may be gleaned from the journals of Thompson and Alex¬ 
ander Henry, the narrative of the latter being especially 
rich in personal observations. 

While waiting for an opportunity to send off the 
Columbia brigade, Henry bartered with suspicious Piegan for 
M what trifles they had". One band possessed a buffalo hide 
of peculiar colouring: "the hair on the back was dirty white, 
the long hair under the throat and fore legs iron gray, and 
the sides of the belly were yellow." They were also the 
proud owners of a diminutive cream-coloured stallion, "three 
feet seven inches high, and four feet four inches from ear to 
tail". This extraordinary creature, with its white mane and 
tail, must have caught the superstitious fancy of the Indians, 
for Henry was unsuccessful in his bargaining. 

He ruled the natives with a strong hand, rightly con¬ 
vinced that firmness was the best policy in dealing with the 
restive Piegan whose constant fear was that the white men 
would supply their western enemies with arms and ammunition. 
His position was further complicated by their insistent de¬ 
mands for drink. The Indians of this region had already 










« 






















■ 





* 









. 





, 





/ 
















• 




• 










. 












• 






.-rr. 


. 











. 


* 








• 


. 













- 29 - 


acquired a craving for the traders* diluted rum, and they 
were always ready to engage in "a drinking match'* • On more 
than one occasion, Henry expressed chagrin over the indis¬ 
criminate use of alcohol, which was steadily driving the 
natives to debauchery and laziness. Yet, while deprecating 
the evil effects of rum on the once noble red man, he was 
not prepared to abandon its use entirely as David Thompson 
had done, (l) When a letter from M Terre Blanche*' brought 

(1) Douglas MacKay, THE HONOURABLE COMPANY, (Edinburgh Uni- 

versity Press. 1937) p.24-3. 

news of "the Act of Parliament prohibiting spiritous liquors 
among the Indians", Henry remarked with some concern that 
"this law may ease the trader, but will not enrich him." (2) 

(2) Coues. p.663. 

However, since there was no police organization to enforce 
it, this measure had little effect on the liquor trade. 

After Thompson and his men had at last departed in 
search of a new route through the mountains, affairs at the 
fort returned to normal. The journal entry for November 20, 
1810, described the routine of an ordinary day: "Desjarlaix 
hunting; seven men out to raise dog trains; four laying up 
canoes and cleaning the fort; one making a wood train; one 
off for meat, one cutting wood, one carting, one making kegs. 
Our canoes are much split by the frost, and four large axes 
broke to-day, being nearly as brittle as glass. Desjarlaix 
killed nothing, as the animals about the fort have all been 
roused by men going for trains, searching for horses, etc." (3) 

(3) Ibid, p.665. . 










' ■- ' • r; 

. 

.. ' . 

- 

. 

. 

' 

■ 

. . 







. 












■ 






. 

. 

: 








. 


. 















- 30 - 

All hands not required for the hunt or other special tasks 
were employed in repairing the "rotten old buildings". An 
energetic worker himself, Alexander Henry could not tolerate 
idleness, and he became extremely impatient with the ihdolent 
fellows who were proceeding so slowly with the necessary 
repairs. 

Though the struggle for furs and survival in an aus¬ 
tere environment left little leisure time, the usual activity 
around the fort was interrupted to celebrate Christmas Day 
and the New Year. The type of entertainment was as crude as 
the primitive surroundings. The men danced as well as they 
could with the Indian women and the event usually ended in 
an orgy of drinking. On January 1, 1811, Henry wrote: "A 
dance at our house in the evening, which did not break up 
until two o’clock, when I gave our people a treat of liquor, 
one pint per man and they began to drink•" (4) No work was 

done on the morrow as "the men were drunk all day and went to 
sleep". 

It is not clear whether any men from Acton House were 
present on this occasion to enjoy the merry-making, but the 
people of the two posts had kept Christmas together. They 
seem to have been on the best of terms even though the inten¬ 
sity of the struggle between their great companies was steadily 
increasing. They carried mail for each other to and from 
"Terre Blanche", Edmonton and Fort Augustus, occasionally 
shared provisions and sometimes hunted together. On December 1, 
1810, Henry wrote, "The H.B. hunters passed up on the S. side 
to join ours at Jolies Prairies", and on another occasion 


















- 

. 
















. 

. 

. 

* 


. 




. i ' * 

. 

r 


















• • ■ , . ■ ■ 









remarked, "Our hunters are tented near Meadow river with 
La Corneille, the H.B.Co. hunter." Perhaps the consciousness 
of their common insecurity in a remote area, where natives 
were not always friendly, nor food supply constant, inspired 
this neighbourliness which was a pleasant departure from the 
violence and ill-will that frequently occurred in other parts 
of the North-West during the same period. 

After the union of the two companies, Rocky Mountain 
House was not kept open during the summer as the volume of 
trade was then very small, but in the fall of the year, when 
the trading season had been inaugurated by the arrival of 
the York Factory brigade, the Rocky Mountain House "outfit" 
would leave Fort Edmonton to spend another winter on the upper 
Saskatchewan. In the Rocky Mountain journal for 1830-31, 

Henry Fisher records such a departure and gives an account 
of his outward trip. 

The party, consisting of twelve men with twenty-three 
horses to carry supplies, left Edmonton on September 18, 1830, 
and following fairly closely the route taken by David Thompson 
in the early spring of 1800, and by Alexander Henry in Septem¬ 
ber, 1810, it struck overland to the Battle River, in the 
vicinity of Ponoka. The brigade then bore south-west, passing 
the heavily wooded area on the east shore of G-ull Lake, until 
it reached the Medicine River where the route turned due 
west toward the mouth of the Clearwater. Owing to the burden 
of winter provisions and the difficult terrain, the journey 
was slow and interrupted by frequent encampments. After 
twelve days of tedious travelling, Henry Fisher and his men 


- 

-- 

; - 






- 

, . * 







• 






■ 



; •; ■ - " , 




•- 






. 

' 









. 

■ 

. 

.. 















■ , 









*- 


. 

. 


- 32 - 

at last ’'got across the Saskatchewan River and immediately 
began to repair their fort.” ( 5 ) 

( 5 ) Rocky Mountain House journal, 1830-31,” "H. bTg.A rchives . 

Since the fort was situated on the north side of the 
river, it would appear that Fisher, like Henry in 1810, 
approached Rocky Mountain House from the south, appar- 
entlv crossing the Clearwater near its mouth. 

During the two previous trading seasons Fisher's 
men had made many repairs, including renovation of the bastions 
and gates and the erection of a number of new store houses. 

Yet so rapid was the deterioration of the establishment while 
unoccupied that an extensive building program had to be car¬ 
ried out in the winter of 1830-31. On the morning after 
their arrival "three men were working at the New House and 
eight at the trading shop”, and several days later "two men 
were chopping logs for the new house, five covering it with 
Hay and earth, two planing Boards.” (6) The Hudson's Bay 

(d) Rocky Mountain House journal, 1330-31, H.B.C.Archive^ 

London. 3.l84a/3. 

men soon put their house in order, and though repairs were 
similar to those carried on by Henry for the North West Com¬ 
pany in 1810, Fisher did not find it necessary to complain 
about the indolence or carelessness of his men. 

It was essential that the buildings be adequately 
restored in order to protect the inhabitants from the sever¬ 
ity of winter weather, and the stockade and bastions had to 
be strong enough to discourage Indian attack. Major repairs, 
however, were usually completed within a few weeks after 
arrival, and maintenance then became a secondary concern. 

The difficult problem of gathering provisions, on the other 























. 















. 






- ; 

. 





































- 33 - 


hand, was persistent, and when game was scarce in the moun¬ 
tain area, the search for food would even temporarily super¬ 
sede fur trading. The brigade took with it a supply of such 
dry provisions as flour, sugar, tea, rice, raisins, and spices, 
but these stores were carefully rationed as they had to be 
brought by boat all the way from York Factory or the Red River 
Settlement. Some posts like Fort Edmonton raised their own 
vegetables in local gardens, but at Rocky Mountain House, 
which was abandoned in summer and where early frosts preven¬ 
ted successful gardening in any case, meat was the only food 
that could be procured locally. According to the reminiscences 
of Henry J. Moberley, the daily ration was “eight pounds of 
fresh meat, 2§ pounds of Pemmican, or three of dried meat, 
to each man” and “train dogs were fed two fish or four pounds 
of fresh meat daily." Each woman attached to the fort re¬ 
ceived one half of the male allowance and each child a quar¬ 
ter. (7) 

(7) Henry™ J . Moberley & William B. Cameron, ifHE^TFUR WAS~KINGr7~ 
(London: Dent, 1929) p.83. 

There is no record to indicate whether this generous 
ration was adhered to at Rocky Mountain House, but during 
the winter large quantities of fresh meat were brought into 
the fort. On January 21, 1837, Chief Trader Harriott made 
the following entry: “Fine clear weather, the three men sent 
to the half breed hunters on the 16th arrived with 4300 lbs 
of meat. They inform us that there is about the same quantity 
of meat remaining on a Scaffold but the Horses are so much 
reduced carrying meat on their backs all winter that they 
are unable to return, as there is no snow it cannot be got 






- 

■ 

. 

• * K. 





. 

. 

fo \ r- 1 .. .. ‘' : •. J 







- 34 - 

home with dogs* The Stone Indian Hunters are pitched on 
the Bank of the River which enables us to get the meat they 
collect with sleds." Earlier in the same month the fort 
had procured "10,000 lbs. of meat" from the Stoney Indians 
and halfbreed hunters, and this large reserve was stored in 
the new ice house. (8) 

T8) Rocky Mountain House journal, 1837-38, H.B.C.Archives^ 

London. 

The traders at Rocky Mountain House endeavoured to 
keep a large store of meat on hand, for the buffalo was a 
migratory animal and years of hunting had gradually reduced 
the quantity of other game, both large and small, which had 
once been so plentiful in the neighbourhood of the fort. To 
guard against future want, therefore, the man in charge 
grasped every opportunity to augment his meat supplies, even 
when the provision book showed a large reserve. The fort's 
own hunters were constantly on the alert for fresh game, 
but dried buffalo meat, grease and pemmican were usually 
obtained from the Indians, whose womenfolk were skilled in 
the various processes of meat preservation. In the fall of 
1854- H. J. Moberley used generous quantities of rum to ne¬ 
gotiate such a trade with the Blackfoot near the fort, for 
Chief Factor Sinclair at Fort Edmonton had warned him "that 
provisions were likely to be short that year in the North."(9) 
(9) WHEN FUR YfAS KING-, p.37. 

Surplus dried meat and pemmican, being less perishable and 
more easily carried than fresh meat, could be transported to 
Edmonton without too much difficulty, and from there distrib¬ 
uted to needy posts. 







■ 





* 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

' 

, l .. 


. 

. ' • i. .. . ... 

• ■ * . - 

. 













35 - 


The people at the Mountain House depended heavily 
upon Indian supplies during the winter season, for often 
the Company hunters were unable to keep them adequately 
stocked with fresh meat owing to the poor state of their 
horses and the deepness of the snow. In the winter of 1861 
the Blackfoot refused to bring either provisions or furs to 
the post, and there was consequently such a scarcity of food 
that Mr.Brazeau and his people were in real danger of star¬ 
vation. Fifty horses had died at Rocky Mountain House and 
since the buffalo were very far off and the men had too few 
animals with which to haul meat, "they had no alternative 
but to leave the Fort.' 1 (10) 

(10) Edmonton journal, March 28, 186l, H.B.C.Archives,London? 

Again, on August 27, 1864, the Edmonton journal 
makes reference to starvation at Rocky Mountain House: 

"Abraham Salois with a whole party of poor starving people 
arrived this morning from R.M.House; received a letter from 
Mr.Brazeau in which he says they have not got a mouthful of 
provisions at the place, and begs hard for a small supply 
from here. 11 In 1866 the fort was kept open in the summer, 
and because game was scarce, men, women and children ex¬ 
perienced serious privations until October 16 ’’when 40 carts 
and a wagon containing the outfit for the mountain arrived 
in the forenoon.” (ll) During the month of August “all hands 

(11) Rocky Mountain House journal, John Sinclair, 1866-68, ' 

B.184a/5. K.B.C. Archives. London. 

set snares for rabbits to keep themselves alive", for they 
did not have “a single load of ammunition". 







' 


* , 

. 

. 













■ - . * 













- 36 - 


Usually food was plentiful enough to enable the 
traders to remain throughout the winter season. The trade 
was conducted with considerable formality, for the chiefs 
and their bands felt honoured by the ceremony with which 
the white men received them, and the traders themselves 
found that consistent procedure simplified the problem of 
discipline. 

When a party of Indians arrived on a trading visit 
to Rocky Mountain House, their camp was customarily pitched 
at some distance from the fort "and braves having piled their 
robes, leather and provisions on the backs of their wives or 
their horses, approached in long cavalcade/ 1 while the offi¬ 
cer in charge went out to meet them. The gates of the fort, 
however, were kept closed in case of treachery. In 1870 Cap¬ 
tain Butler described the trading routine as he saw it at 
Rocky Mountain House: "While the Indians make ready for trad¬ 
ing, preparations are completed in the fort — communication 
cut off between the Indian room and the rest of the buildings, 
guns placed up in the loft overhead, and the men all get 
ready for anything that might turn up; then the outer gate 
is thrown upen, and a large throng enters the Indian room. 
Three or four of the first-comers are now admitted through 
a narrow passage ihto the trading shop from the shelves of 
which most of the blankets, red cloth, and beads have been 
removed, for the red man brought into the presence of so 
much finery would unfortunately behave very much after the 
manner of a hungry boy put near candies on a counter ——. 

The first Indians admitted hand in their peltries through 







- 37 - 


a wooden grating, and receive in exchange so many blankets, 
beads or strands. Out they go to the large hall where their 
comrades are anxiously awaiting their turn, and in rush an¬ 
other batch, and the doors are locked again. The reappearance 
of the fortunate braves with the much-coveted articles of 
finery adds greatly to the excitement. This procedure con¬ 
tinues until all the peltries are sold, or - until all 

trading goods are exhausted." (12) 

(12) William F. Butler, THE GREAT LONE LAND (London: Burns 

and Oates. 1907) p.284. 

Trade usually went on without incident, but pre¬ 
cautions were seldom relaxed, for the behaviour of the Indian 
was unpredictable, especially when trading goods were scarce 
or if the natives had insufficient peltries to purchase the 
amount of goods they desired. The unit of trade was one 
beaver skin, usually designated as "made-beaver 11 , and every 
other skin or article was evaluated according to this standard. 

Though the Hudson*s Bay Company preferred to reduce 
the use of alcohol as much as possible, Jamaica rum continued 
to be an important factor in Rocky Mountain House trade, be¬ 
cause of stiff competition from the Americans who traded 
freely in their own brand of liquor which they called whisky. 
Apparently it was customary to treat industrious Indians 
upon their arrival at the fort, for on Nov.3, 1836, Harriott 
wrote: "An old Stone Indian with his family arrived and as 

they have made tolerably good hunts they received a present 
of nine gallon keg of mixed rum." (13) The^e is no evidence 

(13) Rocky Mountain journal, 1836-37. H,B«C.Archives, London. 
























. 


. 


I . 

* 

. 

. 



















■ 


■ 






. 






■ ■ 

■ 


. , 



















■ 











- 38 - 


in the Rocky Mountain House journals to prove that spirits 
were exchanged for furs and provisions, hut Henry Moberly 
admits such practice while the post was under his charge. 

’’Dried and pounded meat, cakes and bladders of grease, 
buffalo hides, dressed leather, wolf skins and other things 
were taken in exchange for rum, and in a short time the 
effects were plainly visible. Horses were often pledged for 
rum and were always duly delivered after the drinking was 
over. The rum, being 33 percent over proof, went a long 
way when mixed liberally with Saskatchewan water. After the 
first two glasses the rum was diluted -- one of rum to seven 
of water — and for this mixture a stiff price was obtained 
in ’’made beaver”, the currency of the country; dollars and 
cents or pounds, shillings and pence were unheard of.” (14) 
mr WHSN FUR WAS KING, p.34. 

Besides the gathering of furs and provisions, there 
were other Important, though less urgent, industries carried 
on at the fort, and among these the smith’s trade held an 
honoured place. With the aid of his crude forge, stoked with 
local coal and charcoal, and fanned with an improvised bellows, 
the 'smithy* made many of the tools required around the fort. 
During periods of extensive repairs or building he was partic¬ 
ularly busy, for large quantities of nails and spikes were 
then needed as well as hinges, locks and other iron parts. 

On May 5, 1864, it is recorded that the blacksmith had ’’fin¬ 
ished 1000 spikes" for the stockades of the fort alone, and 
many more were required in the course of the building. Some 
of these nails and spikes can still be found on the road which 






. 

■ , ' 1 •: ' ... 

‘ 

. 

■ ■ 

. 

- 

' 

: . . , 










- 39 - 

lies "between the cairn and the crumbling river bank. 

Like Fort Edmonton, Rocky Mountain House was a boat¬ 
building depot, for here there was an abundance of fine white 
spruce and the boats, when finished, could easily be taken 
down the Saskatchewan. Again the smith found a good use for 
his trade, as the carpenters needed certain iron parts for 
their York boats. Evidently this industry at Rocky Mountain 
House was a considerable asset to the Hudson 1 s Bay Company. 
Palliser reported in 1858 that ”13 fine Mackmaw (York) boats 
were turned out before the 1st of May, about 35 feet long and 
capable of carrying 75 Pieces of 90 lb. each.” (15) 

(15) Freeda Fleming, H Rocky Mountain House”(THE BEAVER, Dec- 

ember, 194-9) P.53. 

If Palliser is correct in his estimation, the above boats 
were not constructed according to usual specifications. York 
boats were commonly built in two sizes, one 28 feet long, and 
a larger type, 40 feet by 10 feet. See HONOURABLE COMPANY, 
p.274, and ”CANADIAN VGYAGEURS” by S.C.Ells, Geographical 
Journal. Feb,. 1951. p.85.. 

When trading had been finished and the river was 

free of ice, usually late in April or early in May, the fur 

traders prepared to abandon the fort, packing furs, provisions 

and equipment in their large boats. Though little could be 

done to protect the buildings from the vandalism of the natives, 

the doors at least were ’’carried into the woods so that the 

Indians might not take the nails out of them.” (16) 

(16) Rocky Mountain House journal, 1828-29 (Henry Fisher) 

B.l84a, H.3.C.Archives. London. 

The fall ’outfit’ travelled to Rocky Mountain House 
with horses, as the boats could proceed upstream with only 
half cargoes owing to the swiftness of the current above 


















. 








. 























- 

, 














. 
























- 40 - 


Edmonton, (17) but the return trip in the spring was less 

(17) Report on Saskatchewan District by Colin Robertson, 

July 20, 1823. H.B.C.Archives, London. 

arduous. When Henry Moberly left the post in 1855, he had 
a brigade of eight boats, six of them built at the fort, 
which passed downstream carrying a heavy cargo of 2500 buf¬ 
falo robes,several tons of dried meat and grease, over 300 
cured buffalo tongues, 600 wolf skins and a variety of other 
furs. "The horses, numbering about two hundred, taken prin¬ 
cipally in trade during the winter, were sent overland." His 
party "never camped twice consecutively on the same side of 
the river, and preferred, when possible, an island as a pre¬ 
caution against a sudden raid from some strong war party." (18) 

(18) WHEN FUR WAS KING, p.45. 

Yet, in spite of such danger, the Mountain men must 
have looked forward to the spring journey with a certain de¬ 
gree of elation. Though dances and "drinking matches" en¬ 
livened Christmas and New Year at Rocky Mountain House, the 
larger society of Fort Edmonton was a welcome relief from the 
trying existence at the forks where food was often meagre, 
and the mood of the Indians a constant worry. 


ooooooOoooooo 








: • 




, ; ' . ) • 




. 

. 

. 

- 





. 

■ 


- . 

. 










. 






. 





• 






• 











. 














CHAPTER FOUR 


ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 
BEFORE THE UNION OF 1821 

The recorded history of the Rocky Mountain House 
area began in 175^ when the Hudson's Bay Company, having 
resolved to meet the competition of French traders in the 
interior, (l) sent Anthony Henday into the distant land of 
(l) Morton, d.244. 

the Blackfoot Indians, His journal tells us that he wandered 
close to where the Clearwater River meets the North Saskat¬ 
chewan and he was undoubtedly the first white man to look 
upon the mountains from this region. Before returning to 
York Factory, Henday and his Indians spent several months 
in the country east of the forks, hunting the beaver which 
abounded in the rivers and streams. 

Peter Pangman, representing the North West Company, 
was the next white man known to have entered the same ter¬ 
ritory. He travelled farther west than Henday, passing at 
least three miles beyond the confluence of the two rivers. 
Upon sighting the Rocky Mountains he inscribed his name and 
the year "1790" on the bark of a sturdy pine which was hence¬ 
forth known as Pangman*s Pine. Though no post was built 
then, this tree marked the westernmost penetration at that 
time, and was an indication of the quickening race for furs. 

Several months before the establishment of Rocky 
Mountain House, Hudson's Bay men and Northwesters had been 
visiting the region of the upper Saskatchewan to trade with 
the natives there, but competition for furs became much 














: 

■ 

. 

. 












$ 



. 






* 

■ 

. 

1 

. 

■ 







- 42 - 


more intense when each company built a fort near the mouth of 
the Clearwater in the autumn of 1799. Both parties hoped to 
monopolize the trade of the Blackfoot tribes, and of any Indians 
who would venture across the mountains. 

Meanwhile the energetic North West Company was formu¬ 
lating a bolder plan in which Rocky Mountain House, it was 
thought, would play an important part. Duncan M'Gillivray, 
one of those partners who had been deeply impressed by Alex¬ 
ander Mackenzie's "enlarged views", began to look upon the 
Mountain post as a springboard for invading the prolific fur¬ 
bearing region of the Pacific Coast. Hoping to win over the 
Hudson's Bay Company, he envisaged a single trading organi¬ 
zation that would span British North America and even enter 
into trade with the Orient. In keeping with this grand scheme, 
Duncan M'G-illivray appeared at Rocky Mountain House in the 
autumn of 1800 to search out a suitable water route over which 
brigades could transport supplies to the region of the Columbia 
and also return with furs by way of the North Saskatchewan 
headwaters. 

In spite of poor health he made two preliminary 
voyages to the Rocky Mountains in that same year, but the 
arduous task of crossing the barrier was delegated to James 
Hughes, a partner, and David Thompson, a clerk who was estab¬ 
lishing his reputation as a surveyor and explorer. The first 
effort failed owing to rough terrain and the flooded condition 
of the Sheep River, an upper tributary of the North Saskatchewan, 
but there is some reason to believe that, in the summer of 1801, 














. • ■ 10 . 


V : ' •. 












• ! - . l; 0 






: 









I ■■ * . . ’ . 





















'■ - 










- 43 - 


Duncan M'Glllivray himself succeeded in reaching Kootenay Lake 
by way of White Man's Pass. (2) Nevertheless, when M'Glllivray 

(2) Morton. A HISTORY OF THE CANADIAN WEST t p.467. 

returned to eastern headquarters to enter the firm of McTavish, 
Frobisher & Company, (3) he was not yet able to report that a 

( 3 ) Morton, p.34-4; "After the death of Benjamin Frobisher, on 

April 15, 1787, McTavish Sc Co. united with Joseph Frobisher 
Sc Co. (November, 1787). This firm was gradually able to 
secure to itself the right to supply all goods required by 
the North West Company.” In 1802 Duncan McGillivray be¬ 
came the representative of the McTavish, Frobisher Sc Co. 
travelling up to Fort William to meet the winterers at the 
annual meeting of the North West Company. 

practicable route had been discovered. 

Five years later the North West Company, now rid of 

its costly struggle with the X.Y.Company, resolved once more 

to seize the Columbia region for itself. Accordingly, while 

Simon Fraser was engaged in crossing the mountains from the 

Peace River, (4) David Thompson was instructed to cross them 

(4) Morton. p.4S0. ~ 

by ascending the North Saskatchewan. He spent the winter of 
1806-07 making preparations for the spring expedition, and 
John McDonald of G-arth, then in charge at Fort de I'Isle on 
the North Saskatchewan, came up on two occasions to assist. ( 5 ) 

( 5 ) Tyrrell. Introduction, p.49, and H.B.C.Archives, B.6Q/a/6. 

The arrangements had to be carried out with the utmost secrecy 
so that the watchful John P. Pruden at Acton House would not 
divine their plans, and, above all to escape the attention of 
the Jealous Piegan who were determined to prevent all white 
men from establishing trading relations with their enemies 
beyond the mountains. 













-. , ■ ' 
























x ' ■■ ;i 





i ‘ ' jdr, . ' ■ 

« 



. 























- 44 - 


The story of Thompson's crossing of the Rocky Moun¬ 
tains is almost as well known as Mackenzie f s amazing dash to 
the Pacific in 1793. On May 10, 1807, accompanied by his half- 
breed wife and children, he set forth on the historic journey 
up the Saskatchewan, following a route which he knew the 
Kootenay Indians had used some years before. By good fortune 
the main Piegan band had recently gone on the warpath further 
to the South. Thompson's journal refers to this coincidence 
which contributed much to his success: "The murder of two 
Peagan Indians by Captain Lewis of the United States, drew 
the Peagans to the Missouri to revenge their deaths; and thus 
gave me an opportunity to cross the Mountains by the defiles 
of the Saskatchewan River, which led to the headwaters of the 
Columbia River". (6) 

(6) David Thompsons Narrative, p.375^ ~ 

At the northern end of Lake Windermere, he built 
Kootenay House near the mouth of Toby Creek, and commenced 
trading with the Kootenay and Flathead Indians whose furs 
were taken out by the new Saskatchewan route past Rocky Moun¬ 
tain House. The Columbia enterprise was as last underway. 

The achievement of this much of his great ambition must have 
given the dying M'G-illivray considerable satisfaction, even 
though he had failed to secure the cooperation of the Hudson's 
Bay Company. 

David Thompson built several other houses across the 
mountains, and for a number of years fur brigades travelled 
back and forth on the great Saskatchewan waterway. The Piegan, 
meanwhile, were becoming increasingly restless and after suf- 





. 


' 

. 


• - 

. 


. 








. 





. 












• 


■ 














■ 




. 

. 

. 

' 1 

* • 

. 

< ■ 






- 45 - 


fering a severe defeat at the hands of the Flathead, they 
decided to stop the flow of arms and supplies to their in¬ 
veterate enemies. When Alexander Henry arrived at Rocky 
Mountain House on October 5, 1810, he found that the Columbia 
brigade had been forced to retire to this point because the 
Piegan stood between them and the mountains. Henry, who had 
come to look after the usual trading and administrative busi¬ 
ness at the fort, now found himself in a rather precarious 
situation. Without arousing the suspicions of the Indians, 
he must endeavour to send the Columbia men on their way, as 
he was convinced that David Thompson was on the Kootenay Plains 
waiting for supplies. 

The constant traffic of Indian parties had prevented 
him from launching the Columbia canoes until October 11, when 
Big Bear and his Piegan band set out on a buffalo hunt, and 
no other redskins were in sight. The canoes were immediately 
put into the water, but before the men could embark, the 
Hudson’s Bay outfit from Fort Edmonton suddenly appeared on 
the beach below. Apparently Henry's ingenuity was equal to 
such emergencies, for in his journal he writes: ”... my only 
resource was to put the baggage on board, and send the four 
canoes down river, as if I intended to fetch up the remainder 
of our goods, as I had informed the Indians I should do; but 
directing them to pass up with the towing-line about mid-night, 
when whatever Indians might arrive I would keep drunk until 
the goods were conveyed above the rapids and there embarked."(7) 
HE Coues, p.4^9. ~ 

This stratagem worked. While the Sarcee and the Blood lay in 



























* 

. . . . 

. 

■ 

























- 46 - 


a drunken stupor, and the fatigued Hudson's Bay men slept, 
the Columbia brigade, passed quietly upstream. 

But Henry's troubles were not yet over. At sunset 
the next day his cousin, William Henry, arrived from below the 
fort with the disquieting news that Mr, Thompson was hiding 
from the Piegan near the Brazeau River, not far from the old 
post of Boggy Hall, where he was anxiously waiting for his 
people. While a man went on foot to halt the Columbia brigade, 
which had b$en sent above with such risk, Henry himself set 
off with a party to succour David Thompson. 

When the rescue party reached the explorer's camp 
they found him in a dejected and half-starved condition. 
Thoroughly wearied of the Piegan nuisance, Thompson disclosed 
his decision "to open a new road from North Branch (8) by 

(8) North Branch referred to the Brazeau River, Coues, p, 6 52. 

Buffalo Dung Lake to Athabaska river, and thence across the 
mountains to the Columbia." It was therefore essential that 
the Columbia brigade join its leader, and Henry returned to 
Rocky Mountain House to supervise the manoeuvre. Once more 
he doled out rum to unsuspecting natives, while Thompson's men 
made their way downstream under cover of night and a light 
rain. With a note of supreme relief Henry writes: "I was 
happy to get clear of those canoes, that had caused me so much 
trouble and anxiety ever since my arrival." (9) 

(9) Ibid, p.654. 

While the Canadians were penetrating the country be¬ 
yond the Rockies, the English traders were watching their ac¬ 
tivities with interest. At least as early as November, 1807, 












- 47 - 


they were informed of the North West Company's presence in 
the Columbia region. Early in this month James Bird received 
word from Pruden at North Branch post that "four men, whom 
he had sent to Acton House to fetch some old stores concealed 
last spring, found there three men who had come from Mr.Thomp¬ 
son, who it appears had built at the side of a Lake in the 
Coottanaha country ..." (10) 

(10) H.B.G.Archives. B.gp/a/7. 

When it became apparent that the Northwesters, in 
spite of extreme physical difficulties, were about to make 
a commercial success of their Columbia venture, the Hudson's 
Bay Company hastily dropped its policy of "wait and see". 

Since an experienced trader could not be spared at this time, 
Joseph Howse, clerk, was sent from York Factory in 1809 to 
report on the movements of the North West Company in the 
Rocky Mountains. Howse appears to have had an aptitude for 
his new work, for in 1810 he undertook a second journey to 
the mountains. Following the trail that David Thompson had 
pioneered, he entered the pass, which for no apparent reason 
received his name, and by way of the Columbia reached the 
Flathead River. After a season of profitable trade with the 
"Flathead Indians", he returned to the East with "Thirty six 
bundles of good furs". (11) 

(11) Morton, p.496. 

In travelling to and from Fort Edmonton, it is prob¬ 
able that Joseph Howse spent some time at Acton House. At 
least it is known that this post served him as a victualling 
depot, for on March 25, 1811, James Bird "sent off two men to 















- 48 - 


go to Acton House and from there with horses and Pemican to 
meet Mr.Howse at the Gootanha River, on the West side of the 
Rocky Mountains ..." (12) James Bird later sent William Flett 

(12) Edmonton House .journal, l8lQ/ll H.B.C.Archives, London. 

and four men to Acton House to maintain friendly relations 
with the Piegan chiefs so that they would not molest Joseph 
Howse as he descended the Saskatchewan River on his return 
voyage. 

After the departure of Howse, and Thompson’s discovery 
of Athabaska Pass, the Mountain Houses ceased to be intimately 
associated with the Columbia enterprise. In order to strength¬ 
en its organization in other areas, the older company abandon¬ 
ed the Pacific region to its rival, and the North West traders 
found it more convenient to reach that domain by way of their 
new route. Jasper House now became the provisioning depot for 
the passing brigades. 

Though the importance of Rocky Mountain House had 
diminished, it continued to play a part in the struggle with 
the Hudson's Bay Company. Little violence occurred between 
the Acton people and their neighbours but competition for furs 
remained keen. Undoubtedly the Blackfoot, Blood and Sarcee 
continued to trade at this point, but during the last few 
years before union, both posts were particularly anxious to 
secure the trade of the Muddy River Indians or Piegan as they 
were generally known. (13) 

(13) G-overnor Simpson identifies Muddy River Indians as Piegah 

in Para.67 of his report to the G-overnor and Committee, 
Hudson's Bay Company, London, dated Aug.10, 1832, York 
Factory. K»B.C. Factory Journals. Box 550. No.1063* 




































. 

. . 

, 



. 


■ 

. 











. 










- 49 - 


In March, 1820, Francis Heron visited the Hudson*s 
Bay post to decide whether it would be necessary to send an 
outfit there in the future. Heron's report indicates that 
once again the wishes of the Muddy River Indians were given 
serious consideration: "Yesterday evening I returned from 
Acton House ... After making enquiry I found that the Muddy 
River Indians would feel much disgusted if that place should 
be abandoned and even threatened to go across the Rocky Mts. 
to a N.W. establishment with their Beaver should Acton House 
not be kept up but on the other hand they promised, should 
we keep up that establishment, that they would induce the 
Cutney Kootenay Indians to come with their trade..." (l4) 

(l4V H.3.C. Archives. B.60/a/l9« " ~~ 

Under these circumstances Heron was obliged "to appoint people 
to remain there for the summer." 

On August 6, 1821, news of the coalition reached 
Edmonton, and though the reorganization had not yet been com¬ 
pleted, Canadian and English traders travelled together to 
and from the Mountain House. Mr. John Rowand, a former North¬ 
wester, was placed in temporary charge of the post, and on 
October 29 he left Edmonton House "accompanied by James White¬ 
way, Charles McKay, Ritchard Colin, and some Canadians"... At 
this time there were "11 Englishmen and 27 Canadians" stationed 
at the Mountain Houses, indicating that both establishments 
had been in operation when union occurred. 

The dreams of Alexander Mackenzie and Duncan M'G-illiv- 
ray were realized at last, but too late for either of these 
men of vision to profit by the new organization. 






















CHAPTER FIVE 


ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 
AFTER THE UNION OF 1821 

The Hudson*s Bay Company was now free to develop a 
sound administrative policy in the extensive territory cov¬ 
ered by its charter. Wasteful competition gave way to stabil¬ 
ized trading under a policy of conservation, and the use of 
liquor was reduced or stopped altogether wherever possible.(l) 

(1) Morton, p.640. ~ " 

Many posts were abandoned with a consequent reduction by about 
one-half in the number of servants, and the remaining estab¬ 
lishments, now a considerable distance apart, tended to "throw 

uoon the Indians the burden of bringing in their furs to trade". 

_ ( 2 ) 

(2) Ibid, p.690. 

The situation in the Rocky Mountain House area, how¬ 
ever, was exceptional. The union had not disposed of the 
American traders on the Missouri, and they were still deter¬ 
mined to establish closer trading relations with the Blackfoot 
tribes. The men at the Mountain Fort had to strive hard to 
retain their traditional Piegan trade, and since the Americans 
used alcohol indiscriminately, the Hudson’s Bay Company could 
not abandon its use in this region. In addition, influential 
interpreters had to be paid liberally to live among these 
Indians in order to secure their loyalty. 

The patronage of the Blackfoot confederacy, and the 
Piegan in particular, was of first importance to Rocky Mountain 
House. This confederacy, "the strongest and most aggressive 











T. 




* f 




V : 











- 51 - 

nation on the Canadian prairies", (3) consisted of three 


(3) Diamond Jenness, THE INDIANS OF CANADA (2nd ed.,Ottawa: 
King*s Printer, 1934) p.317. 

related tribes, the Blackfoot proper, the Blood and the 
Piegan. Though the first two frequently took robes and pro¬ 
visions to the Mountain House, it was the latter tribe that 
the Hudson*s Bay Company courted and watched with most con¬ 
cern. The range of the Piegan extended from the Rocky Mount¬ 
ains into what is now Saskatchewan and from the North Saskat¬ 
chewan to the upper Missouri. For many years it was from 
these Indians that Rocky Mountain House obtained the bulk 
of its beaver skins. 

Affiliated with the Blackfoot organization was the 
little tribe of Sarcee Indians. They spoke the Athapaskan 
language rather than the Algonkian tongue of their allies, 
but gradually adopted many of the customs and habits of their 
protectors. (4) Yet, while seeking shelter under the Blaek- 

(4) Jenness. p.325. ~~ " ~ 

foot wing, the Sarcee often eyed the Piegan with considerable 
jealousy when trading at Rocky Mountain House. Henry called 
the former "a beggarly tribe, never satisfied". (5) At the 

(5) Coues. p.657. 

beginning of the nineteenth century they occupied the country 
near the headwaters of the N 0 rth Saskatchewan River. They 
are now living on a reserve near Calgary. 

There were a number of other tribes that traded at 
Rocky Mountain House, though it is difficult to name their 
exact hunting areas. From the west the Kootenay Indians 










. 


A 


. 

' 

' 

T 

. 

♦ 

* 

■* 

. 

* 















52 - 


occasionally ventured through the passes of the Rockies in 
spite of the Blackfoot menace, and it appears that the 
Assiniboine, or Stoney Indians as they were also called, 
came to the fort from the north-west, near or within the 
mountains. This tribe now has a large reserve in the Bighorn 
country west of Nordegg. The Cree, whose hunting grounds 
lay north of Rocky Mountain House, were often at odds with 
the 31ackfoot nation, but they too visited the upper Saskat¬ 
chewan more frequently as the latter began to frequent the 
American posts on the headwaters of the Missouri. (6) Refer- 

(6) Rocky Mountain House journal, 1828-29, H.B.C.Archives~ 

London., 

ences are also made to the Fall Indians who traded fairly 
consistently at the forks, both before and after the union. 
Technically known as Atslna, this tribe was usually spoken 
of by fur traders in Western Canada as Fall Indians or G-ros 
Ventres of the Plains. "They were a detached branch of the 
Arapaho nation, and were of Algonquin stock. On Arrowsmith’s 
map of 1811 they are marked as occupying the upper parts of 
the country drained by the Red Deer River. 11 At one time they 
were allies of the Blackfoot. None of them are now living in 
Canada. (7) Alexander Henry considered them energetic fur 

(7) Dr. J.B.Tyrrell, DAVID THOMPSON*S NARRATIVE, p.304; foot¬ 

note 1. and n.327 footnote 1. 

gatherers, though he disliked the lavish manner in which 
they offered their women to the traders for the merest trifle. 

In spite of the many tribes it had accommodated in 
the past, the future of Rocky Mountain House was uncertain at 











53 - 


the time of the coalition. Chief Trader J. F. La Rocque, 
a former Northwester, was put in charge of it for the season 
of 1822-23, replacing John Rowand who was transferred to Fort 
Edmonton, but G-overnor Simpson was empowered to abandon this 
fort whenever he felt that it was expedient to do so. (8) 

(8) Harvey Fleming, Minutes of the Council, Northern Department 

of Rupert's Land, 1821-31, (Toronto, THE CHAMPLAIN SOCIETY, 

1940. and London. THE HUDSON'S BAY RECORD SOCIETY. 1940)- 

Chief Trader Rowand, however, recommended that it be retained 
for the benefit of the Fall and Piegan Indians, and Patrick 
Small was appointed to take charge by Simpson for the summer 
of 1823. In this same year Rocky Mountain House was abandoned 
on the advice of Chief Factor Colin Robertson, who had estab¬ 
lished McLeod's Branch. Robertson was of the opinion that the 
Piegan and the Blood, who were in the habit of frequenting 
the Mountain post, would get their supplies at Fort Edmonton 
and the few "strong wood" Assiniboine, those who frequented 
the heavily forested regions, would join their friends at 
McLeod's Branch. (9) 

(9) "McLeod's Branch'* was the post later known as Fort 

Assiniboine.. 

Apparently the Piegan promptly expressed dissatis¬ 
faction over this new plan, for on November 30, 1823, John 
Rowand wrote in the Edmonton journal: "... They the Piegan 
regret exceedingly that the Mountain House is abandoned, as 
the distance from their general hunting grounds is too great 
to come this length, as well as being afraid to fall in with 
the Stone Indians on their way hither; whereas at the Mountain 
Rocky Mountain House : they lay quite secure from fear of 







■ 


* 


; 













54 - 


their enemies, as well as all other inconveniences which 
they must experience coming to this place Edmonton. They 


also say that we have a house for the Grees, a house for the 



Stone Indians, a house for the Blackfeet, Sussees 


Blood and Fall Indians, and none for those who give us the 
most Beaver, meaning themselves, so that we must despise 
them ..." (10) 

(lQ) Fort Edmonton .journal, 1822-25, H.B.C.Archives, London. 

The protestations of these Indians, and the growing 
opposition of the American traders induced John Rowand to re¬ 
establish Rocky Mountain House in the autumn of 1825, and 
Patrick Small was again placed in charge. In a letter to 
the Governor and Committee in London Simpson writes: "I am 
concerned to say that several bands of the Piegan tribe who 
usually frequented the Saskatchewan with furs taken in the 
American Territory and across the Rocky Mountains have been 
intercepted on their way to our establishments by some American 
Trappers in the Flathead country during the last year, with 
whom they traded their skins. The plain Tribes are not however 
generally favourable to the American Traders and I think there 
is little doubt of our continuing to secure a good proportion 
of their returns particularly while Chief Factor Rowand who 
possesses great influence over them retains his present sta¬ 
tion. " (11) 

Cll) Letter (Para.17) from Governor"Simpsonto the Governor" 

and Committee, Hudson's Bay House, London, dated York 

Factory, July 25, 1827: H.B.C.Factory journals, Box 541,811. 


In paragraph 32 of the same letter Governor Simpson 
again refers to the Piegan trade: "We have this season per- 















itrj’ •*.*•••■ 






- 55 - 


manently established the Rocky Mountain House for the accommo¬ 
dation of the Piegan, which will have the effect of drawing 
them during the winter from the Flathead lands and thereby 
keep them out of the way of the American Trappers, and our 
system of trade will be so liberal that to compete with us 
on the west side of the mountains, the Americans must lose 
as they cannot afford to sell their supplies taken that pro¬ 
digious distance at anything like the prices we can give.' 1 

Simpson’s correspondence reveals that Rocky Mountain 
House succeeded for a number of years in drawing a considerable 
amount of trade from the Blackfoot tribes. .Every encourage¬ 
ment was rendered to these Indians, and by taking pains to 
keep on friendly terms with their chiefs and principal men, 
the English company obtained an influence over them, which 
the Americans found difficult to undermine. Writing in 1828, 
Simpson gives the Governor and Committee in London a striking 
example of their loyalty to the Hudson’s Bay Company: ”... a 
band of Blackfeet that was encamped with some of general 
Ashley's trappers (12) last summer at the Salt Lake in the 

(l2) In 1822 and 1823 William H.Ashley promoted a trading ’ 

organization in the United States which eventually became 
the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, the great rival of John 
Jacob Astor’s American Fur Company. "Ashley sold out to 
Jedediah Smith, William Sublette, and David Jackson. This 
firm in turn sold out to the Rocky Mountain Fur Company 
whose proprietors were Jim Bridger, Milton Sublette, Tom 
Fitzpatrick, Henry Fraeb and John Baptiste G-ervais.” See 
Bernard DeVoto. ACROSS THE WIDE MISSOURI (Boston: Houghton 
Miff in Co.. 1947) preface, p.xxvi. 

Snake Country, had at the time 600 Beaver skins in their pos¬ 
session, not one of which would they part with, notwithstanding 
the numberless tempting offers made them, but brought the 









:-A i<J. " oTliJC;. 




. 








. 


























■ 


I j 




1 • 




. 










. . ‘ 










- 


. 

. 








.. 


• : . 









- 56 - 

parcel complete throughout a Journey which occupied them 
several months, to Mr.Rowand at the Rocky Mountain House, and 
this of itself shows that kind and conciliating treatment 
can make an impression even on these turbulent bands." (13) 

(13) Para.54, Letter from Governor Simpson to the Governor 

and Committee in London, dated York Factory, July 10, 
1828; H.B.C.Factory Journals. Box 542, No.865. 

The Piegan were at this time the most profitable 

visitors at Rocky Mountain House, and in the fall of 1829 

"they brought upward of 2000 Beaver at one haul". (14) These 

(14) Para.44, Letter from Governor Simpson to the (governor 

and Committee, Hudson’s Bay Company, London, dated York 
Factory, Aug, 26, 1830; H.B.C.Factory journals. Box 
546. No.953. 

Indians, however, were no longer like those industrious trap¬ 
pers of old, who had won for the Piegan tribe the reputation 
of being the beaver hunters of the Blackfoot confederacy, 
in a letter written to London in 1830, Governor Simpson re¬ 
marks; "In the returns of this district Saskatchewan there 
is generally a considerable proportion of badly dressed sum¬ 
mer and cub beaver, which is brought from the west side of 
the Mountains and the banks of the Missouri by the Piegan 
tribe who rarely hunt themselves but lay their less powerful 
and warlike neighbours under contribution, pillage being 
their ordinary occupation". (15) In spite of the ominous 

(15) Ibid. 

deterioration in the Piegan character, they remained on 
excellent terms with the Hudson’s Bay Company establishments. 
"But", Simpson writes, "it is not safe to meet them in an 
enemy's country, as many of our poor fellows who have fallen 












57 - 


by their hands on the west side of the Mountains have had 
occasion to know." (16) 

(16) Ibid. ~ 


Until the winter of 1830-31 the American traders 
had not succeeded in establishing strong trading relations 
with the Blackfoot tribes, but in this season an incident 
occurred which played directly into the hands of the Upper 
Missouri Outfit of which Kenneth McKenzie, a former British 
trader, was head. (17) As the main Piegan tribe was return- 

(17) The American Fur Company was organized by John Jacob 

Astor; but in 1833 its active head was Ramsay Crooks. 
The Western operations during this period were under 
the direction of Pierre Chouteau, Jr., of St.Louis. 

His principal field director was Kenneth McKenzie 'the 
King of the Missouri 1 . He was the head of the Upper 
Missouri Outfit, a principal division of the Company. 
McKenzie's job was, in Chouteau's words, 'ecraser toute 
opposition'. ACROSS THE WIDE MISSOURI, p.24. 


ing to Rocky Mountain House after a successful excursion 
south of the border, they were ambushed "by the Crow Mountain 
Tribe who killed 57 of them and took among other spoils up¬ 
wards of 2000 Beaver Skins, which fell into the hands of the 
American traders." (18) This misadventure had an immediate 

(18) Para. 59, Letter from G-overnor Simps on “to the Cj over nor - ’ 

and Committee in London, dated York Factory, July 18, 1831; 

Box 549, No.1033."The Crow Mountain Tribe" cannot be identified . 

effect on the establishment of Rocky Mountain House. Many 

Piegan now found it expedient to trade at the American posts, 

which were situated near their country, instead of exposing 

themselves to the peril of enemy attack by journeying to the 


North Saskatchewan. 





















- 58 - 


The Hudson's Bay Company, however, made every effort 
to check the intrusion of the Americans. In July 1832, the 
following resolution was passed by the Council of the Northern 
Department of Rupert's Land: "The recent defection of the 
Piegan tribe rendering it unnecessary to maintain the Rocky 
Mountain House which was originally established for their con¬ 
venience, it is Resolved to abandon that Post and to establish 
a new Post to be called the Piegan Post on the borders of the 
49th Parallel of Latitude, with a view to attract that Tribe, 
and to prevent other Indians who are in the habit of frequent¬ 
ing the Honble. Company's Posts in the upper part of the 
Saskatchewan from crossing the line." (19) 

(19) E.H.Oliver, THE CANADIAN NORTH-WEST, ITS EARLY DEVELGP~ 

MENT AND LEGISLATIVE RECORDS, Ottawa: King's Printer, 
1914-15) Vol.l, p»678. 

According to Governor Simpson the treachery of one 
of his half-breed interpreters was chiefly responsible for 
the Piegan defection. Since the Piegan were now less willing 
to trade at Rocky Mountain House, especially as they were at 
variance with some of the tribes that frequented this estab¬ 
lishment, the Hudson's Bay Company adopted the practice of 
sending out "confidential servants" to live and hunt with 
them. In this way, it was hoped, the Company would retain 
some of its former trade and the natives might be persuaded 
to gather furs with greater industry. James Bird, or "Jamey 
Jock" as he was commonly known by Hudson's Bay men, was one 
of these valuable servants. In a letter to the Governor and 
Committee, Simpson devotes considerable space to the descrip¬ 
tion of this man's character and behaviour: 








' 






. 


l ■ ■ 











■ i j. ‘ ; 










■ . ■ . 



59 - 


"It had likewise been usual with us to keep in pay 
among them [piegan a half-breed son of Mr.Bird (20) who was 

(20) According to J.E.A.MacLeod in his article H Piegan Post 

and the Blackfoot Trade" (Canadian Historical Review, 
Sept.19^3, footnote, p.278.) Jamey Jock was the son of 
C.F.Bird and a brother of John Bird, one of the victims 
of the mysterious tragedy in which the explorer, Thomas 
Simpson, lost his life. 

brought up at the Honourable Company's establishment, and 
was for many years a clerk in the service, but relinquished 
his situation some years ago and assumed the habits and 
character of an Indian, connecting himself with the Piegan 
tribe by marriage (or rather marriages, as he has some half 
score of wives) and being a perfect Indian in nature and a 
brave determined blood thirsty fellow, he soon acquired an 
influence among them, and now ranks as one of their war 
chiefs. In order to secure the good offices of this man 
with the tribe, costly presents were frequently given to 
him and an annual salary of £20 allowed him, besides liberal 
payment for any skins he brought. For several years Bird, 
or 'Jamey Jock' (the name by which he is usually known with 
us), was faithful to us, and performed the services we re¬ 
quired of him to our entire satisfaction, and last year he 
was sent off by Chief Factor Rowand with a large and well 
equipped band to hunt on some of the headwaters of the Mis¬ 
souri, with an understanding that he should bring them back 
in the fall of the year to the Rocky Mountain House on a 
fixed date when Mr.Rowand was to meet him - In the meantime, 
however, it became known that the American Fur Company estab¬ 
lished their new Post at the Forks of the Yellow Stone and 









- 60 - 


Missouri Rivers and knowing the influence which 'Jamey Jock’ 
had over the Piegan, they Americans sent couriers in quest 
of him through the Blackfoot country, with pressing invitations 
to visit them, which he did taking with him every Piegan over 
whom he had influence to the Camp of our Opponents with be¬ 
tween 3 and 4000 Beaver - But so much attached were they to 
their old friend Chief Factor Rowand, that, after reaching 
the American Establishment they would not have parted with 
their skins, had they not been assured by ’Jamey Jock' that 
they ’Americans were not opponents but 'brothers* or partners 
of their old trader the 'Iron Shirt* (the name by which they 
know Mr.Rowand) on the Saskatchewan. Thus, I am concerned 
to say we have lost a large proportion of the hunts of that 
valuable tribe." (21) 

(21) Para.67, Letter from Governor Simpson to Governor"and ~ 

Committee, Hudson's Bay Company, London, dated York 
Factory, August 10, 1832, H.B.C.Factory journals, Box 
550. No. 1063. 

In the autumn of 1832 Piegan Post was established 
in accordance with the Council's resolution, although its 
location was not on or near the 49th Parallel, but "near 
the north bank of the Bow River at the mouth of Old Fort 
Creek in latitude 51° 9' north and 155° 4 1 22" west". (22) 

(22) J.E.A.MacLeod, "piegan Post and the Blackfoot Traded ~ 

(CANADIAN HISTORICAL REVIEW, Sept.,1943) No.3, Vol.xxiv, 
p.278. 

The amiable John Edward Harriott, Chief Trader, was trans¬ 
ferred from the Columbia District to take command of the new 
fort, and most of his future service was to be spent in the 
Saskatchewan district as Rowand's chief assistant.. 








I 


















- 61 - 


The establishment of this post did not have the 
desired results, and in his report to London on July 11, 

1834-, Governor Simpson reveals the cause of its failure: 

"The Saskatchewan which was long the favorite District in 
the Northern Department I am concerned to say still continues 
to decline in point of returns, while its expenses on the 
other hand are gradually increasing; the profits are there¬ 
fore going down rapidly, and, when the accounts are made up, 

I am apprehensive that we shall find a deficiency of fully 
<£2000 on those of last year. This is owing to the proximity 
of the American trading posts and trapping parties to the 
hunting grounds of the Plain Tribes, who used to visit us 
from the Southward, say the Piegan, Blood, Blaxkfeet and 
C-ircee tribes, who have of late been drawn to the banks of 
the Missouri by the high opposition prices offered in that 
quarter, which have rendered all the personal influence of 
their old traders on the Saskatchewan of little avail; and 
notwithstanding all Jamey Jock's exertions to bring the 
Piegans back to us, our trade with that tribe did not exceed 
500 beaver, and taking the expenses incurred in collecting 
them into account, at a cost exceeding double their value 
in the London market while the danger to which lives and 
property were exposed, in watching this losing trade, by 
the occupation of the Piegan Post, in the midst of the Plains 
was very great." (23) 

(23) Para.lt, Letter from G-overnor Simpson to the Governor 

and Committee, Hudson's Bay Company, London, dated York 

Factory, July 21, 183^; H.B.C.Factory journals, Box 551, 

No.1172. 








. 

- 

■ 

< 










„ 






' 




' 




. 





























. 

. 

. 


■ 







- 62 


It was not the custom of the frugal Simpson to main¬ 
tain a position if it failed to pay dividends or at least 
thwart the activities of his opponents. The same report, 
therefore, intimated that Piegan Post would soon he abandoned 
in favour of Rocky Mountain House, which would enable the 
Company "to curtail the expenses of the District by the re¬ 
duction of the complement of people”. Actually Chief Trader 
Harriott, having experienced no Improvement in the volume of 
trade, had departed for the Mountain House on January 8, 1834, 
fully six months before the date of Simpson’s letter to the 
Governor and Committee in London. "Piegan Post was the last 
establishment of the Hudson's Bay Company on the south-western 
prairies until 1874, when John Bunn built a winter post on the 
Bow River above the mouth of the Ghost". (24) 

(24) Piegan Post and the Blackpool Trade, p7278. ~~ 

The ordinary trade of the Piegan, which usually 
amounted to 3000 beaver per season and occasionally as much 
as 3000 now dropped off sharply. The Blackfoot rapidly lost 
their old loyalty to the English company as the high prices 
and presents received from the Americans enabled them to ob¬ 
tain all the supplies they required for less than one-third 
of the quantity of furs they used to bring to market. Instead 
of spending their time hunting and trading as formerly, they 
amused themselves by gambling, and by going on war and horse 
stealing excursions. Jamey Jock continued in the service of 
the Hudson’s Bay Company though Simpson found it mortifying 
to have to tolerate "the unreasonable demands of such a fellow". 
However, though the nefarious Jamey was unable to undo his 





Li • 








. 






j j > r. ’ 














- 63 - 

original mischief, the Hudson's Bay Company were mainly in¬ 
debted to his exertions for a "haul of 500 beaver" during 
the winter of 1833-34- which otherwise would have gone to the 
Americans. Simpson finally despaired of regaining the former 
patronage of the Piegans and other Blackfoot tribes, for the 
American traders by their position on the headwaters of the 
Missouri could more easily combine the trade in buffalo robes 
with the fur trade. The only means of competing was by once 
again providing the Blackfoot with a special establishment on 
the Bow River but the fate of Piegan Post in 1834- discouraged 
such a project. "It is evident from the character of the 
country and its numerous and turbulent inhabitants", report¬ 
ed Simpson in 1839, "that the expenses of an establishment 
of sufficient strength to guard against danger, would exceed 
the amount of returns we could reasonably calculate on being 
drawn by such an establishment." (25) 

(25) Letter (Para.24) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 

and Committee, Hudson's Bay House,_London, dated Red 
River Settlement. July 8, 1839 (H.B.C.Factory journals, 
Box 559. No. 14-06). 

Apart from the reopening of Rocky Mountain House, 
Simpson reluctantly decided to make no further effort "to 
recover that valuable branch of trade" and Rowand now direct¬ 
ed most of his attention toward "the thick wood trade" of 
the Saskatchewan district, which continued to be favourable. 
Nevertheless, though the Piegan took the greater part of 
their furs and provisions to the American posts, the Black¬ 
foot and Sarcee bands continued to make occasional visits 
to Rocky Mountain House. In this way the fort retained a 








H| : 
































. 






- 64 - 


small part of its former importance. During the season 

1847-48 Rocky Mountain House was temporarily closed as the 

Blackfoot intimated that they would not be back even in small 

numbers. Yet Simpson was able to report in June 1848, that 

there had been in increase in trade over the previous season 

"to the amount of nearly £ 3000 , principally in Lynx and other 

small furs", and the usual posts (26) remained in operation 

(26) " lv Edmonton, - Fort^Pitt, Tort Carlton, Fort AssiniboTne^ 

Lesser Slave Lake, Cumberland and Moose Lake were main¬ 
tained last winter." Para.60, Letter from Simpson to 
Governor & Committee, Hudson*s Bay Company, London, dated 
Norway House, June 24, 1848, H.B.C.Letters Inwd. from 
_ Sir G-. Simpson. Series 1843-60. ___ 

except the Mountain House. The Honourable Company received 
some consolation from the fact that the absence of the Black- 
foot afforded the Cree a wider hunting ground. They were now 
able to penetrate into the more southern area of the Saskat¬ 
chewan District. 

Rocky Mountain House was again occupied in the fall 
of 1848 when Louis Leblanc was placed in charge. It appears 
to have remained in operation during each winter until 1861. 

In 1856 Simpson once more refers in one of his reports to the 
large trade formerly carried on with the Blackfoot at Rocky 
Mountain House and to their continued defection. He intimates 
that, if there were no sign of their returning to this post 
in the course of the current year, "it is probable that it 
will hereafter be abandoned in which case our chief loss will 
be in robes and provisions which were some years procured in 
large quantities at that establishment." According to the 
rather boastful account of Henry John Moberly, who was in 
charge of Rocky Mountain House during the winter of 1854-55, 
















































r 
















- 







' 










- 65 - 

supplies which he obtained in exchange for rum from Sarcee 
and Blackfoot bands had "helped materially to forstall the 
threatened food scarcity that year in the North," (27) 

(27) WHEN FUR WAS KING, p.4-2. 

It appears that there was almost an immediate im¬ 
provement in the returns from Rocky Mountain House, for in 
1857 Simpson attributes a recent increase in the collection 
of buffalo robes to more frequent visits from the Blackfoot 
during the winter. The Hudson's Bay Company was instrumental 
in arranging a truce between the Cree and Blackfoot confed¬ 
eracies, which was more faithfully kept than in the past. 

The latter could now visit the Saskatchewan in safety, and 
according to G-overnor Simpson these Indians preferred to 
trade at the English posts if prices were reasonable and 
the hazards of the journey not too great. 

Thfe Blackfoot bands continued to linger in the vic¬ 
inity of Rocky Mountain House for a number of years but were 
seldom in a conciliatory mood. They frequently made unreason¬ 
able demands and endeavoured to drive hard bargains by threat¬ 
ening to return to the Americans with their furs and provisions 
Joseph Brazeau was in charge of Rocky Mountain House from 1855 
to 1861, and during this time the Hudson's Bay people were 
constantly worried by the insolent behaviour of the Indians. 
Finally the hostility of the Blackfoot became extreme; they 
refused to supply the post with fresh or dried meat, and at 
the same time threatened to kill the fort hunters. On March 28 
1861, the Edmonton journal recorded: "... two men arrived this 
afternoon coming ahead of Mr.Brazeau and Party from the Rocky 


















! 




















- 66 - 


Mountain House who have from starvation been compelled to 
abandon that Establishment, Mr. Brazeau reports the Blackfoot 
to have always come to the Fort armed, brought no provisions 
or anything else, came apparently only to beg Rum and threat¬ 
ening to kill the people ... One of our men a European Servant 
is a prisoner among the Blackfeet - the 4 men who remained 
at the cache near Rocky Mountain House: have a month's pro¬ 
visions - Mr.Brazeau informs me probably Hardisty that he is 
coming slowly owing to the poor state of the Horses and the 
deepness of the snow ... the Blackfeet have been unbearable 
for the last three years or more, always getting worse and 
worse, destroying our crops, stealing our Horses and doing 
everything they could to annoy us, in order to provoke a quar¬ 
rel so as to kill us. They now threaten openly to kill whites, 
Halfbreeds or Crees where ever they find them and to burn 
Edmonton Fort. All this is owing to the Blackfoot chief that 
was killed here Edmonton last fall by the Crees." (28) 

(28) Edmonton House journal, 1860-61, H.B.C.Archives, London,” 

B.60/a/31. 

After three years the Blackfoot menace appears to 
have subsided, for on September 13, 1864, William J. Christie 
at Edmonton wrote to the officer in charge at Red River: 
"Arrangements have been made for the re-establishment of Rocky 
Mountain House & our trade at that place with the Slave Indian 
tribes, (29) and I have no doubt, the Trade will pay well; 

12$) William Christie undoubtedly means Blackfoot Indians^ 

which were occasionally referred to as "Slaves", Morton, p. 


owing to the number of men required to build a New Fort, it 














- 67 - 


may well be attended with some considerable expense the first 
year, but in a year or two it will clear all these expenses."(30) 

T5o) Fort Edmonton Correspondence Book, 1863-657'Letter from 

William J. Christie at Edmonton to Officer in Charge at 
_ Red River, Sept.13. 1864, H.B.C.Archives, B.60/b/l t f o.50d. 

John McDougall who in company with his father and 
William Christie visited Rocky Mountain House early in January, 
1866, makes the following comment about the reopening of this 
post: "This fort and trading post had been abandoned by the 
Hudson’s Bay Company for some years, but in the summer of 1865 
it was decided to reopen it in order to draw the trade of the 
surrounding Indian tribes - Blackfeet, Bloods, Piegans and 
Sarcees - as also to keep these turbulent tribes as much as 
possible from collision with the wood and plain Crees, their 
hereditary foes," (31) 

(31) John McDougailT PATHFINDERS OF PLAIN AND PRAIRIE (Toronto: 

W. Brians, 1898) p.128. 

Edmonton House journal 1864-65 contains many refer- 
ences to men passing between that place and Rocky Mountain 
House and probably these parties occupied the old fort which, 
according to Dr. James Hector, was already "tumbling to pieces" 
in 1858. Richard Hardisty was delegated to reopen the Mountain 
House and in February, 1865, two carpenters, Paquet and MacLeod, 
journeyed to Rocky Mountain House with him to build a new es¬ 
tablishment a few hundred yards above the other one. Accord¬ 
ing to John McDougall a temporary fort was built by Hardisty 
during the autumn of 1865 in the woods nearby. At the time of 
McDougall 1 s visit the men were taking out timber and sawing 
lumber for the erection of permanent buildings during the next 


















- 68 - 


season. (32) 

(32) Ibid, p.128-129. ' ~ ~~ 

The sanguine hopes of Mr.Christie, however, were not 
entirely fulfilled. On March 28, 1865, he wrote in the Edmonton 
journal: “Received a letter from Mr.Hardisty at the Rocky Mt. 
Hse., confirming the reports we have heard of the great mor¬ 
tality amongst the Slave Indian Tribes which still continues. 
Mr.Hardisty reports the Indians to be very hard to deal with 
and ... blame us for sickness, and threaten to kill whites, 
an outbreak very much apprehended. Indians desperate, assis¬ 
tance in men and arms requested.“ (33) 

(33) Edmonton House journal 1864-65, K.B : .C. Arc hives, B.~6o/a/3 2 i-« 

Rocky Mountain House journals reveal that the people at the 
fort were frequently on the verge of starvation during the 
period of 1866-68. But the volume of trade must have been 
sufficient to justify the operation of the post during the 
winter seasons. References are made to trade with the Stony, 
the Blood and the Blackfoot, the latter tribe, as before, 
giving a great deal of trouble. 

In January, 1873, W. S. Gore visited Rocky Mountain 
House for the purpose of surveying the land around the post 
granted to the Company under Article 2 of the Deed of Surrender 
of 1869. (3^-) Although the fort was in excellent condition, 

TW) E.H.Oliver, THE CANADIAN NORTH-WEST, ITS EARLY DEVELOP- 

MENT AND LEGISLATIVE RECORDS (Ottawa: King's Printer, 
1914-15) Vol.ll. p.94-2. 

he found that very little trading was being done there as 
the fickle Blackfoot had once more returned to the Americans. 

The usefulness of Rocky Mountain House had come to an end. 










• ' 












. 

. 

. . 

- '■' ' V : " ■- " 

' 

'■ ' • •. -c v,- ■ -:\x 







- 69 - 


Chief Trader Hackland, who served at this post from 1867 to 
1871, was the last trader of any note to occupy Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House. 

In 1875 the Mountain Post was abandoned in accordance 
with the instructions contained in a letter from Chief Com¬ 
missioner James A. Graham© at Fort Garry to Chief Factor 
Richard Hardisty at Edmonton, dated December 28, 1874-: 

“... the Post at the Rocky Mountain House has been 
a grievous expense to us & as you acknowledge, its Returns 
are of no importance. If no improvement is exhibited this 
winter you will at once close it up endeavouring to find some 
one you can depend upon to take charge of it. The useless 
expenditure of money keeping up unprofitable Stations be¬ 
cause they cost money, while the prospect of future advan¬ 
tage from them is hopeless, is false policy and very detri¬ 
mental to the Result of the business, which should in every 
branch be paying. 

n The question of the removal of the R.M.Hse. Buildings 
to Fort Pitt has been discussed but I have not yet had your 
final opinioh upon the expense thereby likely to be incurred 
and have to request you to furnish it by first opportunity."(35) 

(35) Comr.J.A.Grahame Correspondence, 1874-, H.B.C. Archives, 

D.13/a,. fo/ 63 . See Appendix for further correspondence 
concerning the disposal of the buildings. 

Angus Fraser, an interpreter and probably a half- 
breed, remained in the fort during the winter of 1874-75, and 
in the spring Hardisty advanced him a small supply of goods 
on condition that he “look after the Establishment during the 
summer without any expense to the Company. 1 ’ The correspondence 







between James G-rahame and Richard Hardisty brought about 
the final abandonment of historic Rocky Mountain House, which 
for seventy-six years had survived so many vicissitudes in 
the fur trade. 


000000O000000 



CHAPTER SIX 


MISSIONARY WORK AT ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 

The history of Rocky Mountain House is not complete 
without some reference to those intrepid men who were not con¬ 
cerned with profits from furs, hut faced innumerable perils 
and hardships in order to spread the Gospel among the savages. 
No Mission was established at the Mountain post but this area 
was visited frequently by both Catholic and Protestant mission¬ 
aries. Their task was not easy, as the Indians were loath to 
abandon their pagan beliefs and rituals. Even after a tribe 
had accepted the white man's religion, the missionaries were 
obliged to make periodic visits to its camp in order to hold 
religious services, solemnize marriages and baptize children 
or new converts. In times of plague they nursed and consoled 
the sick and dying. Of necessity these men were completely in¬ 
different to luxury, or even ordinary conveniences, vigorous 
in mind and body, and endowed with a remarkable degree of self- 
reliance and courage. 

In 1840 the Wesleyan Methodist Church in England, 
with the sanction of the Hudson's Bay Company, established a 
mission at Fort Edmonton, and, according to Rev. James Evans 
who was at that time General Superintendent of Wesleyan Mis¬ 
sions in Rupert's Land, William Bundle was the first Prot¬ 
estant missionary to be stationed on the upper North Saskat¬ 
chewan. (l) His territory extended from Edmonton to Rocky 

(l) Archibald 0. MacRae, BISTORT OF ALBERTA (Western Canada 

History Co.. 1912) Vol.l, p.155. 

Mountain House, and his work was principally among the Cree, 




















■ 






































• -■ 












.« 

- 


■ 


■ 

































- 72 - 


Stoney and Blackfoot. It is recorded that in February, 1841, 
he paid a visit to Rocky Mountain House, where he was kindly 
received by J. H. Harriott, the chief factor in charge. The 
Blackfoot Indians at the fort seemed to have appreciated the 
missionary 1 s attentions, for with the naivete of small chil¬ 
dren they openly showed their affection for him. On February 
22 Rundle writes: "I found several Indians at the fort and 
shortly after my arrival another party arrived from the plains 
G-reat warmth of feeling was expressed by them on seeing me. 
Their dresses were profusely adorned with beads and gay em¬ 
broidery, with porcupine quills and other ornaments. Whilst 
I was saluting them, some kissed me, others, after shaking me 
by the hand, passed both hands over part of my dress, uttering 
at the same time a kind of prayer, and others gave me the left 
hand, because nearest the heart/ 1 (2) Several days later a 

(2) Ibid, p.155-157; quoted"from "HUDSON'S BAY TERRITORIES", 
R.M.Martin. 1849. p.133. 

rumour spread among the fanciful Indians that Mr.Rundle had 
come "down from Heaven in a piece of paper, and that the 
paper was opened by a gentleman belonging to the fort." 

The missionary spoke to the natives, through an in¬ 
terpreter, on the subject of baptism and marriage and endeav¬ 
oured to teach them "the morals and duties of Christianity". 

He also took the opportunity to solemnize two native marriages 
in the presence of over a hundred Piegan and Blackfoot Indians 

On the first day of April Rev. Mr. Rundle departed 
on horseback for the plains in search of the main Blackfoot 
camp. In his diary he records: "My kind friend, Mr.Harriott, 










. 






, •- . 


) • 

. 






f 









- 73 - 


accompanied me some distance from the fort, and I was then 
compelled to hid him adieu for a season. The personal kind¬ 
nesses I received from the gentleman during my stay with him, 
and also the assistance he afforded me in facilitating the 
objects of my mission, deserve my warmest commendation. I 
trust my visit to his fort will be made a blessing to many. 
G-reat attention was generally manifested by the officers and 
others, and, independent of the services on Sunday, I was 
accustomed to preach once during the week to them, and also 
to hold regular family worship, which most of the fort 
attended.” (3) 

HI Ibid. p.l5o. ~ 

John Harriott extended similar hospitality to Father 
De Smet, a Jesuit priest from St.Louis, who, in the course of 
his search for the Blackfcot, arrived at Rocky Mountain House 
on October 4, 1845. He left a glowing account of his agree¬ 
able host: f, The respectable and worthy commander of the 
fort, Mr. Harriote, an Englishman by birth, is among the 
most amiable gentlemen I have ever had the pleasure of meet¬ 
ing. He invited and received into his hospitable fort the 
poor missionary, a Catholic and a stranger, with a politeness 
and cordiality truly fraternal. These qualities characterize 
all the gentlemen of the Hudson*s Bay Company, and although 
Mr. Harriote is a Protestant, he encouraged me to visit the 
Blackfeet, who would soon arrive at the fort, promising me 
to use all his influence with these barbarians to obtain me 
a friendly reception. He has resided many years among them, 








. 


■ 















t. 









- 74 - 

nevertheless he did not conceal from me that I should soon 
he exposed to great dangers." (4) 

(14) Hiram M. Chittenden, and Alfred T. Richardson, FATHER 

PIERRE-JEAN DE SKET'S LIFE AND TRAVELS AMONG THE NORTH 
AMERICAN INDIANS. 1905. Vol.2. p.518. 

Though disappointed in not finding the Blackfoot at 
the fort. Father De Smet was warmly welcomed by a small band 
of Cree. "The joy my presence seemed to occasion them," he 
remarked in a letter to one of his many correspondents, 

"proved that I was not the first priest they had seen. More¬ 
over, the greater number wore medals and crosses. They in¬ 
formed me that they too had been so fortunate as to have a 
Blackgown (Reverend Mr.Thibault) who taught them to know and 
serve the Great Spirit, and baptized all their children, with 
the exception of three who were absent on the occasion. These 
children were brought to me - I administered baptism to them, 
and at the same time to one of my guides, a Kootenai. Dur¬ 
ing their stay at the fort, I gave them instruction every 
evening." (5) 

(5) Ibid, p.519. 

Father De Smet, who had great influence over many 
tribes of the Middle West, was to be called upon repeatedly 
by the government of the United States to assist in persuading 
the natives to accept negotiation and treaty. (6) 

(6) Ibid, preface, p.vii. 

During his visit at Rocky Mountain House an incident 
occurred which revealed even this early in his career that 
he possessed unusual skill as a mediator: 











' 

. 























































- 75 - 


"Two Crees, of the same hand and family, had been 
killed in a quarrel two years since. The presence of the 
offending party for the first time since the perpetration 
of the murder, rekindled in the others the spirit of rancor 
and revenge so natural to an Indian's breast, and which only 
the Christian religion is able to mollify, and there was 
every reason to apprehend fatal consequences from the old 
feud. 

"With the approbation of Mr. Karriote, I assembled 
them all in the fort; the Governor himself had the kindness 
to be my interpreter. He made a long discourse on the ob¬ 
ligation and necessity of their coming to a sincere recon¬ 
ciliation; the matter was discussed in form, each Indian 
giving his opinion in turn, with a good sense and moderation 
that surprised me. I had the pleasure and satisfaction of 
seeing the calumet passed around the assembly. This is the 
solemn pledge of peace - the token of Indian brotherhood - 
the most formal declaration of the entire forgetfulness and 
sincere pardon of an injury." (7) 

(7) Ibid. -0.519. ~ 

At length thirteen Blackfoot arrived at the post, 
and the old chief of the band embraced the priest quite 
tenderly upon learning the purpose of his journey. Father 
De Smet writes: "He was profuse in attention to me, making 
me sit beside him whenever I went to visit them in their 
apartment - shaking me affectionately by the hand and amicably 
rubbing my cheeks with his scarlet-painted nose. He cor- 





















- 7 6 - 

dially invited me to his country, offering to be my guide 
and to introduce me to his people." (8) 

(8) Ibid'. p.525T~ ~ ~ ~~ 

It was later arranged that the band would precede 
the missionary to the main Blackfoot camp in order to prepare 
the natives for his message. Shortly afterwards he took 
leave of the Mountain Fort, having resided there at his own 
expense for almost a month, and headed southward into the 
wilderness of the prairies. He was accompanied by two half- 
breeds, one a churlish fellow who acted as interpreter and 
guide. According to surname and character he appears to have 
been none other than Jamey Jock, the person responsible for 
the original defection of the Piegan. Whether he was jealous 
of the missionary's kindly welcome by the Blackfoot chief at 
Rocky Mountain House, or was simply an enemy of the good, 

Bird soon revealed his bad faith. "It was impossible to 
draw from him a single pleasant word," wrote Father De Smet, 
"and his incoherent mutterings and allusions became subjects 
of serious apprehensions." (9) 

(9) Ibid, P.527. ~ ~~~ ~~ . ~~~ 

After ten anxious days he encountered a Canadian with his 
Indian family who agreed to remain with him for some time. 

The next day his interpreter disappeared, much to the relief 
of the priest who later wrote: "Had it not been for my op¬ 
portune meeting with the Canadian, it is probable I should 
not have escaped his deep-laid plan against me." 

On December 3, 1843, John Rowand sent, almost a 
month too late, the following warning from Edmonton: "Beware, 















- 77 - 


my good sir, of your interpreter Bird. He hates everything 
connected with the French or Canadians. Munroe is not a had 
sort of man, but I cannot recommend him as fit to interpret 
what you have to say to the natives. Munroe does well enough 
at a trading post and in the shop." (10) Interpreters were 
scarce indeed and missionaries had to do the best with what 
(10) Ibid« 0.528. ~~ ~ 

they had. Munroe was not available at the time and De Smet 
had no alternative but to accept the services of Bird. 

After three weeks of intense suffering Father De 
Smet returned to Rocky Mountain House, and thence to Edmonton, 
where he spent the winter. Since the Cree were out in force 
against the Blackfoot, he decided to "await a more favourable 
moment” to visit the latter tribe, but there is no indication 
that he ever again reached the Mountain House. 

The missionary most closely associated with Rocky 
Mountain House was probably that indefatigable priest known 
throughout the West as Father Lacombe. The Edmonton journal 
records that he left for this fort on January 22, 1861, and 
returned on February 13, "bringing letters”. It is possible 
that he had been at the Mountain House on previous occasions 
to instruct the Blackfoot in the Catholic doctrine. Early 
in 1865, while Richard Hardisty was in charge, he went there 
to assist the Blackfoot who were suffering from typhoid fever. 
Father Lacombe again visited Rocky Mountain House toward the 
end of December in the same year after narrowly escaping death 
on the prairies when a strong party of Cree surprised the 










- 78 - 

Blackfoot band with whom he was travelling. The presence 
of the priest caused the Cree to withdraw, out of love and 
respect for the man who had cared for them on many occasions 
of sickness. After treating the wounds of the victims, Lacombe 
made his way to Rocky Mountain House where he had arranged a 
Christmas rendezvous with the Blackfoot. Richard Hardisty 
received the dishevelled missionary with a consideration that 
the latter recalled to the end of his life: "Richard Hardisty 
treated me like a brother that day. I felt so sick and tired 
and hungry when I got to Mountain House that I was ready to 
lie down in the snow and die. But he took our miserable party 
in before his big fire, and warmed and fed us and clothed me, 
and I always feel since then that he saved my life.” (ll) 

(ll) Katherine Hughes, THE BLACKROBE VOYAG-EUR, (Toronto: W. 

Briggs. 1911) P.125. 

Shortly after New Year's Day, 1870, we again find 
Father Lacombe journeying to Rocky Mountain House to preach 
to the Blackfoot Indians who were in that area. He spent 
many hours teaching them prayers, hymns and the catechism, 
as well as continuing the study of their language. 

In the following November he and Father Scollen 
travelled by dog-team from St.Albert to Rocky Mountain House, 
and spent the winter there collecting and revising notes for 
the Cree dictionary and grammar which Father Lacombe was pre¬ 
paring. It was on this occasion that Lacombe met Captain 
William Butler, whom he described as "a pleasant and fine 
looking man." Butler visited with the priest for several 
days and was deeply interested in his many strange experiences 
among the Indians of the plains. 





- 79 - 


John McDougall, the eldest son of George and Elizabeth 
McDougall, and Protestant contemporary of Father Lacombe, also 
included Rocky Mountain House in his extensive missionary 
field. In 1853 the Wesleyan Methodist Church in Canada as¬ 
sumed responsibility for the Methodist Mission in Rupert's 
Land, (12) and George McDougall, accompanied by John, travel- 

(12) ' J.H.Riddell, METHODISM IN THE MIDDLE WEST (Toronto: The 

Ryerson Press. 194-6) p.4Q. 

led from Norway House in 1862 to establish a new mission in 
the far West. In a previous conversation between the elder 
McDougall and Thomas Woolsey, who was in charge of the Meth¬ 
odist Mission at Fort Edmonton, it was decided that the best 
site for the new establishment would be at Victoria, "a strat¬ 
egic point on the great river highway into the West and North." 
. _______ (13 ) 

(13) Ibid. vA7. 

In the following year Elizabeth McDougall arrived at Victoria, 
now known as Pakan, with the five younger children, and for a 
long time lived in lonely isolation. With exemplary courage 
she managed the large Mission House while her husband and John 
were absent on missionary work which occasionally took them 
as far away as the Clearwater. 

Their first trip to Rocky Mountain House was in 1865, 
shortly after celebrating the New Year at Victoria. George 
McDougall had promised to marry a Mr. McAuley to Miss Brazeau, 
the daughter of Chief Trader Brazeau, who was then second in 
command at Rocky Mountain House, and at the same time he hoped 
to meet the Stoney Indians. The good influence of these mis¬ 
sionaries later saved this tribe from being exploited by the 














so - 


"whisky traders" from the United States; the McDougalls en¬ 
couraged the Stoney to take their furs to Rocky Mountain House 
and Fort Edmonton, where the liquor trade was restricted. 

The party, consisting of G-eorge and John McDougall, 
William Christie who was Chief Factor of the Saskatchewan 
District, and the groom, rode in carioles pulled by dogs. 

Tents and buffalo robes provided some shelter at night, and 
their diet consisted of pemmican and hot tea, yet the intense 
cold of January could scarcely be endured. The youhger 
McDougall later recalled; "The cold was omnipresent. In 
great chunks, in morsels, in atoms, it was all about us. You 
could reach out and grasp it. You could shiver in your clothes 
and feel it. You could almost smell it and see it, and you 
could hear it plainly enough as with might and force it strain¬ 
ed the very earth and made the forest monarchs crack as if 
they were so many ends to its lash." (l4) Upon reaching the 

Tl4) John McDougall", FAtfHFiN&EftS 'Oti fECTT’'AHD'TRJIRlE (Toronto! 
w. Briggs. 1898) p.151. 

fort the missionaries were fortunate in meeting a considerable 
number of Mountain Stoney and Blackfoot, and services were 
held for both whites and Indians. After the marriage ceremony 
had been performed and the wedding supper eaten, the hardy 
McDougalls returned to Fort Edmonton, again travelling in sub¬ 
zero weather at the remarkable rate of sixty miles a day. 

During February, 1869, John McDougall joined Richard 
Hardisty, his future brother-in-law, and a number of other 
Company servants in a visit to Rocky Mountain House. Chief 















i 

, 









81 - 


Trader James Hackland, who was In charge of the fort at this 
time, welcomed them "with the usual cheer of the Hudson's Bay 
post," "On Sunday at Service," wrote the young missionary, 
there were many nationalities present, English, Scotch, French, 
mixed bloods, Cree, Stoney, Blackfoot, Protestant, Roman Cath¬ 
olic and Pagan, and I did my best, with the help of the Lord, 
as I spoke in Cree, which was practically the universal me¬ 
dium of the time*" (15) He held two services during his stay 

(15) John McDougall, IN DAYS OF THE RED RIVER REBELLION ~ 

(Toronto: W. Briggs. 1911) q.4~5. 

and visited the people in the fort as well as the Indians in 
their camps which lay near the establishment. 

John McDougall saw Rocky Mountain House for the last 
time in May, 1915, "by then no longer a formidable fort but a 
busy frontier village. He recalled his previous visit in the 
spring of 1871, when he had travelled to this post on behalf 
of the Hudson's Bay Company to forestall an attack which Richard 
Hard!sty believed was threatening. During the journey his 
dogs had to be abandoned because of the early thaw; fortu¬ 
nately he encountered a small party of Hudson's Bay men from 
whom he obtained two horses. There was at this time no human 
habitation between Edmonton and Rocky Mountain House except a 
small Methodist Mission at Pigeon Lake. (16) 

(16) "THE GUIDE", Rocky Mountain House, May To8’ ’T915. —— 

The Anglican Church established a mission at Edmonton 
in 1876, the year in which Rocky Mountain House was abandoned, 
although Canon William Newton may have taken shelter at the 
latter post in the course of his long journeys to the South. 

His judgement of the Hudson's Bay Company differed sharply 













! J > ■ 




■ ' •' • r '- \ i(> 

i 




















- 82 - 


from the opinions of the missionaries already mentioned. In 
a startling comment on its morality he states: "I have myself 
seen in the Mountain Fort, a curious arrangement for serving 
out rum in trade with the Blackfeet, and near Edmonton Fort 
is 'Drunken Lake', keeping up the tradition of Hudson (sic) 
Bay's most unholy rites - a tradition not likely to he soon 
extinguished." (17) 

Il7) Rev.William Newton, TWENTY YEARS ON THE SASKATCHEWAN 

(London; Stock. 1897) P.4-5. 

It can be seen that a variety of useful functions 
was performed by the frontier missionaries. Although con¬ 
version was their primary object they could not ignore the 
material needs of the Indians. They showed real concern for 
the sick at the risk of their own lives, and did what they 
could for those natives who desired to read and write. Some 
of these men endeavoured to assist agricultural development 
in the West. Father Lacombe established several small settle¬ 
ments for Indians and half-breeds, taught them farming methods, 
brought in a grist mill and at St.Albert built the first bridge 
west of Fort Garry across the Sturgeon River, Earlier, in 
1862, he organized the first brigade of Red River carts to go 
to Fort Garry for supplies. In 1871 John McDougall and his 
brother brought horses and cattle into Southern Alberta for 
the first- time. Catholic and Protestant missionaries were 
also most influential in maintaining peaceful relations be¬ 
tween white men and Indians during periods of unrest, and 
assisted the federal government on several occasions by per¬ 
suading the natives to accept treaty. 






- 83 - 


Often they failed to turn the red man from his old 

religious practices. It is known that no adults among the 

Blood Indians were baptised during the first twenty years of 

missionary work, and by 1907 most of them were still pagan.(18) 

(18) Charles M. Maclnnes, IN THE'SHADOW '0F"THE ROCKISS 
_ (London; Rlvlngtons . 1950) p.2 72._ 

Yet the pioneering efforts of the first missionaries in the 
North-West Territories paved the way for more gratifying pro¬ 
gress with the Indian children for whom residential schools 
were later maintained, subsidized by the Dominion Government 
but under the direction of home mission departments of vari¬ 
ous churches. 

When agriculture succeeded hunting as the chief 
means of gaining a livelihood, the work of the Church in 
the West assumed a different aspect. Its new task was one 
of extending adequate religious facilities to frontier home¬ 
steaders who had grown accustomed to the Church in older 
Christian communities. In the beginning leadership and fi¬ 
nancial aid was required from outside, but it was expected 
that self-supporting congregations would eventually emerge. 

Services were at first conducted by itinerant mis¬ 
sionaries. The Presbyterian Church was the first religious 
body to reach the Rocky Mountain House district during the 
period of settlement, appointing Mr. R. H. MacDonald as 
student missionary to this field in May, 1909. Though he 
did not have to travel the great distances of his predecessors, 
the territory which he served was fairly extensive. Besides 
Rocky Mountain House it included the adjacent districts of 
















• '{ ■; 


1 ' j ' : .. . 










r ■ 






- 84 - 

Leslieville, Beaver Flats and Prairie Creek, making it im¬ 
possible for him to hold regular Sunday services in any one 
community. Shortly afterwards the Anglican Church was rep¬ 
resented by Charles Hives, a licensed layreader, and the 
people of this area were able to attend the church of their 
preference. This split created two struggling congregations 
instead of a single strong one, but for the sake of greater 
spiritual satisfaction the settlers were willing to make the 
sacrifice. 

For want of a special place of worship both denom¬ 
inations were obliged to hold services in the homes of their 
members, or in any other building that happened to be avail¬ 
able. The village blacksmith, Mr. F. E. Good, on at least 
ohe occasion offered Mr.MacDonald the use of his shop, while 
on the same Sunday Mr. C. Hives held services in a cement shed 
belonging to the Alberta Central Railway. (19) Even the pool 
(l9) Th^~ ll ECHQ Tr ^Rocky Mountain House. March 19. 1912. 

hall sometimes served in the capacity of a church. William 
Kirby, the first postmaster of Rocky Mountain House, remembers 
that congregations were frequently embarrassed by the pro¬ 
fanity of rude teamsters entering or leaving the hamlet; never¬ 
theless, attendance was good and the collection plate usually 
heavy. 

It was soon felt that the erection of some kind of a 
church building was essential to the development of a large 
and consistent membership as well as to the growth of adequate 
subsidiary organizations. Largely through the leadership of 
Mr.Thomson, the new Presbyterian student in the hamlet, and 







. 

♦rvVi 


















-85- 

Mr.Hives, a mission hall measuring 24 feet by 36 feet was 
built in the summer of 1912. Though a modest structure, it 
enabled the people of the community to worship more conveniently 
and also provided accommodation for a Sunday School. At other 
times the hall was used for public and social gatherings, 
facilitating in this way civic and cultural activities be¬ 
sides religious functions. 

The Roman Catholic Church was slower in reaching 
this area during the period of settlement, although it had 
been one of the first to bring Christianity to the Indians 
at Rocky Mountain House. Father Voisin celebrated mass for 
the first time here on Sunday, February 16, 1913, and since 
attendance was good the Catholic settlers were confident 
that they too would ultimately have their own church. Twelve 
years later a meeting of the Catholic people of the village 
was held in the Mount View Hotel to discuss plans for the 
construction of such a building. On this occasion approx¬ 
imately one thousand dollars was subscribed, His G-race Arch¬ 
bishop O'Leary of Edmonton granting half of the sum. In 
August, 1926, the Archbishop assisted by Fathers Sullivan 
and McDonald, conducted dedication and confirmation services 
at the newly built St.Joseph's Catholic Church. 

The mission hall was apparently used for a long 
period as the first church was not completed until 1923. The 
Protestant people of Rocky Mountain House decided to erect a 
church in 1919 as a tribute to the men of the district who 
had lost their lives in the G-reat War. Through local dona¬ 
tions and a large sum of money borrowed from the Presbyterian 












/ 








' ■(. 






• ‘ 






86 - 


Missionary Society of Toronto, they eventually achieved 
their purpose. The new building, which is simply but attract¬ 
ively designed, was called the Memorial Church and was in¬ 
tended "for the use of all Christian denominations in the 
town", (20) although it remained the property of the Pres¬ 
byterian Church. To honour those in the community who died 

(20) "THE GAZETTS". Rooky Mountain House."October 5. 1922. 

in the Second World War, a beautiful stained glass window 
and a plaque containing their names were placed in the church. 
"The Mountaineer" indicates that a Canadian G-irls in Training 
group was organized by the Presbyterian congregation in the 
fall of 1925, and in November a Mr.Jackson of Red Deer visited 
Rocky Mountain House to organize the Trail Rangers, thirteen 
boys joining at the initial meeting. The Memorial Church is 
now used solely by the Presbyterian sectioh of the community. 

In May 1927, the Church of England started confirma¬ 
tion classes for boys, girls and adults. During the same 
year the Anglican women organized a Woman’s Auxiliary, and 
Rev.Canon Merrick came out from Red Deer on this occasion 
to assist them. Although the monthly collections were often 
under fifty dollars, (21) the newly formed Women's Auxiliary 

(21) "THE MOUNTAINEER", June 9, 1927, states that collections 
for the last three Sundays In May amounted to 136.16. 

was assured.that aid in building a church would be forth¬ 
coming from the Diocesan Board on request. There was not 
always a fully qualified minister available to hold services, 
but a student minister took charge of the parish between 
university terms. Frequently the members were assisted by 
Cannon Merrick of Red Deer who conducted baptismal cermonies 




















■:*" i ; .qc J 










- 87 - 

at Rocky Mountain House, and on more rare occasions Bishop 
Sherman of Calgary would pay a pastoral visit to the village 
during which he sometimes held confirmation services. 

By 1928 the hard work of the Anglican congregation 
began to show real promise for the future. In the early 
summer Rev. Victor Smith became the resident clergyman for 
the Church of England at Rocky Mountain House, taking up 
temporary residence in Mr. William Kirby*s cottage, and 
definite plans for the erection of a church were formed. 

The building, to be called Holy Trinity Church, was ready 
for use in the autumn of 1930, and the dedication ceremony 
was conducted by Bishop Sherman on Sunday, October 26. 

Though not yet completed, the work of construction had pro¬ 
gressed sufficiently to reveal an artistic and comfortable 
interior. In his remarks on this occasion the Bishop com¬ 
mended. the congregation and its various leaders for their 
splendid cooperative effort which was at last rewarded "in 
the completion and dedication of this beautiful edifice/ 1 (22) 
(22) m THS MOUNTAINEER". October 15. 1930. p.l. 

With three denominations well equipped to serve 
those people who desired religious instruction, the pioneer¬ 
ing work of the churches in this area was largely over. With¬ 
in a period of twenty years a promising Christian community 
had emerged from the wilderness near the old fort, where in 
less tranquil days missionaries had sought to enlighten the 
heathen Blackfoot tribes. 


000000O000000 




: . 
























87 A - 


THE FIRST THREE CHURCHES AT R O CKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 



Holy Trinity Church, dedicated on October 26, 1930. 



St. Joseph's Catholic Church, 
dedicated in August, 1926. 


Memorial Presbyterian 
Church, built in 1923. 




















CHAPTER SEVEN 


EARLY SETTLEMENT 

After the departure of the fur traders, the Rocky 

Mountain House area lay dormant until the beginning of the 

twentieth century. Settlers were not interested in this 

remote part of the country while good homesteading land was 

available in the park areas. The splendid farming district 

around Red Deer, which is approximately sixty miles east of 

the old fort, was surveyed in 1883 and in 1891 the Canadian 

Pacific Railroad between Edmonton and Calgary had reached 

the hamlet of Red Deer, giving further impetus to settlement. 

Seven years later this community had a population of 125 people, 

while at Rocky Mountain House the only vestige of the white 

man was the blackened ruins of a trading post. (1) 

(l) Annie L. Saetz,THE.PARE COUNTRY (Vancouver: Wrigley “ 

Printing Co., 194-8) 

It was not until 1904 that the first homesteader 
pushed within sight of those mountains which, over a hundred 
years before, Peter Pangman had viewed from the same place. 
Unlike their predecessors, who lived upon the wild animals, 
the settlers depended primarily on the soil for their exis¬ 
tence. The earliest pioneers usually located on small prairies 
which frequently occurred within the wooded area, for these 
open spaces could be more easily broken and cropped. Later 
homesteaders were left with the poorer land and the heavier 
clearing. 

Like the adjacent districts of Eckville, Stauffer, 

Raven and Leslieville, the Rocky Mountain House region filled 









pr : ' : 





r 











- 89 - 

up rapidly during the ten years preceding the outbreak of 
the first World War. The majority of the settlers were of 
Anglo-Saxon origin, coming from Eastern Canada, the Middle 
Western States, and the United Kingdom. There were a few 
immigrants, however, from continental Europe, enthusiastic 
over the new Province of Alberta where free land was still 
available. These were optimistic years in the West and, as 
in other infant communities, the homesteaders of Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House were inspired rather than discouraged by the hard¬ 
ships and toil of their new life. Although for several years 
their roads were no more than trails, they were always con¬ 
fident that the railroad would soon arrive, which, it was 
generally believed, would solve marketing difficulties and 
bring prosperity to all. 

Settlement moved westward chiefly from Red Deer 
and Innisfail, though some people came from Lacombe. The 
Prairie Creek district, lying south-west of Rocky Mountain 
House, was settled from Innisfail. Homesteaders first enter¬ 
ed the Raven area, then Stauffer further to the north-west, 
and eventually crossed the Clearwater River where the hamlets 
of Chedderville and Dovercourt later appeared. This line of 
settlement continued to move west until it penetrated the 
wooded country around and even beyond Prairie Creek, that 
lengthy tributary which rises in the Rocky Mountains and 
joins the Clearwater near its confluence with the North Sas¬ 
katchewan River. To serve the hardy families that settled 
further upstream, Vetchland Post Office was established by 


. 

. 

r • 

• , 

~ . 1 • ■ ■' ■ . ; , • . 

■ 

. 









. 

■ 







90 - 


the Dominion Government in 1911, and Mr. G. L. Gabler, one 
of the first pioneers in this district, was hired to haul 
the mail by democrat from Rocky Mountain House. Vetchland 
was renamed Strachan in memory of G. D. Strachan who came 
into the country with Joseph Chambers and was later killed 
in World War 1. Mr. Chambers, also a veteran, remained in 
the Prairie Creek district till 194-1, and was engaged as 
secretary to that Municipality from 1930 to 1939, when in 
the latter year financial stress caused it to revert to the 
status of ’’local improvement district”. Joseph Chambers, who 
is now secretary-treasurer of the Raven Municipality, recalls 
many interesting incidents which occurred during his home¬ 
steading days. He used to trade at Stauffer, some twenty- 
five miles south-east of Strachan, where two early pioneers, 

C. H. Stauffer and J. D. Ducommun, had started the original 
store. Such centres were a boon to scattered communities, 
enabling the farmers to get their provisions and mail with 
less hardship. Supplies for these outlying stores were hauled 
by team from Inhisfail or Red Deer over rough trails which 
skirted marshes and cut across creeks and rivers. In winter 
the drivers sometimes had to face blizzards and intense cold, 
while the horses struggled desperately against banks of snow, 
frequently sinking down to their bellies in continuous drifts. 
Travelling in the spring was equally toilsome; wagons and 
teams often bogged down in ruts and mire, and turgid streams 
were dangerous to ford. 

The country around Rocky Mountain House was settled 
principally from Red Deer where the Land Titles Office was 





. 


. 


, 


. 










. 


. 

- 

. 

. 

- 

. 


‘Y 


' 












. 




‘ 

t 

■ - ; : /. ; | : m i ; e;. tM 

* 




* . • ‘ • . ; 


. 








■ 






- 91 - 


located. The first family to reach the region consisted of 
G-eorge and Fred Fletcher and their mother, who had recently 
arrived from England. G-eorge, the elder brother, set out 
alone from Red Deer with wagon and a borrowed team in April, 
1904. His purpose was to look over the country that lay to 
the west. Although good land was still available in less 
isolated places, he decided to squat near the old fort. After 
building a shack there for shelter he returned to Red Deer 
for the rest of the family and supplies. On the journey back 
the Fletchers found that both the Medicine and Horseguard 
Rivers were flooded, but by caulking the wagon box with a 
shirt, they were able to ferry across, reaching their new 
home on June 26, 1904. That summer Alexander Thomson settled 
fourteen miles away and Andy Ross squatted where Stauffer now 
stands. For several years the Fletcher family had no other 
neighbours. 

In 1906 this country was surveyed into ranges, town¬ 
ships and sections. On December 19th of the same year, Frank 
Highstead, who had come from Minnesota, made the first home¬ 
stead entry, filing on the S.W.J of Section 2, Township 40, 
Range 7, west of the fifth meridian. During the following 
two years applications for homesteads were made by G-eorge 
Fletcher, the original settler, John H. Bertrand whose home¬ 
stead later became thejtownsite of Rocky Mountain House, W.G-. 
Waters, W. McKay, Thomas G-ray who started the first store in 
the district, J. F. G-ray and Ernest Ross, who at present op¬ 
erates a large garage in the town. By the end of 1910 many 
other families had moved into this area, and a new rural com- 











. . 


' . . 
























- . : 


. 


t 









o . 

. 

. 


. 



♦ 



, 






‘ 






92 - 


munity began to take form. At first the nearest store and 
post-office were at Stauffer, a distance of 28 miles, but the 
influx of settlers soon brought improved conditions and the 
companionship of closer neighbours. In June, 1909, the Fed¬ 
eral Government authorized the opening of Prairie Grange Post 
Office on the homestead of W. S. McKenzie who acted as post¬ 
master. The office was joined to his house, which was situated 
on the opposite side of the river from the chimneys, about 
three-quarters of a mile from the present town. For several 
years John Bertrand carried the weekly mail from Stauffer which 
was served twice weekly from Innisfail by way of Markerville 
and Raven. In August, 1911, the growing settlement secured a 
semi-weekly delivery, truly an excellent service compared with 
that of some settlements in Alberta today which have only a 
weekly delivery, and none at all when weather and roads are 
bad.(2) 

(2) Personal experiences at Dunstable, Alberta, and Timeu, 

Alberta, during the spring and summer of 194-8. 

The first store in the district was opened in December, 
1909, by Thomas Gray whose farm was situated two miles west 
of the chimneys, and here the farmers were able to procure 
their more essential goods, though he himself had the arduous 
task of bringing them in from Red Deer. Mr. Gray had no in¬ 
tention of becoming primarily a merchant; nevertheless he 
carried a line of staple goods at his farm residence until 
1912, when he sold out to John Killick, who now operates the 
successful Killico Stores at Rocky Mountain House. 

Typical of the hardy pioneers who opened up this area 
is Martin Borstad. He was among those thousands of American 







}.. J 


J .. . • a. 




'■J i 


' . • hi 










- 92A - 


TYPICAL PIONEER BUILDINGS 



John H. Bertrand’s house as it looked during 
the early days of homesteading. John Bertrand’s 
granddaughter and her family are now living 
in it. This interesting relic of the pioneer 
era should he preserved. 



The Bertrand house as it looks today. 





















92B - 



A.J. Pingrey's homestead. 



A pack outfit leaving Tom dray's store. 



A homestead house still standing near 
Rocky Mountain House. 



















- 93 - 


immigrants entering Western Canada during the decade that 
preceded the First World War. With hardly more than the 
clothes he wore Mr. Borstad walked from Red Deer to the 
scattered settlement around the old fort and selected a 
homestead about two miles south of the forks. Like his 
neighbours he cleared his land with only an axe and grub 
hoe, and broke the virgin soil with a walking plough pulled 
by horses or oxen. For want of better equipment most of 
the pioneers used a small disk to till their fields, and 
some also employed a crude harrow fashioned from branches 
of willow trees. Logs were often chained together and hauled 
across the fields to level the raw breaking. All seeding 
was done by hand. As binders were expensive, the first crops 
were cut with mowers; the grain was then raked and stacked 
to provide fodder for the cattle and horses during the long 
winters. 

In the wooded country it usually took homesteaders 
three or four years to clear enough land to support their 
families. Meanwhile many were obliged to eke out a slim 
living by working in the saw mills and lumber camps of the 
Great West Lumber Company which had its headquarters at Red 
Deer; others earned a little money doing road work. In 
1911 a number of farmers joined construction gangs that had 
commenced work on two railway lines, running west from the 
Calgary-Edmonton Railroad toward Rocky Mountain House. 

Those people who arrived from older communities 
soon discovered, usually with considerable dismay, that they 
had to adjust themselves to a drastically different environ- 












' 




. 




. 




■ 

. 



■■ 


■ 












■■ ■ : - . 







- 94 - 


ment. In 1908 Alfred Brockman, an early pioneer who still 
resides at Rocky Mountain House, left a secure position on 
the English railways and the beautiful country of Kent to 
begin life anew in the Canadian West. Unemployment was an 
unusual experience for him, and the questionable conduct of 
some remittance men in Alberta made his situation all the 
more embarrassing. ”ln maryplaces where I sought work," Mr. 
Brockman recalls, ”1 found placards which read: ’Englishmen 
Need Not Apply'.” After spending several unprofitable years 
in Edmonton, he was drawn to Rocky Mountain House by attract¬ 
ive reports concerning free land in the district. To con¬ 
serve his dwindling savings he walked to Red Deer, instead of 
travelling by train, and there filed on a homestead at the 
Land Titles Office. He built a log shack measuring twelve 
feet by ten feet on his new farm and then returned to the 
city for his young wife and three small children. On Feb¬ 
ruary 21, 1910, Harry Bertrand, the son of John Henry Bertrand, 
met the Brockman family with a sleigh at the Arlington Hotel 
in Red Deer. When provisions and household equipment had 
been loaded, the small party began the long journey to Rocky 
Mountain House, following one of the several trails which 
were then in common use. (3) 

(3) Interview with Alfred Brockman on April 18, 1952, at 

Rocky Mountain House. 

During the two succeeding summers Alfred Brockman 
was obliged to leave his wife and children in order to earn 
money in Edmonton laying pipes for the city sewer system. 

In the winter months he, like most of his neighbours, re- 



















. 









■ 











- 95 - 


mained at home until money again became scarce; it was then 
customary to "go into the bush” to hew trees for a dollar 
per day. John Bertrand once accepted a tough team of cayuses 
with harness as his winter*s wages. The outfit which had em¬ 
ployed him was unable to pay cash having lost all of its ties 
while attempting to drive them down the North Saskatchewan to 
Edmonton. The pioneers at Rocky Mountain House were perforce 
road builders and lumberjacks as well as tillers of the soil, 
and in view of the many hardships that they endured, it is 
truly remarkable so few of them gave up their homesteads. 

Another ordeal which the settlers faced was the gruel 
ling task of bringing in supplies, especially during bad weath 
er. The establishment of local stores reduced the amount of 
travelling to some extent, but many farmers preferred to take 
advantage of the lower prices and greater variety of commod¬ 
ities available at the larger trading centrea. One of the 
roads leading west from Red Deer was the Hudson's Bay Trail 
which in the past had been used by fur traders and Indians. 

It followed in a winding fashion the highest land up to 
Sylvan Lake, which was crossed when the surface was solidly 
frozen but otherwise skirted. The trail then angled across 
country to Eckville and from this point passed through the 
Blueberry Hills to Leslieveille, where for several years 
Dan McLeod provided food and shelter at reasonable prices 
for the travellers. Occasionally a merry crowd would con¬ 
gregate at his house and stories would be told late into 
the night. Eventually the tired travellers would roll up 
in their blankets and sleep soundly on the rough floor. At 




- 96 - 

dawn the last leg of the trip would begin* This part of 
the journey was particularly rough for corduroy roads had 
been built across the muskegs between Eckville and Rocky 
Mountain House. 

Often it was necessary to ford creeks and rivers, 
though crossings were later constructed at the most danger¬ 
ous places. A bridge finally spanned the Medicine River 
at old Eckville, about two miles north of the present town, 
and there was another bridge north-west of Evarts on the 
same River. Pole crossings were usually built over creeks 
but these constructions were frequently washed away during 
the spring thaw. Travellers learned through bitter expe¬ 
rience that it was wise to carry a block and tackle so that 
they could pull their vehicles out of bogs and mudholes. 

Some carried tents with them, and everyone a blanket roll 
and a canvas which served as a ground sheet. When their 
horses tired, the pioneers would camp under the wagon if no 
other shelter was near. It took Martin Borstad six days to 
make a round trip to Red Deer; two days were required to 
reach the town, shopping took another day and three days 
were needed to return with the load of groceries, horses 
feed and other essential supplies. (4) 

(4) Interview with Martin Borstad at Rocky Mountain House,"” 

August. 1951. 

Mrs. Martin Borstad, formerly Helen Bertrand, re¬ 
counts her experience on such a trip made in June, 1908, as 
follows: 

H My first long trip from Minneapolis to Innisfail 
took two days and two nights. My father was to meet me there 






. 

. 

. ' 

* 

. . . . *: - ' . . - ... " ■ : . . ' . 

. • ■ - 

. 

• • 

. 

. 

. 

- . ‘ . ■ 

. 

' 

•: •... ' . 

. 

' . ’ • ■ 

. 

. 

; 

' 











- 97 - 


but bad roads had delayed him. I went to the hotel and 
after a good rest was called into the hotel parlor for tea. 
There, with ten or twelve other guests and helpers, I had 
my first cup of black tea. I thought it was awful but the 
friendly welcome made me forget the bad taste. 

"On Saturday my father came. He had a small load 
of supplies to take out but, as freighters were not allowed 
to leave on Sunday, he got permission from the police and a 
warning to get started early before someone objected. 

"He was driving two horses hitched to a wagon, lead¬ 
ing one to change off as either of the others tired. We cov¬ 
ered fifteen miles that day - up and down and round about. 

We spent the night at a 'stopping house’. The accommodation 
was very simple although the welcome was genuine. 

"The next morning on again - twenty-five miles to 
Stauffer. We hadn’t gone far when we had to ford a creek. 

Dad said, ’Hang on* and in we plunged. The water ran into 
the wagon box but we managed to reach the other side. I 
was not accustomed to long trips in the open and by that 
night had a glorious sunburn which lasted a week or more. 

"At Stauffer my mother was waiting and after two 
very pleasant days we started for home, another twenty-five 
miles. All went well until about seven miles from our des¬ 
tination, where we had to ford another creek. When nearly 
across the wagon stuck in the mud. My father helped us out 
and my mother and I went up the hill to a homesteader’s shack. 
Here we found the owner who helped to unload the wagon and 





' JL 















- 98 - 


get it on higher ground. The supplies were covered with canvas 
as it had started to rain. We all stayed the^re for two days; 
in the morning of the third day we started on. The ground was 
very soft and once we tipped over on apparently level ground. 
About a mile from home another creek had to be forded. This 
time my father decided to cross alone and it is well that he 
did as the horses almost found it necessary to swim before 
they were across. 

"My mother and I followed a ridge between the river 
and the creek for about quarter of a mile. It led down to the 
road beside the river where my father met us and took us home." 

___LSI 

(5) Interview with Mrs.Martin Borstad, Rocky Mountain House, 
April. 1952. 

Although by 1911 rural development of the Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House area was proceeding rapidly, many farmers were dis¬ 
satisfied with the regulations laid down by the Dominion Gov¬ 
ernment in respect to homesteading. George Thomson, a staunch 
Conservative and editor of the first newspaper in the district, 
exaggerated the discontent of the settlers through the columns 
of the "Echo", asserting that the land policy of Laurier's 
Liberal Government was actually impeding western settlement. 

It was certainly reasonable that each homesteader be 
required to live on his quarter section for at least six months 
of every year, but those settlers who entered the country with¬ 
out cash or equipment feared that they would not, within a 
period of three years, be able to build a habitable house, dig 
a well, break thirty acres of land, crop twenty acres twice, 
fence eighty acres and at the same time provide a living for 




1 

i . ■ . 

* . 

. 

■ 

. 

. 







• " v 


■ 

- ' ; .v 

• • ' • . 

' 

. . 

! ■ ■ : 

. 


■ 




. 


■ 






' ; 









- 99 - 


their families. It was rightly felt that the conditions 
should be less exacting in those areas where the terrain 
was rocky, marshy or timbered, for preparing thirty acres 
under such circumstances was obviously a more strenuous task 
than breaking a field of equal size on the open prairie. In 
the grasslands a homesteader of the previous summer might 
have thirty or forty acres of land in crop, perhaps a patch 
of spring breaking seeded in flax, and the assurance of suf¬ 
ficient feed for his stock during the winter. At Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House the settlers whose farms were heavily wooded could 
hope to clear only a few acres yearly, and machine farming 
was impossible until the large roots and stumps had been re¬ 
moved from the land. 'True, the pioneer in this region had 
abundant fuel and building material which the prairie settler 
lacked, but these advantages were small in comparison with 
the rapid production of cash crops and the superior market¬ 
ing facilities that the latter enjoyed. In open country pro¬ 
duce could be hauled to the nearest railway over trails which 
would not suffice in the rough and marshy terrain of the forest 
belt. 

Dissatisfaction over the Homestead Regulations grad¬ 
ually increased in the settlement as more people took up land. 
During the spring of 1912 a petition signed by nearly 500 men 
was sent to the Honourable Robert Rogers, Minister of the 
Interior, requesting that the acreage to be broken be reduced 
from thirty acres to fifteen acres in wooded districts. In 
his reply to the petitioners the Minister drew their attention 
to a provision in the Regulations which the settlers had not 









100 


been aware of: "Where homesteaders are unable to meet the 
requirements by reason of woods, rock or the broken character 
of the surface, the area required may be reduced, and the 
application for patent will be taken subject to acceptance 
by the Agent and Department after a homestead Inspector has 
visited the land and reported; but inspections of this' kind 
are not made prior to the application for patent." (6) 

( 6 ) The "Echo", Rocky Mountain House, May 21, 1912. 

In practice the Land Agent at Red Deer was lenient, 
frequently accepting smaller acreages than the law specified 
and passing as habitable residences which were little more 
than shacks. If the homesteader could show that he had made 
reasonable progress during the three-year period, he had no 
difficulty in obtaining his patent. 

As the community grew a trading centre developed 
about half a mile below the mouth of the Clearwater River 
on the east bank of the Saskatchewan. A number of business 
establishments sprang up near the camp of the Alberta Central 
Railway v/hich In 1910 had started work on a railroad bridge 
at this point. Although the citizens of the unofficial ham¬ 
let were not entirely satisfied with its site and haphazard 
plan, it grew rapidly during 1910 and 1911. 'The "Echo", found¬ 
ed on February 4, 1910, was one of the earliest enterprises. 

In April, 1911, W. Fraser and H. L. G-aetz opened a general 
store and their business grew so rapidly that within one year 
they had to enlarge the building on three different occasions 
to accommodate their customers. Soon afterwards Mr. H. C. 
Turnbull from Bowden started a jewellery counter in the 







101 


Fraser and Gaetz store, moving later into larger premises 
a short distance away. On May 20 of the same year the first 
automobile to be seen at Prairie Grange arrived from Red Deer. 
It was a McLaughlin Buick, Model 17, and was driven by A. C. 
Williams, accompanied by two ambitious businessmen, J. H. 
Driscoll and W. J. Kirby, both from Calgary. They set up a 
store in a large tent, while a frame building and warehouse 
was being constructed. During the spring a boarding house 
was opened by Mrs. J. Olson, and Paul Paulson, formerly of 
Morningside, erected two large tents to which he gave the 
name "Rocky Mountain House Hotel 1 '. A snort while later ne 
ouilt a large frame ouilding in order to provide oetter serv¬ 
ice for railroad ouilders and travellers. Messrs. Chalmers 
and Lundy opened the first restaurant, out finding the pre¬ 
mises ratner small, they enlarged the dining space and at 
the same time ouilt a rooming house and public hall above. 

Sam Creighton came from Lacombe to open a barber shop in the 
poolroom at Rocky Mountain House, and the "Echo" referred to 
him as "a first-class hair and whisker artist". Mr. C. L. 
McLean, who had been on the engineering staff of the Alberta 
Central Railway Company, felt such confidence in the future 
of this district that he resigned his position in order to 
launch a real estate and insurance business. The first drug¬ 
store was owned by Mr. A, E. Pepper of Lacombe, and it was 
advertised in the paper that he had "an up to date stock of 
drugs, patent medicines and toilet requisites" as well as a 
good supply of "horse and veterinary medicines". (7) The 


(7) The tf Echo tr r August 5. 1911 












































IoIA 


OLD TOWN 



Old Town as it appeared before many of its build¬ 
ings were moved to the new site. 



The only relic of the original stores 
at Old Town. 







IOIB - 


OLD TOWN TODAY 




Old Town is now a residential 
suburb of 

Rocky Mountain House. 










102 


latter drugs were needed to combat the swamp fever that was 
prevalent In this area. He later sold out to Dr. A. H. Brown 
the hamlet*s first doctor, who had been employed by the Can¬ 
adian Northern Railway Company. The first blacksmith to 
reach the forks since the closing of the fort in 1875 was 
F. E. G-ood. His services were in great demand, for horses 
needed shoeing and ploughshares had to be exceedingly sharp 
to cut through tough roots and turn new soil. William McLen¬ 
nan built the first livery, feed and sale stable, which the 
farmers found most convenient in winter. Two more livery 
barns later appeared, insuring that all teams could be ade¬ 
quately accommodated. Teams and vehicles were also available 
for renting. 

In 1911 Mr, L. G. Taylor, who like several others 
came from Lacombe, became the first Dominion Land Agent at 
Rocky Mountain House. It was now unnecessary to travel the 
great distance to Red Deer to settle homesteading affairs. 

Mr. Taylor also acted as Justice of the Peace and at the same 
time embarked upon a real estate, loan and insurance business 

This rapidly growing settlement required capable 
builders and it found them in E. R. Hill and J. E. Nordstrom, 
two contractors whom the editor of the local paper described 
frequently as "hustlers". They owned a saw mill and were 
therefore able to build homes directly from the log. There 
was also a lumber yard in the community, operated by Messrs. 
Martin and MacDougall, from which private builders could 
procure their supplies. 
















- 103 - 


On October 3, 1911» the "Echo" announced that Wm. 

J. Kirby had written to the Inspector of the Imperial Bank 
of Canada informing him the hamlet had grown to such an ex¬ 
tent that it required a bank* Not long afterwards a branch 
was opened and Mr. W. M. Sellens was appointed manager. 

The rapid growth of an urban centre prompted opti¬ 
mistic business men to give serious thought to the selection 
of an official location for the great metropolis "which they 
envisaged would emerge on the banks of the upper Saskatchewan. 
They felt that on its original site the future expansion of 
Rocky Mountain House would be limited by the river on the 
west and the ravine on the south. After much debate about 
whether the town should be on the west or on the east side 
of the Saskatchewan River, an adventuresome group of settlers 
formed the Central Alberta Townsite Company. Although prac¬ 
tically penniless, they promptly made arrangements to purchase 
a new site. Because of its high elevation and good drainage, 
"its accessibility to the greatest number of settlers” (8) and 

(8) RockFUountain House Guide, August 29~1913* ~~ ' 

probably the fine view of the Rocky Mountains to the north¬ 
west, John Henry Bertrand’s homestead was selected. For this 
fractional quarter, consisting of 12? acres of land, and lying 
on the east side of the river about one and a half miles from 
the mouth of the Clearwater, the Townsite Company agreed to 
give Mr.Bertrand the amazing sum of $10,160.00 } two hundred 
and fifty dollars of which was to be paid at once. It was 
optimistically believed that the remainder of the purchase 
price would be raised through the sale of lots. (9) 

(9) "See appendix ror copy of original agreement. 










I03A - 


THE HAMLET AND THE VILLAGE 



Rocky Mountain House on the official site, 

1912. 



Rocky Mountain House as a village (the date is 
missing). 












I03B 


THE TOWN 



Rocky Mountain House Today. 

The mountains are visible in the background 


















- 104 - 


Thomas Daniel G-reen, a full-blooded Indian born on 
the famous Six-Nation Reserve at Brantford, Ontario, surveyed 
the townsite. A graduate of McGill University, he held cer¬ 
tificates as a Dominion and Alberta Land Surveyor, and had 
been associated with a number of historic surveys including 
Fort Ellice Trail in Manitoba and various mining claims in 
the Yukon during the Gold Rush of 1898. He also surveyed the 
townships in the Rocky Mountain House area in 1906. He finally 
settled on a homestead east of Rocky Mountain House but later 
moved into the village where he took an active interest in 
local affairs until the time of his death in 1935* 

After surveying and subdividing the land, the pur¬ 
chasers submitted their plan to the Registrar for the North 
Alberta Land Registration District. The lots were placed on 
sale on February 27, 1912, and George Thomson marked the oc¬ 
casion by issuing "The Townsite Special". In it he listed 
"Nine of the 1001 Reasons" for buying property at Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House. The arguments, apart from the customary comments 
on the scenic beauty of the region, were economic. The Can¬ 
adian Northern Railway and the Alberta Central were at this 
time building parallel lines toward the hamlet in a race to 
the Brazeau Colleries. It was generally believed that at 
least one of these roads would in a short time be a trans¬ 
continental line. With the knowledge that the Panama Canal 
would soon be opened to traffic, many people thought that 
most of the prairie wheat and livestock would be hauled to 
the Pacific Coast for shipment to Europe. The editor in¬ 
dicated, too, that the town was advantageously situated at 













t 



















h;-: 














- 105 - 


the confluence of two rivers whose headwaters flowed through 
millions of feet of virgin timber. It was also in the midst 
of an infant, but thriving, dairying and mixed farming region. 
The most attractive feature of Rocky Mountain House appears 
to have been its position midway between the business centres 
of the province and the large deposits of coal in the Brazeau 
area which German capital was preparing to exploit. "This 
place is going to grow very fast," stated the "Echo 11 , "from 
the day the first lots go on the market; a month ago we thought 
5000 people, now we figure on no less than at least 40,000 in 
the next ten years." (10) 

(10) The 11 Echo" June 5. 1911. 

The property sold rapidly in the beginning for the 
merchants in general had given the scheme their blessing, and 
were now anxious to estaolish themselves on the new site as 
quickly as possible. Skids were placed under the buildings 
so that horses could pull them more easily and with less danger 
of damage. Most of the business residences withdrew to the 
official site, but "old town", as it became known, did not 
disappear. It is in fact a residential suburb of Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House proper; Levi Smith, one of the earliest homesteaders, 
still resides there at the ripe age of eighty-six. 

Rocky Mountain House now stands as a substantial 
tribute to those enterprising citizens who were not afraid 
to invest in its future, but the venture from a financial 
point of view was not successful. Ho one ever grew rich from 
the sale of lots and Mr.Bertrand in particular was burdened 
by the Investment. 






106 - 


Mr. Skinner, the editor of the ’’Guide" which in 
1912 had replaced the "Echo", blamed the slow sale of lots 
on the Canadian Pacific Railway. "Upon several occasions," 
he wrote on November 21, 1913, "the Townsite Company offered 
one half of the remaining lots to the Canadian Pacific Rail¬ 
way as a gift. The Company refused them, but acquired the 
quarter section adjoining on the west, on which they have 
announced their intention of surveying a townsite and estab¬ 
lishing a station." These rumours retarded the sale of lots, 
for the uncertainty that shrouded the location of the station 
caused many prospective purchasers to bide their time. As it 
turned out, the Canadian Pacific Railway Company ultimately 
abandoned the idea of founding a second town, although a 
station was built called Lochearn. To avoid confusion the 
Company later adopted the name Rocky Mountain House. 

Despite early difficulties and frustrations the 
hamlet rapidly reached the status of a. village, receiving 
notification of its incorporation from the Department of 
Municipal Affairs on May 2, 1913. The first elections for 
the village council were held one month later, and Mr. H. L. 
Gaetz, one of the pioneer merchants, became the first mayor. 

The Council was immediately embarrassed by lack of 
funds as approximately two-thirds of the village was owned 
by the Townsite Company which had not paid taxes on the 
grounds that its only returns came from the sale of lots. 

On March 13, 191^, Mr. J. H. Bertrand felt obliged to shoul¬ 
der the liabilities of the bankrupt company. Since the vil¬ 
lage would not relinquish its right to claim taxes, he agreed 
to pay the sum of $1500.00 which was owing on the property, 









and in this way made the lots a more attractive investment, (11) 
('ll) Rocky Mountain House G-uide, March 15, 191^. 

John H, Bertrand, who died at the age of 82 on 
February 17, 1932, deserves more than any other person to 
be recognized as the founder of Rocky Mountain House. His 
original home is still standing and is occupied by his grand¬ 
daughter. It should be preserved as a memorial to one of 
the town's finest pioneers. 


ooooooOoooooo 






." . - - t . . ■ ‘ ’: ' ■ a 

■ . 




, 

. 

. 


















CHAPTER SIGHT 


ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 

The pioneer community around Rocky Mountain House 
began in a mood of optimism during a period when homesteading 
and railroad building possessed an irresistible appeal. Bless¬ 
ed with the triple resources of land, lumber and coal, the 
people of this district believed the extravagant predictions 
uttered by railroad officials and editors relevant to the 
future prosperity of their settlement. The following passage 
from the "Echo" reveals the sentiment that prevailed at this 
times "Rocky Mountain House is the gateway to the Brazeau 
coal fields. Settlers can depend upon a ready market for all 
and more than they can produce and the home market is always 
the best; you don't have to kick about freight rates on stuff 
you have to sell. Five railways will enter Rocky Mountain 
House from the east side of the river within the next five 
years. There is a future before us I" (l) 

Cl) The "Echo'* Rocky Mountain House, June 5. 1911. ~~ 

By the spring of 1911 many homesteaders had small 
areas of land under cultivation; fencing had begun and cattle 
raising, though still in its infancy, was developing steadily. 
Yet farm produce could not be marketed until the country was 
served with better transportation facilities. Roads and a 
railway were essential to the community's growth, and the 
settlers clamoured for both continually. In 1911 there was 
at last real hope that the main route into the settlement 
would soon be improved. "We are informed by Mr. E. Michener, 
M.P.P. ," wrote G-eorge Thomson, "that the Government intends 





















- 109 - 


to grade the road from Emberley's Corner to the Clearwater 
early next summer. This will make a good road from Red Deer 
to Rocky Mountain House." (2) The side trails, however, re- 
(2) The , *Echo ,t , Feb. 18. 1911.. 

mained inadequate for many years. Even now, during spring 
thaw and rainy weather, they present a serious problem to 
those farmers who do not live near the David Thompson highway. 

While the people awaited the coming of steel, G-eorge 
Brewster of Bov/den started a stage service between Rocky Mount- 
ain House and Red Deer, and the maiden trip was begun on Dec¬ 
ember 4, 1911, by Ira G-ray, the son of Thomas G-ray. The 
former still resides in the district. The stage left the 
hamlet at 6:30 a.m. on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays, 
and arrived at Red Deer the same evening. Return journeys 
began at the same hour on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. 

Both passengers and parcels were carried each way. This 
service, the forerunner of the bus, was typical of pioneer 
resourcefulness. 

The railroad facilities improved in a spectacular 
manner, but not because the railway companies were concerned 
about the isolation of the settlers. The spirit of rivalry 
which had prevailed in this region during the fur trade was 
suddenly rekindled by the discovery of large coal deposits 
near Nordegg. Early in 1910 two companies, the Canadian 
Northern and the Alberta Central, decided to build compet¬ 
itive lines toward Rocky Mountain House, each hoping to mo¬ 
nopolize the Brazeau coal trade. The road of the former 
was a continuation of the branch that passed through Alix 






110 


and Mirror to the north-east and crossed the Edmonton-Calgary 
railway several miles south of Blackfalds. The Alberta Cen¬ 
tral began at Red Deer and this town, hoping to benefit from 
the rich hinterland that lay to the west, gave the project 
its moral support. The "Echo", though favouring the Canadian 
Northern Company, cheered on both contestants, giving praise 
when progress was rapid but condemning them vehemently when 
activity abated. The early pioneers had always felt confi¬ 
dent that steel would follow them in a few years, but the 
prospect of two competing railroads was beyond their earlier 
expectations. They were quite prepared nevertheless to make 
the most of this happy situation. The railway boom provided 
capital and employment at a time when both were greatly needed, 
and was largely responsible for the rapid growth of a village. 

As early as 1910 the Alberta Central Railway Company 
had employed the Dominion Steel and Bridge Company to con¬ 
struct a bridge across the North Saskatchewan River at a 
point three-quarters of a mile below the mouth of the Clear¬ 
water. Meanwhile the Canadian Northern concentrated on road 
building, reaching Sylvan Lake before its competitor had 
even completed a survey. By the end of 1911 it had laid 
tracks to within one mile of Rocky Mountain House. 

Behind in the race, the Alberta Central made valiant 
efforts to overtake its energetic rival. On April 1, 1911, 
President J. T. Moore and Chief Engineer J. G-rant McG-regor 
awarded to James McDonald and Company a contract for one 
hundred miles of grading and ballasting on the proposed 
Alberta Central road for a distance of 64 miles west of Red 







Ill 


Deer and 36 miles east. (3) At a cost of $25,000,00 per 

(3) The line east of Red Deer was not completed. 

mile this contract amounted to the considerable sum of 
$2,500,000.00, and the work was to be completed by the 
end of August. 

It was at this time that the Scotsman, Mr.McGregor, 
broached the idea of giving the name Loch Ernie or Lochearn 
to the flourishing hamlet at the forks. The local paper 
offered only mild criticism on this occasion: ,f It is a suit¬ 
able name in a way as Lake Ernie is just two miles east but 
it is not much like the beautiful lochs in Scotland.” (4) 

(4) The "Echo". April 1, 1911. 

Indeed, the lake referred to was no more than a large slough. 

At Rocky Mountain House the two railway lines drew 
together. Here the right-of-way granted to the Alberta Cen¬ 
tral permitted this company to build a grade that cut across 
the proposed route of its competitor. This unusual situation 
set the stage for a travesty which brought railroad building 
to a standstill and entertained the settlers for several 
months. Although their steel had not yet reached Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House, construction gangs employed by the Alberta Central 
Company began to erect barricades on both sides of the Saskat¬ 
chewan River in an attempt to halt the rapid advance of the 
other company. Without hint of violence Canadian Northern 
men simply removed the barriers during the night. Between 
Perrier and Ullen, on the north side of the river, they also 
dumped ground from their higher grade on that of the Alberta 
Central Railway, which was lower and running parrallel. In 















. . . 





. 
















-• 




, 
















. 


* 

' 

* 







- 112 - 


this way "both outfits began playing leapfrog with stretches 
of track clear on to Horburg", (5) a distance of sixteen miles. 
T5TRobert E. Gard, JOHNNY CHINOOK (London: Tongmans, 1945) 

_E-Jlg.____ 

Ultimately tiring of the game, the Alberta Central 
Railway Company sought to obtain an injunction against the 
other company. In 1912 the controversy was settled by the 
Railway Commission which decided that only one bridge was 
needed at Rocky Mountain House, and the Alberta Central was 
favoured in this respect as it had already commenced con¬ 
struction. This company, on the other hand, was ordered to 
end its steel at Ullen, several miles west of Rocky Mountain 
House on the north side of the river, while the Canadian 
Northern, having laid the greater length of track west of Red 
Deer, was permitted to continue on to Nordegg. According to 
the arrangements made by the Commission, the Canadian Northern 
Railway Company was permitted to use the Alberta Central 
bridge and track up to Ullen for which the latter company 
was recompensed. 

The Canadian Northern Railroad reached Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House in the middle of June, 1912, well in advance of 
the Alberta Central line. John Henry Bertrand was given 
the honour of driving the last spike while over three hundred 
people looked on. George Thomson, who had bet Mr. Galbraith, 
the editor of the Red Deer Advocate, "his hat n that the 
Canadian Northern Railroad would win the race, was jubilant 
as his favourite company lived up to his great expectations. 

To mark the occasion he wrote some doggerel verse which 








II2A - 


THF. T.AftT RPOffi 



John H. Bertram drives the last spiKe m 
the Canadian Northern Railroad at Rocky 
Mountain House, June, 1912. 






- 113 - 


appeared in the "Echo”s 

Did you ever hear of the Great C.N.R.? 

The railroad that earned its renown 
By the way it goes forging its way through 
The West and linking up village and town. 

They're bound to be first, at the Brazeau Mines, 
And beat J. T. Moore at a walk; 

And show the A.C. that the^re miles in the rear, 
And you can't build railroads with talk. 

The A.C.R. tried with injunctions and fines 
To stop all the C.N.R. hadjdone: 

But now it's all over, the train is right here, 

And so the C.N.R. won. 

When you ride in a nice Pullman car, 

And go to the Lake (Sylvan) for a trip, 

Just remember the C.N.R. is top dog 
And the A.C.R. has got whipped. 

There's never a wind that don't blow for good, 

You can always be sure about that; 

The Advocate's lost and it's up to the boss 
To send G-. T. Thomson his hat. 

Though dubious from a literary point of view, these lines 

are interesting because of the references to the railway 

controversy and the suggestion that a mild rivalry existed 

between Red Deer and Rocky Mountain House. 

On July 2, 1912, George Thomson expressed his kindly 
feeling toward "The Advocate" and its editor for having 
honoured the bet. When Mr.Galbraith heard that the Canadian 
Northern steel had reached Rocky Mountain House, he sent an 
order to Fraser and Gaetz to fit out the editor of the "Echo" 
with the best hat in their store. 

Meanwhile the Alberta Central construction gang 
continued to push slowly westward. By January 3, 1913, 
practically all of the grading on the road leading to Rocky 
Mountain House was finished, and tracks laid to a point 
fifteen miles west of Red Deer. At the same time the bridge 



t 











t 





' 











- 114 - 

was nearing completion. This structure was ready for use 
on June 26, 1913. It was an important link not only between 
Rocky Mountain House and Nordegg, but also between the two 
communities lying on opposite sides of the high river banks. 
When the ferry could not be operated, and when the river ice 
was dangerous to cross, this bridge provided the only means 
by which pedestrians and teamsters could reach the village 
from the north. 

The second railway entered Rocky Mountain House in 
1914, just prior to the outbreak of the First World War. In 
this year the Alberta Central Railway was absorbed by the 
larger Canadian Pacific Company. The new road, which had 
been created under the direction of J. T. Moore, was in¬ 
formally opened on Monday, August 17. The Maintenance De¬ 
partment of the Canadian Pacific Railway took over the line 
from the Construction Department, and the first train was 
run west and east to inaugurate the regular tri-weekly serv¬ 
ice. A mixed train, freight and passengers, left the Red 
Deer station at 12:30 p.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Sat¬ 
urdays. It reached Lochearn station (later Rocky Mountain 
House) at 4:00 p.m. and returned the same day. Later in 
that month Mr. Donlevey, the energetic Canadian Pacific Rail¬ 
way agent at Red Deer, provided an excursion on the occasion 
of the Red Deer Fair. A special train consisting of five 
standard coaches carried people from the western region to 
Red Deer. Lochearn Station, built by the Alberta Central, 
accommodated both companies which were now following a more 
cooperative policy. 















. 


. 



. 


■ . 


. 


. 

, 

. 

. 


. . . 








- ;.r - •• 

, 

, 


■ . ; .. . , - : 

. 




. 


. 




. 

. 

* 

, - 





115 - 


Mall was still being carried by team to the village 
as late as July 31, 1914-. On this day "The Guide" announced 
that the Post Office Inspector at Calgary, Mr. D. A. Bruce, 
had informed the editor by letter that "mail service by train 
to Rocky Mountain House is now engaging the attention of the 
Railway Mail Service Branch." 

The Canadian Northern Railway Company, being more 
interested in reaching the Collieries than starting a regular 
train service for Rocky Mountain House, had by October 10, 

1913, laid rails to a point thirty-three miles beyond the 
station of Lochearn. It hoped to reach the Brazeau mines by 
the end of that year. It was already common knowledge that 
the Dominion Government would soon take over this branch. (6) 
(6) "The Guide". July 11. 1913. ' 

The citizens of Rocky Mountain House could no longer 
complain about the lack of railway facilities, but their dream 
that one line at least would eventually become part of a trans¬ 
continental line passing through historic Howse Pass, or else 
be connected with the Canadian National Road through Yellow- 
head Pass, never materialized. By the end of 1914 railroad 
fever had subsided, and common sense indicated that it was 
uneconomical to extend the steel beyond Nordegg. Today two 
companies continue to provide a tri-weekly service to Rocky 
Mountain House, but only the Canadian National Company sends 
freight and passenger trains to Nordegg. 

It was coal, more than farming or lumbering, which 
had fired the imaginations of settlers and railroad interests, 







- 116 - 


and raised hopes that were never fully realized. Brazeau 
coal '’classed as low volatile bituminous in rank", (7) and 

(7) J.A.Allan, COAL AREAS OF ALBERTA, Research Council of 

Alberta. Edmonton. Alberta, 194-3, p.174. 

suitable for locomotive engines, was first exploited by 
Brazeau Collieries Limited, an organization financed by 
G-erman capital. This company obtained control of 10,000 
acres of coal lands near the southern headwaters of the 
Brazeau River, approximately sixty miles west of Rocky 
Mountain House. Development of the field was begun in 1911, 
before a single track had been laid on the north side of the 
Saskatchewan. A mining camp was established on the property; 
this settlement later became known as Nordegg, after Martin 
Nordegg, the company’s geologist and first president, who 
reputedly surveyed the original field. John Shanks, who 
was formerly manager of the Coal Creek Mines of the Crow's 
Nest Pass Coal Company, became general manager of the Brazeau 
Collieries in 1914. He held this position until September, 
1945, and died in Calgary five months after his retirement. 

During 1911 the Saunders Creek Coal Company was 
also preparing for production a smaller deposit of bitumi¬ 
nous coal forty miles west of Rocky Mountain House. As soon 
as the Canadian Northern Railroad reached the mines at 
Saunders and Brazeau, coal began to be produced in large 
quantities principally for steam purposes. These fields, 
though valuable, did not become the most important in Alberta. 
For example, during 1941 and 1942 coal mined at Nordegg fell 
far short of the annual output at such centres as Crowsnest, 




. 

■ 


. . 


. 

♦ 



• 

• 

. 

- 




■ ' 

■ 




* 





- 

- • 

* 

- 




• 

■ 


* 


'• f • r\. . \ J .1 : : • 








- 117 - 


Drumheller, Mountain Park, Coalspur and even Edmonton, (8) 

(8) Ibid, Table 3, p.167. 

Today coal trains continue to pass through Rocky Mountain 
House, but the market has suffered appreciably owing to the 
increasing use of the Diesel locomotive which in a few years 
will entirely replace the steam engine on Canadian and Ameri¬ 
can railways. 

The significance of the Brazeau and Saunders mines 
to the economic growth of the Rocky Mountain House area lay 
not so much in the coal trade itself as in the location of 
the fields west of the town. They inspired the railroad boom 
that had both temporary and far-reaching effects on the life 
of the community. In 1911 a discerning land agent reported: 
"Considerable railway development took place during the past 
year, but 1911 promises to be phenomenal in railway construc¬ 
tion throughout the district. Construction work on the Alber¬ 
ta Central and Canadian Northern Railways west from Red Deer, 
which was carried on all winter, has given employment to a 
large number of settlers. These companies have paid good 
wages and have purchased all kinds of produce that the farmers 
had to sell, which has made good times generally. Many new 
towns are springing up, and the older towns are growing 
rapidly, consequently there is a heavy demand for all kinds 
of skilled labour. The building of the railways to the West 
has given an impetus to settlement in that portion of the 
district, which formerly was neglected on account of lack 
of transportation facilities. Butter and cheese making, 
which is an important factor in the life of the farmer in 




. ' 


. 




















. 




. 






















■ - - 












r> 







- 118 - 


this district, is steadily increasing and the earnings of 
the factories have been above the calculations of the most 
optimistic. 11 (9) 

(9) Arthur S. Morton and Chester Martin, HISTORY OF PRAIRIE 
SETTLEMENT AND "DOMINION LANDS" POLICY, Toronto, 1933, 
Vol.ll. p.143. 

The coming of two railroads to Rocky Mountain House 
assured the advancement of both mixed farming and lumbering, 
the basic industries of the area. From an economic stand¬ 
point, the stockyards and the Atlas planing mill are undoubt¬ 
edly the most important establishments in the town. 

Farming has become the most extensive occupation in 
the Rocky Mountain House district, yet throughout the greater 
part of the fur trading period this region was considered in¬ 
capable of producing anything but small potatoes. It was not, 
of course, in the interests of the trading companies to attract 
settlers to the North-West with rosy reports of its agricul¬ 
tural possibilities; nevertheless the records of the fur trad¬ 
ers cannot be entirely discredited. While kitchen gardens 
and cereal crops were usually successful around Fort Edmonton 
and Fort Carlton, they seldom reached maturity at Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House. As early as 1810 Alexander Henry wrote: “The soil 
in general is sand, covered with thin black mold which I do 
not suppose would answer for agriculture. Gardens have been 
made at this place Rocky Mountain House' but have never pro¬ 
duced anything worth the trouble. Potatoes are the only 
things that come to maturity. The climate is too inconstant 
for gardening. In the daytime the heat is excessive, but no 
sooner has the sun set than the weather becomes chilly, with 








119 - 


a white frost almost throughout the summer.” (10) 

TlO ) Coues, p.700. 

Apparently the Hudson's Bay people experienced 
similar disappointments in their horticultural pursuits at 
this post. In 1821 Francis Heron reported: ”... At the Rocky 
Mountain House a small space of ground was last year planted 
with potatoes and Barley, the whole of which were destroyed 
by severe frosts which are common in the vicinity of these 
vast mountains at all times in the summer.” (11) 

Ill) Report on the Edmonton District, 1820-21, by Francis 

Heron, H.B.C. Archives, London. 

The Select Committee of 1857 was keenly interested 
in the agricultural prospects of Rupert's Land, and as a 
result of its inquiries Captain John Palliser and his bot¬ 
anist, Dr. Hector, were instructed to report on the country. 
The latter visited Rocky Mountain House in January, 1858, and 
the following comment reveals how sharply his outlook differed 
from that of the early fur traders; "Sometimes before aban¬ 
doning the fort in the spring, the Company's servants have 
planted potatoes and sown barley and turnips, and what was 
left by the Indians of the resulting crop until their return 
in the autumn, was sufficient to prove that the soil and 
climate are very favourable to agriculture. Every day we 
had here soft winds from the west, which cause a rise in 
the thermometer, sometimes to even above the freezing point, 
and the winter is said to be always much milder and the 
spring earlier than at places further to eastward.” (12) 

(12) Annual Report, 1886, Yol.il, p.53e. " " 















120 


Dr.Hector appears to have been unduly influenced by the balmy 
Chinook which the fort experienced during his stay, for his 
report was excessively optimistic. At that time there was 
no grain that matured early enough to escape the frost hazard 
at Rocky Mountain House. 

The first accurate soils survey of this region was 
begun in 1950 by the Soils Department at the University of 
Alberta, and progressive farmers will soon be able to obtain 
the resulting information free of charge from the Department 
of Agriculture. In addition to small areas of black loam, 
four types of soil have been identified in the vicinity of 
Rocky Mountain House. Of these only the grey wooded and the 
Codner half-bog soil are practicable for cultivation. The 
former, though inferior to the rich earth of the park belt, 
can be greatly improved by use of fertilizer containing sul¬ 
phur and by growing legumes. The half-bog soils are those 
in which the peat is not too deep to prevent the roots of 
common crop plants from penetrating the underlying mineral 
soil. Such areas can produce coarse grains and forage crops. 
The podselized grey wooded soil, which has developed for the 
longest period of time under forest conditions, is usually 
leached to a much greater extent than the other types of 
soil. It is found in the sandy areas west of Rocky Mountain 
House and south of Cow Lake, and is unsuitable for agriculture, 
although it produces blueberries in abundance. Another type 
of soil, known as sedge-peat bog, occurs in poorly drained 
places. These muskegs are often covered with a shrubby growth 
of Labrador tea, and frequently there is a scattered growth 








121 


of small conifers consisting of spruce and tamarack. The 
average farmer cannot afford to drain such lands. If the 
peat layer is burnt, too little organic matter is left to 
provide a good seed bed. Yet, in spite of the large area 
of unproductive land around Rocky Mountain House, there is 
enough good soil to support a permanent agricultural com¬ 
munity. (13) 

(l3) Interviews with Mr. Peters, Soils Department, University 
of Alberta, July. 1951. and May. 1952. 

The growing season begins on approximately April 30 
and ceases toward the end of September. The short frost-free 
period, only 48 days as compared to 98 at Edmonton and 95 at 
Olds, still makes grain growing hazardous and prevents the 
maturing of late vegetables. On the other hand, the farmers 
seldom complain of drought, as the rainfall is well above the 
provincial average. The rainfall from April to October in¬ 
clusive is about sixteen inches. Hay, pasture and fodder 
crops are usually plentiful, enabling farmers to depend 
primarily on livestock for their existence. 

The pioneer settlers in this region soon discovered 
its climatic limitations, but by this time early maturing 
grains and vegetables had been developed, making it possible 
for them to engage in mixed farming. Progress was slow, how¬ 
ever, until the advent of the railroad. Martin Borstad was 
one of the first farmers to purchase a binder. His machine 
was a John Deer model; it could be pulled by three horses 
and cut a six-foot swath. Threshing did not commence until 
autumn of 1913, when William Ellenburgh brought in a thresher 
by rail. Hitherto grain had been cut for green feed, but in 

















, ' 




* 

















• ■ : • '■ 








122 


this year many farmers allowed their grain to ripen. Ellen- 
burgh’s threshing machine, run by a stationary, eight horse¬ 
power engine, introduced a new era in farming operations at 
Rocky Mountain House. The greatest acreage was usually de¬ 
voted to oats but barley, wheat, timothy, alfalfa and clover 
were also popular crops. Most farmers considered it more 
profitable to feed the bulk of their grain to cattle and 
swine, as the damp atmosphere and frosts frequently harmed 
the quality of the kernels. Until 1932 there was no elevator 
in the district, and any grain that was sold was handled by 
local buyers who loaded it directly on box cars. There is 
now only one elevator, the Midland Pacific, at Rocky Mountain 
House, an indication that stock raising and dairying are 
still predominant in this region. 

In i9l4 there were less than one hundred milk cows 
in the district, (l4) while at least four hundred were con- 
(14) "The Guide 11 . August l4. 1914. 

sidered necessary to support a local creamery. Cattle were 
expensive and most farmers did not have enough feed to keep 
many through the winter. If was realized that more land 
would have to be brought under cultivation in order to main¬ 
tain larger herds. Meanwhile people in the village were 
supplied with fresh milk and cream by Alfred Brockman who 
had one of the largest herds of milk cows. Several years 
later the Lochearn Creamery began to serve the increasing 
dairying industry until it was totally destroyed in 1922 
during one of the village’s frequent fires. Dairy produce 
then had to be shipped to Red Deer. Two years later Central 







- 12 2 A - 


AN EARLY CHOP 



Mr. and Mrs. John H. Bertrand and 
one of their early crops. 






- 123 - 


Creameries Limited opened a branch at Rocky Mountain House 
under the able management of Mr. J. Plathan, who started 
and for many years trained the Boys' Band. In 1927 his 
creamery made 112,000 pounds of butter, 40,000 pounds of 
which were sold locally. He became a specialist in butter¬ 
making and frequently his samples won distinction in ex¬ 
hibitions throughout Canada. (15) 

(15) h The Mountaineer".Rocky Mountain House. March 2. 1927. 

By 1925 stock raising had increased to such an 
extent that it was necessary to have a stock car service 
every two weeks. The Central Alberta Farmers' Co-operative 
Marketing Association, located in Red Deer, began to send 
a buyer to Rocky Mountain House, and he accepted all the 
animals that the farmers wished to sell, paying in cash a 
price which was one cent off the figure quoted on the Calgary 
market for that particular day. In 1929 the local paper in¬ 
dicated that the Medicine Valley Co-operative Livestock 
Marketing Association, which had its head office in Eckville, 
was doing an increasing business in hogs, sometimes shipping 
two carloads in one day from Rocky Mountain House. (16) Be- 

(16) Ibid. June 26. 1929. 

fore the day of trucking, cattle were herded into town and 
pigs were usually hauled to market by wagon. Now livestock 
is trucked into the town stockyards or else taken all the way 
to Calgary. 

The founding of an Agricultural Society in the sum¬ 
mer of 1913, under the Alberta Agricultural Fairs Association, 
encouraged better farming practices. It endeavoured to pro¬ 
mote improved methods in the breeding, care and feeding of 






. 

. 




. 




. 



- 

* 


. . 

. 

. J .. .* •/ • 

. 

- 

■ ' • ' ' ' 

. 

. 



- \ . 




. 









* 

.. 










. 








. 




. .. ■ ; : 












124 - 


all types of domestic animals, and in the growing of roots, 
grasses, grain and vegetables. The Society was also inter¬ 
ested in the manufacturing of dairy products such as butter 
and cheese. Officers were elected in time to hold a fall 
fair, which became an important annual event at Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House. The Provincial Government supplied fifty per 
cent of all prize money paid out each year. In addition to 
the government grant, money was raised through membership 
fees and donations from local merchants. Prizes were given 
for the best exhibits which included everything from live¬ 
stock to home cooking. The Fair engendered a competitive 
spirit, inspiring many members to purchase purebred poultry, 
cattle and other farm animals. In 1914 Howard Ringrose, a 
Prairie Creek farmer, obtained a purebred Holstein bull and 
in the same year T. E, Edey brought in Barred Plymouth Rocks 
and White Leghorns, Bruce Williams purchased a number of 
White Orpingtons, and A. J. Pingrey started a flock of Rhode 
Island Reds. (17) In time other farmers acquired improved 
Xl7) ~ n The Guide” , March 20, 1914. ' ". —- 

breeds of poultry. Peter Grant, who was noted in the district 
for his superior exhibits, secured a yearling Hampshire ram 
from the University of Alberta in 1930. The careful breed¬ 
ing carried on by enterprising farmers encouraged others to 
follow their example and in this way the quality of livestock 
was gradually raised. Although not always as active as in 
its earlier years, the Agricultural Society continued to 
function until the beginning of World War 11. It still owns 
property in the town but interest in the Fall Fair has died. 








- 125 - 


With vigorous leadership the Society could once more be¬ 
come a useful institution at Rocky Mountain House. 

The lumbering industry, though secondary to agri¬ 
culture, has also been of considerable importance to the 
prosperity of the community. It is dependent upon the ex¬ 
tensive stands of spruce and pine lying west of the town, 
up to and including the Clearwater Forest Reserve. Before 
Rocky Mountain House existed as a hamlet, Red Deer was the 
chief centre for the lumbering operations in this region of 
Alberta. The planing mill of the Great West Lumber Company 
was located in the town. Later Rocky Mountain House, sit¬ 
uated closer to the forest area, emerged as the principal 
centre. In 1913 the Phoenix Lumber Company, a subsidiary 
of the Burrows Lumber Company in Manitoba, set up an office 
in the village and remained there for twenty-three years. 

A number of smaller concerns also engaged in lumbering. 
Messrs. McDougall and Martin operated a saw mill and in 
1914 supplied the Tremble and Garland Lumber Company in 
Lacombe with 450,000 feet of lumber. (13) Walsh Brothers 
TlS) 11 The Guide 11 . March 26. 1914. 

and Wright likewise owned a local mill and their first con¬ 
tract was to supply 200,000 feet of squared timbers for the 
Alberta Central Railway bridge. (19) Gradually Phoenix 
(19) The "Echo' 1 . May 6. 1911. 

either absorbed or hired most of the smaller outfits. Until 

the Atlas Company entered the district, it faced very little 

competition. According to ’’The Guide” the Phoenix Company 

in 1912 had obtained a lease on 110 square miles of timber 
along the Saskatchewan and Clearwater Rivers. Mr. Michener, 




























. 


. 







- 126 - 


M«P.P. for the Red Deer Constituency which at that time 
included Rocky Mountain House, criticized the Dominion 
Government*s policy of letting large companies monopolize 
such vast areas of timber, (20) 

(20) "The Gulde lT T~July 15. 1912. 

Besides lumber for construction, mining timbers, 
and poles for telephone lines and other purposes, ties 
were produced in large quantities. They were needed for 
the expansion and maintenance of tracks in the West. Dur¬ 
ing February, 1921, the Phoenix Company hauled about ten 
thousand ties daily to Horburg where they were taken out 
by rail. 

The Atlas Lumber Company came to Rocky Mountain 
House in 1923, buying out the Smith Lumber Company located 
in the village. It already had yards at Sylvan Lake, La- 
combe, Bentley, Eckville and Rimbey, with head office in 
Calgary. Like the Alberta Lumber Company, it is now a sub¬ 
sidiary of the Revelstoke Saw mills, a vast organization 
which owns and supplies with lumber seventy yards scattered 
throughout Alberta and Saskatchewan. A large Atlas planing 
mill was opened at Rocky Mountain House in 1929 and this 
establishment provided work during seasons when many lum¬ 
ber men were unemployed. Logs cannot be cut while the sap 
is flowing, but winter-cut logs can be sawn and planed in 
the summer months. They are usually 11 rough sawn' 1 in the 
bush and then hauled by truck to the planing mill where 
the finished lumber is produced. 

After 1936 the Atlas Company, except for the ac¬ 
tivities of several smaller concerns, had a clear field. 










- 126A - 

THE ATLAS PLANING MILL AND LUMBER YARD 
AT ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 






















- 127 - 


In this year the Phoenix Company at last ceased operations 
owing to financial difficulties, ”The Mountaineer” announced 
its departure with some regret: M The buildings at Phoenix 
saw mill site are rapidly being torn down. All winter long 
machinery has been loaded and shipped, and soon there will 
be nothing left of this big concern except a memory. Jake 
Lewis is in charge of operations for the Machinery Depot 
Limited, Calgary, which bought the property. It seems too 
bad that the Phoenix people had to suspend operations. Their 
methods may have been open to criticism but just the same 
when they were running they gave employment to hundreds of 
men and the mill crew alone numbered about one hundred and 
fifty.” (21) 

(21) '‘The Mountaineer'*. March 18. 1936. ~~ 

The Atlas Company followed the practice of letting 
out generous contracts to local lumber men, as well as hiring 
people in the district to assist in operating several saw 
mills of its own west of Rocky Mountain House. These policies 
and the location of its planing mill at Rocky Mountain House 
endeared the company to the town and community. Many people 
had come to rely upon it as their chief means of gaining a 
livelihood. On several occasions the citizens demonstrated 
their loyalty to this organization in an effective manner. 

In the winter of 1937 a difficulty arose as a result of the 
Minimum Wage Act which provided that in the lumber industry 
employees would receive an additional five cents an hour in 
centres containing 500 or more people, and within a ten mile 








- 128 - 

radius of such places. Much to the distress of the Atlas 
management the population of Rocky Mountain House, then 
between 500 and 1000, was large enough to place its workers 
on the new schedule. It was argued that the new regulation 
was unfair inasmuch as Atlas lumber would have to compete 
in the open market with the same produce coming from mills 
operating under almost identical conditions, but enjoying 
a lower minimum wage. Representations made to the Depart¬ 
ment of Trade and Industry by both the Company and the local 
Board of Trade, which, was extremely anxious to have the mill 
remain in operation, resulted in a favourable revision in 
the regulation whereby only places with a population of 1000 
or more were to be affected by the increased wage rate. 

More recently the Chamber of Commerce (formerly Board of 
Trade) succeeded in preventing the Imperial Lumber Company, 
which was considered an interloper, from securing an ex¬ 
tensive timber berth west of Rocky Mountain House. 

The lumber industry continues to thrive at this 
centre, enjoying an era of prosperity based on the great 
demands of post-war construction. The Atlas Company is the 
largest concern associated with the lumber industry of 
Rocky Mountain House, but the Imperial Lumber Company, which 
established a temporary office in the town during 1950, may 
offer the older company some competition in bidding for 
leases. At present some sawmills are operating less than 
twenty miles from the town, and there are still many acres 
of marketable timber in the Clearwater Forest Reserve and 
Chippewa Indian Reserve. It is, however, the considered 








, 

. 








' 












* 




, 

- 

. 1 , 










. 






■ 




, 


. 






129 - 


opinion of many residents that, if two large companies in 
addition to the several small outfits that exist compete 
in exploiting the western forest resource, Rocky Mountain 
House will lose its important lumber industry within a 
period of ten years. As lumbering declines, it is hoped 
that agriculture alone will be able to sustain the present 
level of development in the town and district. 


000000O000000 



CHAPTER NINE 


THE DEVELOPMENT 0? COMMUNITY LIFE 

A frontier society emerged rapidly at Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House as various institutions began to shape and direct 
the social activities of the increasing population. In this 
development the press, the church and the school were of 
particular importance. 

The function of the local newspaper was especially 
valuable during the period of settlement, for it, probably 
more than any other agency, raised the morale of the pioneer 
community. The editor recorded the progress of the settle¬ 
ment, suggested future objectives and in other ways helped 
to arouse interest in the district. By publicly recognizing 
their existence and labours, he also enhanced the settlers' 
individual sense of worth, and at the same time increased 
the circulation of his paper. Providing that the report was 
not disparaging, everyone liked to have his activities men¬ 
tioned occasionally. 

The original paper, called the "Echo", first appeared 
on Friday morning, February 4, 1910, and was delivered to 
subscribers through Prairie G-range Post Office. It was pub¬ 
lished by a group of settlers who dubbed themselves "The 
Canadian Uncle Sam Amusement Club". They were staunch Con¬ 
servatives, and the editor, G-eorge Thomson, did not conceal 
their political bias from the general public. The professed 
motto of the "Echo" was "Live and Let Live", a slogan which 
Thomson's temperament sometimes contrad-icted. Poorly written 












- 131 - 


from a literary or grammatical point of view, the articles 
were nevertheless refreshing and full of local interest. 

No one can doubt after scanning its pages that this pioneer 
newspaper was thoroughly enjoyed by the majority of its 
readers who were not offended by spelling errors, slang 
expressions and faulty sentence structure. 

In his recollections of pioneer days, published in 
"The Mountaineer", in 1945, George Thomson explains how the 
paper originated: "Early in 1910 a few of us thought it 
would be a great joke on the settlement to get out a news¬ 
paper. We had a box of changeable rubber type, an ink pad 
and a stamp which held four lines four and a half inches 
long. The type had to be put in and taken out of the stamp 
with a pair of small tweezers. You will quite understand 
that it was no small task to print fifty sheets with front 
and back pages, each containing two columns, but it passed 
the time during the long winter evenings of January. The 
heading or name *Rocky Mountain House Echo* was carved with 
a jack-knife from a block of wood. We had no intention of 
getting out more than one issue as we knew very little about 
the printing business, and had no money to buy a plant." (l) 
TO "The Mountaineer* 1 , Dec. 19. 1945. p.l. 

There was an immediate demand for a regular issue of the 
"Echo". With this encouragement and an unexpected loan to 
cover the cost of a more adequate press, George Thomson, 
assisted by Harry Bertrand, decided to edit a larger semi¬ 
monthly paper. Many settlers helped by contributing news 
items concerning Rocky Mountain House and the surrounding 









■ 













t 




. 



' 




. 









- 132 - 


districts of Eckville, Stauffer, Dickson, Prairie Greek 
and Raven. Arthur Eckford, after whom Eckville was named, 
became the first correspondent. 

Besides local advertisements and news, and borrowed 
items on Canadian and world affairs, it contained articles 
devoted to the early history and growth of the settlement. 
Occasionally the editor expounded his home-spun philosophy 
of life, one of his themes being "Wealth does not make for 
happiness". Views expressed in such homilies sometimes con¬ 
flicted with his inordinate ambition in connection with the 
growth of Rocky Mountain House, and his great admiration of 
"hustling" business men. His worst fault appears to have 
been occasional vindictiveness. Especially unfortunate were 
his belittling remarks directed at ministers in general and 
at the student missionary, R. H. MacDonald, in particular. 

The latter, in opposition to a number of settlers who were 
inclined to disregard the sabbath, wished to keep Sunday as 
strictly a day of rest and worship. (2) On the other hand, 

(2) The "Echo". July 25. 1911. and May 7. 1912. 

George Thomson often spoke openly and vehemently in favour 
of improvements. Without children himself, he nevertheless 
harangued the ratepayers over the glaring lack of educational 
facilities, which were not available Until the fall of 1911. 
Voicing the complaints of the homesteaders, he stressed the 
need of traffic bridges across the Clearwater and Saskatchewan 
Rivers. The Clearwater bridge was built in 1914, but people 
along the Saskatchewan had to wait until 1946, when the David 
Thompson bridge was opened. His paper also clamoured for 







- 133 - 


road construction and reminded the community that a cemetery 
was required so that the dead would no longer have to be 
buried on the homesteads. (3) 

(3) The tr Echo”, October 1. 1912. 

The ’’Echo 11 received favourable comment in ’’The 
Orangeville Banner”, a larger newspaper in Ontario: ”We 
have just read a copy of a modest little newspaper called 
’Rocky Mountain House Echo', further described as the offi¬ 
cial organ of the ’Canadian Uncle Sam Club’. The paper is 
printed on a single sheet, 14 by 11 inches, and is issued 
the first Saturday of every month. Whatever it lacks in 
size is made up for by the breeziness and spicy character 
of its news columns. 'The editor of the interesting pub¬ 
lication is Mr. George Thomson of Prairie Grange, Alberta. 
George, our readers will be interested to learn, is a former 
Caledon boy; he was born and brought up in the Alton neigh¬ 
bourhood, and went West about fifteen years ago.” (4) 

(4) Excerot from ’’Orangeville Banner”, Ontario, published in 

the ’’Echo”, Feb. 18, 1911. P.2.‘ 

The paper increased in size from a single monthly 
sheet printed by hand and costing 25 cents a year to a six- 
page, semi-monthly publication. The annual subscription 
rate was raised to fifty cents and the cost of advertising 
was twenty cents per column inch. Retiring in October, 1912, 
George Thomson took pride in the fact that he still had his 
first subscriber Robert Fleming, and his first advertiser 
John McVicar, who ran a general store in Red Deer. 











1 







f 1 







- 134 - 


The second paper, "The Guide", was edited by Mr. 

J. D. Skinner who, possessing twenty-two years of experience 
in this work, moved to Rocky Mountain House from G-adsby to 
take over the "Echo". Since his newspaper was issued weekly, 
he raised the subscription price to one dollar, and adver¬ 
tising now cost fifty cents per column inch with a special 
rate of twenty-five cents for any advertisements in excess 
of 250 inches used within a year. Skinner's publication, 
described by "The Lacombe Globe" as "a breezy little paper 
that voices the sentiments of the district" was actually 
large for a small village, containing local and outside 
news, a comic strip and a special page for women. "The 
Guide's" Liberal leanings, which local Conservatives found 
intensely annoying, were revealed by its approval of the 
Arthur Sifton Government. (5) Although somewhat less rough 
TP '‘The guide 11 , April 1. 1913, g.U ~ '' 

in style, it was gossipy like the original newspaper, and. 
was not always restrained in its comments. Articles like 
the following did not endear the editor to a certain section 
of the community: "A much needed clean-up in gambling circles 
took place this week. The pool hall here has developed into 
nothing more than a gambling, dive ... It is a very signifi¬ 
cant fact that the gambling resorts of this town seem to 
centre around the premises of one firm. This place is no 
longer a camp town and better citizens are determined that 
camp town life and its vices shall cease. The pool hall 
will be permitted to run as a pool hall but the little dark 

room in the corner will have to be moved." (6) 

To) “The Guide", January 1 , 1915> ~ 







- 


- 





































: 




. 

. 

. , ’ . 

. 















- 135 - 


In 191^ the strong opinions of "The Guide" caused 
a press feud which is unique in the history of Rocky Mountain 
House. It appears to have been touched off by Skinner 1 s pub¬ 
lished statement that the village was not yet "a safe place 
for investment under conditions then existing", for "property 
was held at an abnormally high figure and nothing whatever 
was known as to the intentions of the railway companies." (7) 
(7) Ibid, August 28, 1914. ~~~. 

Several business men had purchased a large number of lots 
from the Townsite Company, and in the opinion of the editor 
were holding the property for re-sale at unfair prices. A 
number of undignified remarks and acts by both parties widen¬ 
ed the rift, each accusing the other of "knocking the village". 
Finally, the opponents of "The Guide"announced their intention 
of starting another newspaper, "The Mountaineer", under the 
editorship of George Thomson. The first issue appeared on 
March 31, 1914, and its introductory article ran: "For a 
year or more many people have expressed their opinion that 
a newspaper should be published in this village that would 
have impartial news columns, be free from irrational polit¬ 
ical opinions and personal animosity and, with such a paper, 
we are making our bow..." It succeeded in winning a portion 
of "The Guide*s" advertising business and subscribers, but 
its circulation was not sufficient to dislodge the larger 
and more firmly established paper of J. D. Skinner. Somewhat 
subdued, the promoters of "The Mountaineer" stopped publica¬ 
tion after seven months. In parting they uttered a few words 
of wisdom for the benefit of their rival: "Every paper should 





- 

! 


-• t 
























n 










. 






, 

, , , 


* 






* 

-• 




. 

















- 136 - 

offer criticism on public affairs, but should keep away 
from personalities, and we hope 'The Guide' will accept 
our kindly hint in this regard." The controversy was note¬ 
worthy in two respects. It proved that the population of 
the Rocky Mountain House area was not large enough to sup¬ 
port two local papers, and above all it led to a noticeable 
refinement in editorial policy. G-radually the two factions 
disappeared entirely as former enemies cooperated in useful 
community activities. 

"The Capital", edited by Mr. C. A. Roulston, followed 
"The G-uide", which ceased publication in the spring of 1918. 
Less prone to abusive criticism than the previous newspapers, 
it served the district well for about two years. Early in 
1921 Will Dyer and Chester Moffet, who had previous expe¬ 
rience in press work, started "The Gazette", "an independent 
weekly newspaper published in the interests of Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House, Nordegg, Leslieville and surrounding districts". 
Offering a larger paper costing two dollars per year, they 
endeavoured to attract subscribers "within at least a radius 
of sixty miles." (8) Apparently the experiment was not as 
(3) "The Gazette". January 15. 1921. 

successful as they had hoped, for in October, 1922, both 
men left the village for positions on larger newspapers. 

Although the proprietorship of the local paper 
changed frequently, another party was always ready to under¬ 
take the work. Norman Frost was one of the most success¬ 
ful editors at Rocky Mountain House. He took over "The 
Gazette", which was in a shocking state, having few adver- 








' 

■ 








r x 









‘ 





. 


. 

. 

. 







- 137 - 


tisers and only eighty subscribers, and in one month in¬ 
creased its circulation six-fold. In 1923 the name of the 
paper was changed to "The Mountaineer", a more appropriate 
title. Assisted by his father G. W. Frost, he did much to 
make the community aware of its responsibility in supporting 
the press. "Many people," he wrote, "sneer at their local 
newspaper, scoffing at the efforts of the editor who works 
under great handicaps. It is unfair to compare it in quality 
with the large dailies of the metropolis, for it serves a 
distinctly different purpose." (9) He indicated that for 
(9) "The Mountaineer". May 11. 1926. 

the small sum of $1.50 per year a subscriber received fifty- 
two issues containing news, the advertisements of village 
merchants, municipal, legal and sale notices. For the 
farmers it also listed hog shipping days, train schedules 
and market reports and provided informative articles on 
agriculture. Norman Frost remained in charge of "The Mount¬ 
aineer" for five years, selling out to Mr. G. H. Pearson in 
1927. He again edited it for a short period in 1932, when 
under Mr. E. Beveridge the newspaper was in financial straits. 

Mr. ¥. K. Schierholtz became the proprietor in 
the spring of 1933 and remained editor until shortly be¬ 
fore the time of his death in 194-7. He gave the newspaper 
a stability which it had lacked in the past owing to the 
constant change in management. "The Mountaineer" is now 
co-edited by Mrs. Grace Schierholtz his widow, and Jack 
Gare, a veteran of the last war, who acquired a knowledge 
of newspaper work at Trochu under his father. The useful 








. 








, 


















. 

. 




. 

. 






. 

. 





, 









- 138 - 


page entitled M Farm Notes” is edited by District Agri¬ 
culturist E. A. Chisholm. The only paper "serving the 
west country", "The Mountaineer" enjoys a wide circulation 
and has become a profitable enterprise. 

The growth of the church at Rocky Mountain House 
kept pace with the development of the press. The work which 
the itinerant missionaries could accomplish was limited, 
and their opinions were sometimes scoffed at by a small 
sceptical element in the young community, yet their services 
were welcomed and supported by the majority of the settlers. 

As the urban centre became more than a squatters' settle¬ 
ment, strong Presbyterian, Anglican, Catholic and Nazarene 
congregations were formed, which had a refining influence 
on the expanding society. More recently the Dutch Reformed 
Church has been established at Rocky Mountain House. Be¬ 
sides providing an opportunity for religious worship and 
promoting works of charity, the churches assisted other 
organizations of the village in directing the activities 
of the young people into wholesome channels. The Presby¬ 
terian and Anglican Churches each made a further contri¬ 
bution of a different nature. 

In 1929 the Women's Auxiliary of the Anglican 
Church sponsored a Dramatic Society which for six years enabled 
interested members to display their histrionic talents. At 
the same time it provided a new type of entertainment for 
the people of this area. The plays, chiefly comedy, were 
well chosen, and were apparently presented with some skill 





- 139 - 

for they attracted full audiences. In 1930 Holy Trinity 
Church was built at a cost of $3500,00, and money raised 
by the Dramatic Society enabled the Anglican congregation 
to clear the debt within five years. 

The special contribution of the Presbyterian Church 
was in the field of health services. Although Rocky Mountain 
House was seldom without a doctor, for several years the sick 
had to be housed in private homes as there was no hospital 
available. The doctors were obliged to travel many miles 
to administer to rural patients who were unable to reach the 
village. During the First World War Mrs. Charlie Stewart, 
a registered nurse, opened a nursing home which accommoda¬ 
ted about eight patients. She tended victims of the influ¬ 
enza epidemic in 1918. For many years, in the most inclement 
weather, she would ride great distances to treat people who 
were ill. To this day she is remembered with respect and 
affection by the inhabitants of Rocky Mountain House. Nurse 
Stewart's home was the only hospital in the village until 
the present building was constructed in 1938. 

In 1936 Rev. R. K. Peck, the minister of the local 
Presbyterian Church, noticed in one of the periodical of 
the Presbyterian Women's Missionary Society of Canada that 
a hospital operated by them in Northern Ontario had been 
sold to the community, and the proceeds were available to 
aid hospital building in the West. He lost no time in re¬ 
questing this assistance for Rocky Mountain House. A sub¬ 
sequent visit by two officers of the Missionary Board of 













i 








/ 












. 








' 


' 

■ 












I39A - 



Mrs* Stewart's nursing home. It is 
now a private residence. 



The present hospital at Rocky Moun¬ 
tain House. It was undergoing fur¬ 
ther construction when this picture 
was taken. 













- 140 - 


the Presbyterian Church resulted in a promise of a ten-bed 
hospital, providing that the community could raise $4,000.00 
of the $15,000.00 needed for its construction. A local com¬ 
mittee was formed to look after the project and the required 
amount was raised through donations. In July 1938, a sub¬ 
stantial hospital was officially opened by Deputy Minister 
of Health Dr. M. R. Bow. During 1939 and 1940 the building 
was enlarged and improved x-ray, operating and sterilizing 
facilities were installed. 

It was felt in 1946 that Rocky Mountain House should 
conduct its own health scheme, and so release the Missionary 
Society’s investment for hospital development in other areas. 
Under the leadership of Dr. A. C. Greenaway and several other 
interested citizens, a provisional board was formed which 
drew up a health plan that was acceptable to the ratepayers. 
The hospital was purchased through the issue of debentures 
which were sold locally and the Rocky Mountain House Munic¬ 
ipal Hospital District was established. The alertness of 
Rev. peck and the willingness of the Presbyterian Missionary 
Society to provide financial and administrative assistance, 
had thus introduced an essential service to Rocky Mountain 
House area. 

Educational facilities were not provided until sev¬ 
eral years after the first congregation had been formed. In 
January, 1911, there was still no school in the settlement, 
and yet the ratepayers at a poorly attended meeting voted 
against the organization of a school district. At this time 






- 141 - 


the population of the area concerned (five-sixths of town¬ 
ship 39, range 7, west of the fifth meridian) was seventy- 
one; the ratepayers numbered thirty-three and there were 
thirty-one children, twenty-one of whom were over or had 
.Just reached school age, (10) Some argued speciously that 
(10) The "Echo", Nov.7. 1911. ~ 

a district should not be formed until it was known definitely 
where the railways would run, while others thought no action 
should be taken until the government road past Rocky Mount¬ 
ain House was completed. The "Echo” suggested that the real 
objection was probably the school tax which the people with¬ 
out children were unwilling to pay. 

On behalf of the small group that was concerned 
about the education of the children, Leslie Slaght, an early 
pioneer who passed away at Rocky Mountain House in 1951, 
wrote to the Department of Education for advice. He re¬ 
ceived the following reply; 

February 27, 1911* 


Sir; 


I have your letter of the 17th inst. and in reply I 
would say that although the minister has the authority 
under section 39 of the School Ordinance to order the 
formation of a school district even against the expressed 
wishes of a majority of the resident ratepayers, the con¬ 
ditions existing in your district do not quite meet the 
requirements of the School Ordinance in this connection. 

It is desirable in any event to erect the district with 
the sanction of the resident ratepayers and I would suggest 
that the committee call another first meeting when the 
outlook appears more promising. The necessary forms for this 
purpose will be mailed to you upon application. 

Your obedient servant, 

D.S.MacKenzie 

Deputy Minister of Education 



















. 




























. 























’ 










. . 





- 142 - 


During the summer Mr. A. W. Brockman again took up 
the matter, assisted by Messrs. T. B. Williams and J. Haworth. 
A third meeting was called in October and the fifteen rate¬ 
payers present agreed that a school should be established. 

The new district was called the Confluence School District 
because the Clearwater joined the North Saskatchewan at approx 
imately the centre of the township. A board of trustees was 
immediately appointed to make arrangements for the erection 
of a building, the purchasing of supplies and equipment and 
the engaging of a teacher. The original members of the board 
were Alfred Brockman, G-eorge Fletcher, and Fred Williams. 

The "Echo” received a letter at this time from a resident 
who inquired; M Are the newly appointed trustees men of 
culture and do they think themselves thoroughly fitted to 
carry out the trusteeship? If not, they should resign at 
once I n (11) Probably this same individual had not bothered 
(ll) Ibid. Dec. 5. 1911. 

to attend any of the meetings. At least his remarks were 
typical of the disgruntled minority found in almost every 
school district; these people envied the authority and social 
prestige of the local trustees but were not always willing 
to assume the obligations or face the criticism which such 
a position entailed. 

On February 27, 1912, a sum of one thousand dollars 
was borrowed on the security of the Confluence School District 
and Leslie Slaght received the contract to build a one-room 
school on the south-east corner of section 27, township 39, 
range 7, west of the fifth meridian. Miss Mabel Fleming was 







- 143 - 

the first teacher and school opened in October with an 
attendance of forty pupils, the majority of whom were in 
grade one although their ages varied greatly. Miss Fleming 
was young and of small stature but an effective disciplin¬ 
arian. She conducted the school successfully during the 
first three years. 

The administration of the school was a perennial 
worry. Taxes were not always promptly paid, and the school 
board frequently had insufficient funds to pay the teacher's 
salary, small as it was. A representative of the Department 
of Education visited Rocky Mountain House in 1916 to investi¬ 
gate the serious problems of the school district. The class 
register at this time contained seventy names, and the aver¬ 
age attendance was approximately fifty. Since one teacher 
could not carry such a load adequately, it was recommended 
that another room be added in the immediate future. The 
original school was never enlarged but others were formed 
within the Rocky Mountain House area, and the erection of 
a village school in 1922 gradually relieved the situation. 

In 1938 the burden of local school boards was greatly re¬ 
duced by the formation of Rocky Mountain House School Divi¬ 
sion, No.15, which includes Local Improvement District 65 
(thirty-two townships containing most of the Rocky Mountain 
House trading area) and the Raven Municipality, and extends 
south into the Waterloo Municipality and east into the Red 
Deer Municipality. The division has sixty-seven rooms in 
addition to fifteen rooms at Rocky Mountain House. Some 
centralization has taken place, but further expansion will 




















. 






. 




























... 

. 




. 






' 












.' ■ •• - < • ■•■■■ ' : ’ ■ . : ■ 

' 






I43A 


it 




Remodelled, the old school is now 
a private residence. 














- I43B - 



The first village school. It was built in 1922. 













- i44 - 


be necessary in the near future. Larger schools at Rocky 
Mountain House, Caroline, Dickson, Markerville and Benalto 
accommodate rural children who are transported to and from 
these centres by bus. As elsewhere in Alberta, the trend 
is away from the traditional one-room school which, though 
valuable as a focal point for community interest and social 
activities, cannot meet the demands of modern education. (12) 

( 12 ) "interview with Mr. Jack Stronach, secretary of the"Rocky 

Mountain House School Division, No.15, July, 1951* 

The early forms of entertainment at Rocky Mountain 
House were of a typically pioneer character. The excitement 
of community gatherings intrigued settlers, most of whom 
were living on scattered homesteads. The Pioneers’ Basket 
Picnic in July, the Pioneers' Banquet in late fall or Dec¬ 
ember and the annual Christmas Tree, were the outstanding 
social events of the year. Probably to keep the group a 
manageable size, only settlers living in six neighbouring 
townships were considered to be within the Rocky Mountain 
House area (13) and so eligible to attend. A program com- 

(13) The area consisted of townships 38, 39 and 40 In ranges 

7 and 8, west of the fifth meridian. The "Echo" Dec.5>1911* 

mittee was appointed well in advance of each celebration, 
and the "Echo" kept the public informed regarding the prep¬ 
arations. "The committee," it reported, "is agreeably sur¬ 
prised at the number who are so willing to help to make up 
the programme and give the toasts. A large programme is 
already started which will be enlarged, singers will have 
a good organ and accompanist to assist them; as there is a 




















- 145 - 

very large programme of songs, recitations, musical selec¬ 
tions, toasts, step dances and pioneer stories, the committee 
wish to state there will be no dance in connection with the 
banquet. An excellent dinner is being provided by Chalmers 
& Lunday; the hall which is 22 x 60 feet will be decorated 
with tools used by the pioneers, flags and bunting. A smok¬ 
ing room will be provided for smokers and a dressing room for 
the ladies." (14) In 1912 the banquet was held in the Mission 
(14) Ibid. : 

Hall. A large heated tent had to be erected nearby to shelter 
the overflow of guests. The picnics were frequently held at 
the old chimneys, a pleasant spot overlooking a bend in the 
river. Baskets of food brought by the ladies were combined 
to make a hearty meal, which was followed by numerous races 
for the children. 

G-eorge Thomson, who played the part of Santa Claus, 
describes the hilarious Christmas celebration of 1910; "Per¬ 
haps the greatest event of the year was the gathering at the 
Bertrand home just before Christmas. There was community 
singing, recitations by the children; there was a brightly 
decorated tree. Everything was carried off according to 
arrangements made by Mrs. J. H. Bertrand and Mrs. Dan Hayes. 
BfeMacDonald, the missionary, was chairman, and kept the 
children informed just where Santa Claus was, from notes he 
was getting at the store. There was a very excited group of 
children to greet old Santa Claus when he landed on the roof 
with his sleigh and prancing reindeer with all their bells 
jingling. They could hear him scolding Mr. Bertrand for 




. . 

- 


















. 
















- 


. 
















. 


- 

. 
















- 146 - 


having a chimney he could not get down; then he slid off 
the roof into a big snowdrift and came rushing into the 
front door, his fur robes and long white beard all covered 
with snow* A little girl told me the next day: ‘You sure 
missed it not being there to see Santa playing with the 
children, hugging the mothers, slapping the dads and try¬ 
ing to kiss the girls.’ (15) Later the Oddfellows spon- 
(15) ,f ‘The Mountaineer**, Jan*l6, 1946* pi* 

sored the Christmas Tree and Concert for many years in 
their hall* Treats were donated by local merchants, and 
the teacher looked after the program of recitations and 
songs. Young and old came by sleigh from miles around to 
participate in the yuletide festivities. 

The first two pioneer events gradually disappeared 
as the community grew and the July Sports Day and the Fall 
Fair, sponsored by the Agricultural Societjr, took their 
place. Interest in these events was stimulated by the en¬ 
thusiastic announcements of the local paper: “The town has 
had a meeting and July 1 was set as the 'July Sports Day'. 
Over |300 have already been collected for prizes and it is 
reported that the first special train will be run over the 
C.N. track from Sylvan Lake. The big feature of the sports 
will be base-ball, |75 in cash prize for the team west of 
the C. & E. Ry. Calgary and Edmonton Railway! which wins. 
There will be broncho busting, bucking contests, roping 
the steer, climbing the greasy pole, catching the greasy 
pig (and perhaps a blind one), horse races, foot races, 










I 


* 

4 



! 














- 147 - 


jumping contests, chewing tobacco contests, smoking con¬ 
tests, shooting, Indian races and other events. In fact, 
it will be a regular frontier sports day in the last great 
West ... A tug of war between the bootleggers’ and ’cider 
dope shiners’ will wind up the day's performances amidst a 
brilliant display of fireworks and an Indian pow-wow.” (16) 
(l6) Ibid. June 4. 1912. 

The Diamond Jubilee of Confederation held on July 1, 
1927, was one of the more elaborate celebrations. The spe¬ 
cial attraction was the parade containing patriotic floats 
which various groups in the village had prepared for this 
great occasion. Led by the Boys 9 Band the procession passed 
slowly through the main streets, halting before a temporary 
platform near the school. After f, 0 Canada” had been sung 
by the assembly, the mayor spoke briefly on Canadian polit¬ 
ical growth since Britain's acquisition of Canada. His 
address was followed by the usual program of competitive 
sports. 

The Fall Fair, although devoted primarily to agri¬ 
cultural exhibits, was also a form of public entertainment. 
The masquerade parade, which was part of the program, created 
a Mardi gras mood in the village, and most farmers could 
not resist taking a holiday from their autumn labours. 

There were, of course, other kinds of amusement. 

The pool hall was frequented throughout the year, occasion¬ 
ally wrestling and boxing matches were sponsored and usually 
a weekly dance. Before there was a hall, dances were held 
at Thomas C-ray ’ s farm because he had a large house, and 





. 

- 

. 



t 

. 

' 

. 








" ' ' 

V., 




■ - - 


I 

• 

. 
















. 
















■ 






* 
































- 148 - 


music was provided by James Wilde and his fiddlers. The 
Passtime Movie later attracted full audiences with its 
special family rates. Whist parties were held from time 
to time as well as "'bachelor parties" where the men engaged 
in cribbage tournaments. For those who preferred more 
thought provoking entertainment, a debating society was 
formed, which held numerous meetings. Its topics were 
well chosen, and the debates for some years held the in¬ 
terest of the general public. 

Some effort was made to provide suitable recreation 
for the youth of the district. The churches sponsored 
Trail Rangers, Canadian Girls in Training and other pro¬ 
grams. In the spring of 1930 the Boy Scouts were organized 
and Cameron Kirby, son of the postmaster, devoted much 
time to their training. Mr. Plathan's band attracted 
boys possessing musical talent. Alfred Hooke, principal 
of the Confluence School from 1930 to 1935, and now Min¬ 
ister of Economic Affairs for Alberta, started a literary 
club. It was open to school children above grade six and 
young people who had left school. The village has always 
been without a gymnasium, but there are ample opportunities 
for outdoor sports. 

For ma,ny years the nearest beach was at Sylvan 
Lake, which after 1912 could be reached by train. In 1927 
residents of Rocky Mountain House awoke to the fact that 
they had a small but beautiful lake a few miles north-west 
of their village. In a letter to "The Mountaineer " William 
Ellenburgh, one of the "trail blazers" who had cut the 











r ■, 







' • 

' 




I48A 


THE BEACii AT C RIMS ON LAKE 



I 

































- 149 - 

original path to its sandy beach, suggested that Crimson 
Lake be made a summer resort. Not long afterwards the 
townspeople began to make this place more accessible. In 
April, 1931, an enthusiastic group of men led by Edward 
Brett widened the road that winds through the numerous 
sand hills lying between the lake and the town. They im¬ 
proved the beach, erected a pier and prepared a parking 
space for cars. The profusion of berries and wild flowers 
and a wooded island enhance the lake's attractiveness. 

The origin of the name Crimson is not certain, but it was 
probably suggested by the abundance of fireweed which grows 
in the surrounding woods or perhaps the brilliant reflection 
of the sun in the water. Now a Provincial Park, Crimson 
Lake is rapidly becoming a popular resort where picnicking, 
boating and swimming may be enjoyed. Many cabins have al¬ 
ready been built along its wooded shores, and yet it has 
retained a tranquil atmosphere. This lake provides a pleas¬ 
ant gathering place for the people of the Rocky Mountain 
House area. 

In the summer of 1951 the Pioneer Ranch Camp for 
boys and girls was opened by Mr.Carl Joseph Curry on be¬ 
half of the Inter-School Christian Fellowship. Situated 
on the eastern shore of Crimson Lake, it offers at cost an 
excellent training in a variety of outdoor activities dur¬ 
ing July and August, which include trail riding, canoeing, 
boating, riflery, archery, hiking and chuck wagon trips. 
There is a similar camp in Manitoba and three in Ontario, 
where the idea originated, but only the Alberta branch 





I49A - 


THE PIONEER RANCH AT CRIMSON LAKE 



Mr. Gurry is standing on the steps 
leading down to the water. 










- 150 - 


maintains a herd of horses. The ranch was suggested by 
Mr. Curry who, though a native of Ontario, readily perceived 
the special recreational interests of boys and girls living 
in the West. The success of the Pioneer Ranch is apparent. 
At present forty-five children can be accommodated every 
two weeks, but it is anticipated that further expansion 
will be necessary in the future. (17) 

(17) Interview with Carl J. Curry, Pioneer Ranch, Crimson 

Lake. July 15. 1952. 

For those who are chiefly interested in fishing, 
trout are available in the numerous small streams that flow 
into the North Saskatchewan. This summer a fine new fishing 
ground at Twin Lakes was opened to the public. Previously 
inaccessible owing to muskegs, these small lakes lying just 
half a mile off the Crimson Lake road are described as M a 
real boon to the business men who have only a short time 
in the evening to go out to try their luck”. (18) About 

(18) M The Mountaineer”. July 3. 1952. 

nine miles south of Rocky Mountain House lies swampy Cow 
Lake, which is fed by springs. Less attractive than Crimson 
Lake, it is nevertheless sometimes visited by hunters and 
fishermen. It overflows at its south-east corner into Cow 
Creek which, at one time stocked with Eastern Brook Trout, 
is recognized as a good fishing stream. 

In season berry picking and hunting have always 
offered the inhabitants of the region a pleasant escape 
from the work-a-day world. These diversions also attract 
tourists. During one of the more fruitful seasons ’’The 






































' 

. 

. 

. 

. 

















- 151 - 

Mountaineer” reported: ‘’Berry pickers from all over the 
province are gathering a bountiful harvest in the sand 
hills and other spots across the river. People come in 
trailers and camp for several days, taking out many pounds 
of blueberries and raspberries. (19) 

(19) Ibid. August 31. 1938. 

A plentiful supply of small game is found in the 
district, and big game inhabits the eastern foothills of 
the Rocky Mountains. Guides have usually been available 
for hunters who could afford them. In the fall of 1930 
Tex Small and D. ¥. Robison opened a guide camp some twelve 
miles north of Horburg on the Little Baptiste River. They 
were fully equipped for hunting moose, deer and bear as 
well as for trips into the rugged sheep and goat country. 

Ray Mustard, now a forest ranger, on several occasions 
also guided wealthy Americans who were in search of trophies. 
Mr. S. G. Kerr, an Ohio lawyer, succeeded in obtaining sev¬ 
eral fine sheep heads, one of which he donated to the Car¬ 
negie Museum at Philadelphia and another to the Carnegie 
Institute in Pittsburg. (20) Clarence Sands, a pioneer of 

(20) Ibid. Nov. S.T933 and Nov .7, 1934. ~ 

the Rocky Mountain House area, and his sons now operate 
the largest guiding outfit west of Red Deer. 

The good old days of community picnics and suppers, 
which "oldtimers” recall with apparent nostalgia, disappeared 
as the swelling population began to break into smaller 
associations. This development started during the First 














- 152 - 


World War, but the growth of lodges and societies proceeded 
more rapidly after the armistice. In 1915 Grand Master G. 
W. Henderson of Calgary instituted Oddfellows Lodge No.120 
at Rocky Mountain House. About the same time the Women's 
Institute was organized, and its main purpose was to raise 
funds for local improvements. In 1916 the Ladies Home 
Charity Association was formed. A branch of the Great War 
Veterans Association, later called the Canadian Legion, was 
organized at Rocky Mountain House shortly after 1918. It 
helped to promote the annual Armistice program and Poppy 
Day campaign, and endeavoured to look after the interests 
of local veterans. The Loyal Orange Lodge, Mountain View, 
No.2852, was founded by 1922. Two years later the I.O.O.F. 
Rebekah Lodge was instituted, as well as the Knights of 
Pythias Lodge, called North Star No.24. In 1927 an unusual 
society called Native Sons of Canada formed a branch at 
Rocky Mountain House. This organization began in Victoria, 
British Columbia, in 1921 and secured a charter from the 
Dominion Government the following year. A nationalistic 
society which appealed to zealous Canadians, its professed 
aims were: "To keep in Canada all her native born; to bring 
back to Canada all those Canadians who reside in foreign 
lands; to induce desirable people to make homes in Canada; 
to create and foster a distinctly Canadian national spirit; 
to provide a non-partisan, non-sectarian influence in the 
affairs of Canada; to promote a spirit of national unity 
and harmony and to foster a distinctive sense of pride in 
the privilege of Canadian citizenship; to further the de- 

























' ■ . . ' . 1 ' 






- 153 - 


velopment of Canadian literature, art, science, and Canadian 
institutions; to generally promote the interests of Canada 
and Canadians/' (21) In an effort to inspire greater patri- 
( 21 ) Ibid, January 5. 1927* 

otism the local branch recommended that the Union Jack be 
flown over the school grounds during the day. The members 
also took a keen interest in the preservation of the fort 
chimneys. Probably because of its chauvinistic colouring, 
the Native Sons received limited support at Rocky Mountain 
House, and after several years of activity faded away. 

Lochearn Lodge, No.151, of the Masonic Order was 
established in 1927; the Order of the Elks appeared in 1930, 
and it would appear that the Ladies Orange Benevolent Asso¬ 
ciation and the Macdonald of G-arth Chapter of the I.O.D.S. 
began to function about the same time. The Kinsmen Club, 
organized in 194-2, started a "Milk for Britain Fund" and 
made many valuable contributions to the community, especially 
in respect to recreation for the young people. All of these 
lodges and societies, and several new ones are active today 
with the exception of the Elks, the Knights of Pythias and 
the Ladies' Home Charity Association. There is a branch of 
the Fish and G-ame Association in the town as well as the 
Independent Order of Foresters. The former has endeavoured 
to arouse interest in the conservation of useful wild life 
and the destruction of predatory birds and animals. Besides 
their formal social activities most of these organizations 
give donations to various benevolent associations and in¬ 
stitutions throughout the province. 






- 154 - 


Although Rocky Mountain House still has the atmos- 

V 

phere of a frontier town, the society has passed beyond 
the pioneer stage. The numerous associations which have 
been mentioned, an adequate press, school and hospital, 
five churches with subsidiary organizations, together with 
the natural recreational facilities of the region, give 
the people of the town and surrounding country ample op¬ 
portunity to lead a full and enjoyable life. 


0000000O0000000 




CHAPTER TEN 


ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 
IN LATER YEARS 

Rocky Mountain House was proclaimed a village on 
May 2, 1913, and its future expansion seemed to be assured. 

Many of the settlers believed that they would live to see a 
small city on the banks of the upper Saskatchewan. Such hopes, 
however, have not been fulfilled. The early years of bustling 
activity and varied opportunities for employment had been stim¬ 
ulated greatly by the railroad builders. When they left pro¬ 
gress slackened perceptibly, as the settlement entered a long 
dormant period characterized by economic depression, a spirit 
of disillusionment and a series of disasters. 

The village, consisting chiefly of wooden structures, 
had frequent fires. Faulty chimneys and hot stoves, especial¬ 
ly during the winter, caused most of them, and the flames were 
difficult to control as there was not an adequate water supply. 
During December, 1922, and January, 1923, ten buildings were 
burned, including three cafes, a shoe-repair shop, a livery barn, 
Seth Sitton's store, a hotel, the McDermott Hardware, a butcher 
shop and a law office, (l) After this serious loss of property, 
(l) “The Gazette'*, Jan. 3. 10, 31, 19237 

the village council urged the residents to check their chim¬ 
neys and stoves carefully, recommended that building be fire¬ 
proofed and made some effort to improve the efficiency of the 
fire-fighting equipment. Mr. P. McDermott quickly had a new 
brick store ejected, but the predominance of wooden buildings 
continued to make the fire hazard great. 










- 156 - 


Assisted by a firm of consulting engineers, Haddin 
and Mills Ltd. of Calgary, the council in 1931 placed before 
the ratepayers two alternative plans, either of which would 
have provided the village with an effective defence against 
fire. Both schemes were voted down for the times were hard, 
and the citizens preferred to face the danger of fire rather 
than carry the burden of extra taxes. Two years later, after 
the Modern Cafe and the general store of S. Saad were demol¬ 
ished, the village council formed a permanent fire brigade 
instead of relying entirely on untrained volunteers. 

The greatest catastrophe experienced by the people 
of Rocky Mountain House occurred dramatically. On the after¬ 
noon of July 9, 1927, a tornado twisted through the centre of 
the village, damaging or totally destroying some fifty build¬ 
ings. Boards, and even roofs were flung from the west to the 
east side of the main street, windows were smashed and the 
torrential rains that followed the two-minute onslaught ruined 
much of the stock in the shattered stores. The Atlas lumber 
piles were transformed into a tangled mass. M By some miracle,” 
”The Mountaineer” recalls, ”there were no deaths, only two 
men badly hurt and they recovered. George Meston was in the 
McDermott Hardware when it fell apart and he plunged into the 
cellar when the floor collapsed. Jack Fuller was also in the 
store, and when the front window crashed, he started for the 
back door, but the roof lifted and he rushed back to the front, 
only to be knocked down by a rafter. He crawled to the door 
just as the wall fell out onto the sidewalk.” (2) The debris 
(2) ”The Mountaineer”, "July 12, 1951* ' 




' 


4 















' 








. 


, 




. 

, 

' ■ ' ' • .. ' r . , ■ 






. 






, 



4 


. 

. 




. 




- 157 - 

was cleared away rapidly but, since only the Atlas Lumber 
Company was insured against such a calamity, the loss of 
property was a heavy blow to the village. 

The most severe set-back to the community as a 
whole was the economic slump which between the two World 
Wars affected all of Canada. During these years the prices 
offered for agricultural and timber products were low, and 
farmers had little incentive or money to clear new land for 
cultivation. Many were finding it difficult to pay their 
taxes and meet the ordinary expenses of living. 

The poverty of the rural population burdened two 
municipalities in the area, Prairie Creek and Lochearn. At 
a ratepayers' meeting in 1937, it was shown that less than 
one-third of the lands in the rural portion of the Lochearn 
Municipality had the school taxes paid in full, making it 
extremely difficult to finance new schools that were urgently 
needed. In a resolution made on this occasion the Provincial 
Government was requested not to encourage settlers to move 
into the district unless they were able to earn a living and 
pay their taxes. (3) Only by reducing the salaries of munic- 
( 3 ) ^The Mountaineer'*, March~3> 1937» 

ipal officials and school teachers, and curtailing road im¬ 
provements, were these districts able to struggle on until 
1939. In that year, owing to tax arreas, the sharply mounting 
costs of relief and medical care to indigent families, and 
other financial problems, the two councils resigned. The 
Department of Municipal Affairs appointed Mr. S. Potts, a 
municipal inspector, administrator of the Lochearn and Prairie 




. 






' 

v,., 


















. 










. 

* 

* . 

. 

. 

; ; ■ 1 : ■ i . ;•" ' .. . . :v - 

■r ; . . - 




. . ■ . . ■ - / ' . . ' 


\ - . . - - . ; . .. ; ' 

. . . . ■ " 

. 

- 

' -:-i- ' ' ... I- • 

. 


. 






- 158 - 

Creek Municipalities. Both districts became part of Local 
Improvement District No .65 in 1944. This step was a neces¬ 
sary but unfortunate retrogression in the development of 
local government. 

Although Rocky Mountain House was not part of a 
municipality, the villagers depended largely on the surround¬ 
ing region for their livelihood. The merchants were extremely 
jealous of outside competition and did all in their power to 
induce the people of the district to trade at local stores. 

In April, 1925, they launched, according to M The Mountaineer” , 
”a huge counter-attack against the Mail Order Houses”.(4) They 
(4) n The Mountaineer’*, April 22. 1925* " 

declared that by selling for cash only their prices could be 
lowered and “mail order competition” reduced. This policy 
was not popular with those farmers who needed credit while 
waiting for crop returns or livestock to fatten. The mer¬ 
chants also vied with one another in holding bargain sales. 

In one issue of ”The Mountaineer”, J. A. Driscoll advertised, 
among other “specials”, ”14 bars of Pearl Soap and five packets 
of Lux Flakes for one dollar”, and for the same price the 
Killico Store had sixteen different “deals”, including ”4 lbs. 
of Pure Lard, 3 lbs. of Raisins and 3 lbs. of Icing Sugar”, 

”49 lbs. of Buffalo Flour, 2 pkgs. of Yeast Cakes”, and ”5 
loaves of Bread, 5 - lb. packet of Prunes, 7 - lb. bag of 
Salt”. (5) Later in the same year “a community buying cam- 

'(5) “The Mountaineer”, June 15, 1932 ~ ~~~ _ 

paign” from October 1, 1932, to March 31, 1933, was sponsored 
by the merchants and “The Mountaineer”. Approximately ^350.00 













. 




. 

* 

. 


















* 

' 

• s s; ■; : 'U' . ,c ■ - ~ • 

. 


■- 

. 

' 






' - 




. 








. 




. 




■ ' ■ ' - 












- 159 - 


in prizes were offered, $100.00 to the person in the district 
making the greatest amount of "home” purchases during the 
specified period, $50.00 to the second highest and a number 
of smaller prizes to those people who estimated the nearest 
number of entries that would be received. Since "The Mount¬ 
aineer" contributed part of the prize money, all competitors 
had to be paid up subscribers. Such enticements were used 
to stimulate trade during the period when money was scarce. 

It was not always easy for some farmers to reach 
their trading centre at Rocky Mountain House owing to poor 
roads and the difficult crossing of the Saskatchewan River. 
The loudest complaint was in connection with the ferry, which 
was subject to dangerous mishaps and irregular service until 
Mr. 0. E. Thompson took charge of it in 1924. However, even 
in the hands of a competent operator, the ferry was not en¬ 
tirely satisfactory. The local Board of Tra.de made many ef¬ 
forts to secure a traffic bridge and road improvements. It 
was argued that the people on the north side of the river 
had no means of reaching the village during at least four 
months of the year, when the ferry could not be used because 
of "low water, slush ice or high water". (6) Many farmers, 

(6) "The Mountaineer", Feb. 10. 1926. 

it was stated, had to curtail grain and stock raising owing 
to the inaccessibility of markets. A number of daring team¬ 
sters drove loaded wagons across the railroad bridge, but 
they did so at the risk of both injury and prosecution for 
trespassing. At this time there was a dirt highway between 
Red Deer and Rocky Mountain House. It was suitable for traf- 







- 160 - 


fic only in dry weather, and ended at the east bank of the 
river. The road west to Nordegg was not yet under construction. 

After 1931 there were definite indications of pro¬ 
gress in the area. In August of that year Mayor W. J. Kirby 
received a letter from Alfred Speakman, Member of Parliament 
for the Red Deer constituency, which bore the heartening news 
that a road from Rocky Mountain House to Nordegg would be 
started during the winter under the joint provincial and fed¬ 
eral scheme for unemployment relief. This road was completed 
several years later, and relief camps also constructed a road 
fourteen miles west of Nordegg, through mountainous terrain 
to Windy Point. In 1932 Gordon L. Sorenson started a regular 
bus service between Red Deer and Rocky Mountain House and the 
highway was gradually improved. 

In the town a new hospital was in process of erec¬ 
tion during 1937, as well as a skating rink, a curling rink, 
two business blocks, a fire hall and about twelve residences. 

In the same year the Calgary Power Company extended its trans¬ 
mission lines to the village. Feeling that at last they were 
emerging from the wilderness, the inhabitants staged a great 
celebration in October, 1937, to mark the Silver Anniversary 
of Rocky Mountain House. The electric lights were turned on 
for the first time, and everyone enjoyed two days of revelry. 
There was ”a Calithumpian parade, Barbecue sandwiches, the 
big midway down Main Street, the Buffalo Supper at the Legion 
Hall, the Old-Timers’ registration and big dances on both 
Friday ,and Saturday.” (7) 


(7) h The Mountaineer”, Oct. 20, 1937* 














- 

. 

. . 

. 

. 

1 . : 

. 

, 


- . 




. 















. 

. 


■ . ■ ; ' . '■ • ■ 


' 


* 

.. 

. ■ 

. 


. 

. 

• ■ , 

1 . 

. 














- 161 - 

On August 16, 1939, Rocky Mountain House was of¬ 
ficially declared a town by the Hon. Lucien Maynard, Minis¬ 
ter of Municipal Affairs. According to a civic census taken 
at that time, the urban population was 769, exclusive of M 01d 
Town", the hospital staff and a number of families living 
immediately outside the town limits. The first mayor was 
William Teskey, councillors were W. H. Schierholtz and J. A. 
McLean. Mrs. S. A. Durnford was the secretary-treasurer. 
Under the new status certain changes had to be made in ad¬ 
ministration and Mr. J. Minkler, for some years secretary- 
treasurer of Lacombe, accompanied by Mayor Thomas Wilkes 
and Chief of Police Mosier, visited Rocky Mountain House to 
help in this matter. Although a member of the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police was already stationed at Rocky Mountain House 
as well as a police magistrate, a police department, con¬ 
sisting of one chief and a constable, was established. Be¬ 
sides enforcing the law in the town itself, they collected 
license fees, business taxes and acted as foremen of public 
works. Rocky Mountain House gained further recognition in 
194-3, when it became the centre of a provincial constituency, 
represented by the popular Alfred Hooke, Minister of Economic 
Affairs. 

To the great satisfaction of the entire community, 
after thirty-seven years of ferry service, a bridge was offi¬ 
cially opened at the new town by the Hon. W. A. Fallow, Min¬ 
ister of Public Works, in February, 194-6. Some five thousand 
people gathered to witness the cermony. The bridge is a 
great convenience to farmers, lumbermen and tourists, pro¬ 
viding easier access to the newly gravelled David Thompson 







• 


* 




. 


. ■ 


* 

• , 


... • 

' 




. 


■ 


. 

. 


. 

, 







, 



. 

. 











I6IA - 



The David Thompson Bridge was officially opened in 
February, 194-6. 



The former ferry service 
at Rocky Mountain House. 















162 - 


Highway which runs west to Nordegg. It is now hoped that 
the Government will build this road through the mountains 
to the Banff-Jasper Highway. The route was actually sur¬ 
veyed during 1939, and in the following year Ernest Ross, 
accompanied by several other men from Rocky Mountain House, 
negotiated the distance between Nordegg and the Banff-Jasper 
Highway in a 1930 Ford car and a 194-0 International truck. 
Later, other parties made the difficult trip to prove that 
such a road would be practicable. 

Since the last war a number of veterans have set¬ 
tled on land in the Rocky Mountain House area under the 
Department of Veterans' Affairs. The rural population has 
also been increased by a promising Dutch settlement of ap¬ 
proximately four hundred people. During 194-6 and 194-7 mem¬ 
bers of the Dutch Immigration Committee, together with rep¬ 
resentatives of the Department of Colonization and Agriculture 
of the Canadian National Railways, investigated settlement 
opportunities in several districts in Northern and Central 
Alberta. The district around Rocky Mountain House was se¬ 
lected as being suitable for Dutch farming families. 

Although these immigrants tend to form a little 
society apart from the community in general, their contri¬ 
butions to the area are considerable. They are industrious, 
moral and deeply religious. Belonging to the Dutch Reformed 
Church, they first held regular services in the hall belong¬ 
ing to the Women's Institute while a new Church was being 
built. The majority of these settlers are experienced farmers 





















. 












. 




■ . 




« 

' 

. . ■ / . , I ' „ : r "or'J :;c>i'x 

. 

. 














- 163 - 

and know the value of crop rotation, legumes and the use of 
fertilizers. It is expected that they will rapidly improve 
their land. The Dutch immigrants have helpd the expansion 
of agriculture, which is essential to the economic growth 
of the community in view of the anticipated decline in the 
lumber industry. 

Long associated with the district are the Gree and 
the Chippewa Indians who live on reservations north-west of 
the town. They impart to Rocky Mountain House a primitive 
quaintness, but have always been somewhat of a problem. For 
more than thirty years Mr. Henry Stelfox looked after their 
welfare voluntarily on behalf of the Department of Indian 
Affairs. G-rant MacLeod is now the resident Indian Agent. 

Most of the Gree came from North Battleford, Saskat¬ 
chewan, in 1930 and a smaller number from Pigeon Lake joined 
them in the Rocky Mountain House area. They wished to settle 
on a reserve while suitable Grown land was still available, 
but negotiations between this Cree band and the Department 
of Indian Affairs were delayed owing to the immoderate de¬ 
mands of their chief, Louis Sunchild. After his death in 
1944, the Gree, about one hundred in all, accepted 12,800 
acres lying in the vicinity of the Baptiste River. 

The Chippewa Indians proved even more obstinate. 

For fifty years led by Jim O’Chiese, their implacable chief, 
they wandered over the western and north-western regions of 
Alberta, hunting and trapping, working in logging camps and 
saw mills or clearing brush and making fence for farmers. 

Too proud to accept from the white man land which they con- 






. 

































- 164 - 


sidered was already theirs, these Indians refused to sign 
a treaty u n til poverty and disease convinced the majority 
that such a step was their only salvation. In 1950 the 
Chippewa, numbering over two hundred, were given a large 
reservation of 33,000 acres lying between the Nordegg and 
Baptiste Rivers. 

Several of the Cree and Chippewa families are 
successful farmers and during the winter many of them re¬ 
ceive good wages from the Atlas logging outfits and saw 
mills which are working the valuable timber berths located 
on both reservations. The Indians in general are not, how¬ 
ever, consistent workers, and being extremely improvident, 
spend their money as quickly as they earn it. Much of their 
inertia is attributed to poor eating habits and diet, tuber¬ 
culosis and syphilis, as well as frequent intermarriage. 

Since it is no longer feasible for them to follow their 
ancient nomadic way of life, the Department of Indian Affairs 
is encouraging them to build houses and engage in agricul¬ 
tural pursuits instead of spending so much time in the town 
of Rocky Mountain House or travelling many miles to attend 
"Sun Dances'’. (8) 

(8) Interview with Mr. Henry Stelfox, Rocky Mountain House, 

__J uly, 1951, and July, 1952. _ 

As a town, Rocky Mountain House has made rapid 
strides. By 1941 the population had reached 800 and the 
1946 census showed an increase of 206. "The Mountaineer” 
complained that the figure 1006 did not do justice to the 
actual number of inhabitants. "In addition,” it stated, 










- 165 - 

"there are the homes located on the Day acreage, those on 
the east side of the river bank on the bridge road, the Slaght 
subdivision down at 'Old Town', about eight homes in and 
around the Griffin Auto Camp, the subdivision on the former 
Andy Kline farm and the new Hart subdivision adjoining the 
town on the east. The hospital alone has a resident staff 
of around twelve. One can go so far as to include a half- 
dozen homes on the west bank of the river. All these oc¬ 
cupants are in every respect part of the town, except that 
they are living just outside of the corporate limits. They 
would add approximately 300 to the actual population of the 
town." (9) The 1951 Dominion Census set the population of 
( 9 ) >T The Mountaineer 11 . October 2, 194o. 

Rocky Mountain House proper at 1147, but the townspeople claim 
1400. The area has also increased through the years. The 
townsite, originally 127 acres, is now over 260. 

The facilities of the town have expanded greatly, 
and the new business establishments and residences offer a 
striking contrast to the rough structures remaining from 
earlier days. The fire hazard has been reduced considerably. 

A modern fire truck and equipment were purchased in 1950, 
and there is a trained fire brigade to deal with emergencies. 

In addition, the Forest Rangers located in the town are well 
equipped to handle large conflag^rations. Water is obtained 
from local wells and the North Saskatchewan River, and private 
water systems have been installed in a number of homes. Cement 
sidewalks are gradually replacing the board walks and dirt 
streets are being gravelled. The natural surroundings are 





. 

. 






























- 

. 

* 





- 166 - 


most attractive. If more of the citizens made an effort 
to beautify their homes and yards, Rocky Mountain House 
would be one of the most pleasant places in Alberta. 

Possessing all the facilities essential to a farm¬ 
ing and lumbering community, the town serves a large area. 
Local Improvement District 65 , containing 660,480 acres, and 
the Raven Municipality, containing 190,080 acres, form the 
greater part of the Rocky Mountain House region. (10) Ac- 

TlO) "Annual Report of the Department of Municipal Affairs 

of the Province of Alberta”, 1950. pn.124, and 150* 

cording to the 1951 Dominion Census, the former district has 
a present population of 4p92, and the latter 3,515* Although 
Rocky Mountain House is not likely to achieve the development 
predicted for it by the "Echo” in 1910, it has become the 
most important urban centre west of Red Deer, and will play 
an important part in the further settlement and agricultural 
expansion of an extensive territory in the grey wooded belt. 


ooooooOoooooo 






BIBLIOGRAPHY 




- 167 - 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


BOOKS AND MAGAZINE ARTICLES 

Butler, William F., THE GREAT LONE LAND 

(London: Bums and Oates, 1907). 

Chittenden, Hiram M., and Richardson, Alfred T., 

FATHER PIERRE-JEAN DE SMET’S LIFE AND TRAVELS 
AMONG THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS, 1905. 

Coues, Elliott, NEW LIGHT ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF 

THE GREATER NORTHWEST, (New York: Harper, 1897) 

DeVoto, Bernard, ACROSS THE WIDE MISSOURI, 

(Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 194-7). 

Fleming, Freeda, "Rocky Mountain House" (THE BEAVER, Dec., 194-9) 

Gaetz, Annie L., THE PARK COUNTRY, (Vancouver; Wrigley 

Printing Co., 1948) 

Gara, Robert E., JOHNNY CHINOOK (London: Longmans, 194-5). 

Hughes, Katherine, THE BLACKROBE VOYAGEUR, (Toronto: 

W. Briggs, 1911). 

Jenness, Diamond, THE INDIANS OF CANADA (2nd ed., Ottawa: 

King’s Printer, 1934-). 

Kane, Paul, WANDERINGS OF AN ARTIST (london: 1859) 

Maclnnes, Charles M., IN THE SHADOW OF THE ROCKIES, 

(London: Rivingtons, 1930). 

MacLeod, J.E.A., "Piegan Post and the Blackfoot Trade" 

(CANADIAN HISTORICAL REVIEW, Sept., 194-3). 

MacRae, Archibald 0., HISTORY OF ALBERTA (Western Canada 

History Co.,1912). 

McDougall, John, IN DAYS OF THE RED RIVER REBELLION 

(Toronto: W. Briggs, 1911). 

McDougall, John, PATHFINDERS ON PLAIN AND PRAIRIE 

(Toronto: W. Briggs, 1898). 

Moberly, Henry J., and Cameron, "William B., 

WHEN FUR WAS KING (London: Dent, 1929). 

Morton, Arthur S., A HISTORY OF THE CANADIAN WEST, 

(London: Thomas Nelson & Sons Ltd., n.d.) 

















■\ 





* . 






- . .x 




. 










168 - 


Newton, Rev. William, TWENTY YEARS ON THE SASKATCHEWAN 

(London: Stock, 1897). 

Oliver, E. H. THE CANADIAN NORTH-WEST, ITS EARLY 
DEVELOPMENT AND LEGISLATIVE RECORDS 
(Ottawa: King’s Printer, 1914-15). 

Riddell, J. H., METHODISM IN THE MIDDLE WEST 

(Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 1946). 

Tyrrell, Dr. J. B., DAVID THOMPSON’S NARRATIVE 

(Toronto: Champlain Society, 1916) 


HUDSON’S BAY COMPANY JOURNALS. REPORTS AND CORRESPONDENCE 

1) Rocky Mountain House journals, Hudson’s Bay Company Archives 

L ond on, England. 

1828- 29, kept by Henry Fisher, Clerk. 

1829- 30, ” ” ” ” ” 

1830- 31, " " 

1836-37, ” ” John E.Harriott, Chief Trader. 

1866-68, ” ” John Sinclair. 

2) Fort Edmonton journals, Hudson’s Bay Company Archives, 

London, England: 1799-1868. 

3) Reports on Districts 

a) Report on Saskatchewan District by Colin Robertson, 

July 20, 1823, H.B.C.Archives, London,England 

b) Letter (Para.17) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson’s Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, July 25, 1827 (H.B.C.Factory journals, 

Box 541, No.811). 

c) Letter (Para.54) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson’s Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, July 10, 1828 (H.B.C.Factory journals, 

Box 542, No.865). 

d) Letter (Para.44) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson's Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, August 26, 1830 (H.B.C.Factory journals, 

Box 546, No.953). 

e) Letter (Para.59) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson’s Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, July 18, 1831 (H.B.C.Factory journals, 

Box 549, No.1033). 







■ 




. , 






. 





. • 






r .:" : 






. 


. 


- ■ ■ • 

- 




. 

. 


. 


. 


... 


. 




. 






. 

. 

, ..... 









. 

. 

... 

. 



- 169 - 


f) Letter (Para.67) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson's Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, August 10, 1832 (H.B.C .Factory journals. 

Box 550, No.1063). 

g) Letter (Para.17) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson's Bay House, London, dated 

York Factory, July 21, 1834 (H.B.C. Factory journals, 

Box 551, No.1172). 

h) Extract from Governor Simpson's Report on the Northern 
Department, 1835 (H.B.C.Archives, Factory journals, 

Box 553, No.1218). 

i) Letter (Para.24) from Governor Simpson to the Governor 
and Committee, Hudson's Bay House, London, dated 

Red River Settlement, July 8, 1839 (H.B.C .Factory journals, 
Box 559, No.1406). 

j) Letters Inward (Series 1843-60) from Sir George 
Simpson to the Governor and Committee, Hudson's Bay 
House, London: 

i) June 24, 1848, para.59 and 60 
ii) June 30, 1857, para. 7 

k) Letter from William J. Christie at Edmonton to the 
Officer in Charge at Red River, Sept.13, 1864 (Fort 
Edmonton Correspondence Book, 1863-64, H.B.C.Archives, 
b60/b/l, fo.50d). 

l) Commissioner J.A.Grahame Correspondence, 1874 (H.B.C. 
Archives, D.13/a. fo.63). 


4) Harvey Fleming, Minutes of the Council, Northern Department 
of Rupert's Land, 1821031 (Toronto, The Champlain Society, 
1940, and London, The Hudson's Bay Record Society, 1940). 


GOVERNMENTAL REPORTS 


Papers Relative to the Exploration by Captain Palliser 
of that Portion of British America ... (London, 1859), p.25. 

Journals, Detailed Reports, and Observations Relative to 
the Exploration, by Captain Palliser, of that Portion of 
British North America ... (London, 1863), pp.62-63. 

Annual Report, GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF CANADA, 1886, Vol.ll. 

Annual Report of the Department of Municipal Affairs of 
the Province of Alberta, Edmonton, 1950. 















170 - 


Allan, J. A., COAL AREAS OF ALBERTA (Research Council of 
Alberta, Geology, Report No.34, Part V - pages l6l to 196, 
Edmonton, 1943). 

Newton, J.D., Ward, A.S., Bentley, C.F., WOODED SOILS AND 
THEIR MANAGEMENT (University of Alberta, Faculty of 
Agriculture, Bulletin No.21, Fourth Edition, Revised, 

March, 1948). 

ECONOMIC SURVEY OF THE TOWN OF ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE, 
(Industrial Development Branch, Department of Economic 
Affairs, Government of the Province of Alberta, May, 1950). 


NEWSPAPERS 

"ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE ECHO”, Feb.4, 1910, to Oct.15, 1912. 

"THE GUIDE", Rocky Mountain House, Nov.8, 1912, to 

Feb.23, 1917. 

"THE MOUNTAINEER" Rocky Mountain House, Mar.31, 1914, to 

Sept.29, 1914. 

"THE CAPITAL", Rocky Mountain House, April 2, 1918, to 

Dec. 1920. 

"THE GAZETTE", Rocky Mountain House, Jan.15, 1921, to 

Oct.5, 1922. 

"THE MOUNTAINEER", Rocky Mountain House, Oct.7, 1922, to 

July, 1952. 


ooooooOoooooo 

























APPENDICES 






- 171 - 


APPENDIX A 


List of Men in Charge of 
ROCKY MOUNTAIN HOUSE 
After the Union of 1821 


1821-22 

John Rowand 

Chief Trader 

1822-23 

Joseph Felix La Rocque 

Chief Trader 

1823 (summer) 

Patrick Small 

Clerk 

1824-25 

Patrick Small 

Clerk 

1828-32 

Henry Fisher 

Clerk 

1834-46 

John E. Harriott 

Chief Trader 

1846-47 

G-. McDougall 

Clerk 

1848-49 

Louis Leblanc 

Postmaster 

1849-53 

John E. Harriott 

Chief Factor 

1853-54 

Louis Leblanc 

Postmaster 

1854-55 

H. J. Moberly 


1855-61 

Joseph H. Brazeau 

Clerk & Postmaster 

1864-67 

Richard Hardisty 

Chief Trader 

1867 (summer) 

Joseph H. Brazeau 

Clerk 

1867-70 

James Iiackland 

Chief Trader 

1870 (summer) 

An Interpreter & 
six men 


1870-71 

James Hackland 

Chief Trader 

1874-75 

Angus Fraser 

Interpreter 


During the season of 1841-42 it would appear that Harriott 
was at Edmonton while Rowand went to the Columbia with 
Governor Simpson, (See Simpson to Harriott, Nov.4, 1841, 
H.B.C.Archives D.4/59, pp 30-32). 









APPENDIX B 


Excerpts from the correspondence "between Chief 
Commissioner James A, G-rahame at Fort Garry and Chief Factor 
Richard Hardisty at Fort Edmonton relevant to the final 
abandonment of Rocky Mountain House: 

1) Chief Commissioner Grahame to Chief Factor Hardisty, 
December 28, 1874-: 

fl . .. the Post at the Rocky Mountain House has been a grievous 
expense to us, and as you acknowledge, its Returns are of no 
importance. If no improvement is exhibited this winter you 
will at once close it up endeavouring to find some one you 
can depend upon to take charge of it. The useless expenditure 
of money keeping up unprofitable Stations because they cost 
money, while the prospect of future advantage from this is 
hopeless, is false policy and very detrimental to the result 
of the business, which should in every branch be paying. 

”The question of the removal of the Rocky Mountain 
House Buildings to Fort Pitt has been discussed but I have 
not yet had your final opinion upon the expense thereby likely 
to be incurred and have to request you to furnish it by first 
opportunity. M 

2) Chief Factor Hardisty to Chief Commissioner Grahame, June 8, 
1875: 

M I hope the arrangements made with regard to the 
Rocky Mountain House, will prove satisfactory. Angus Fraser 
was in charge of it for the past winter. I have now given 
him a small supply of goods at his own expense, and will at 
the same time, look after the Establishment without any ex¬ 
pense to the company. 



- 173 - 


M I cannot very well come to any satisfactory con¬ 
clusion, what the rafting down of the Fort would cost. Some 
think it could not be done with safety, on account of the 
stormy rush of current against banks of drift wood, and that 
a large raft could not very well be taken down. I see no 
other way than first make an attempt with one building, which 
if a success, the rest could be brought down afterwards. 

"The cost of bringing down this one building would 
be about $200.00 M 

3) Chief Commissioner G-rahame to Chief Factor Hardisty, 

January 5, 1876. 

"The arrangement about the Rocky Mountain House is 
satisfactory provided you are certain of recovering the advances 
you have made to Angus Fraser. I presume your agreement with 
him gives you the control of any furs he may collect. If the 
cost of taking down to Fort Pitt one of the Buildings at Rocky 
Mountain House would not exceed $200.00 (two hundred) I think 
it could be advisable to make the attempt leaving the others 
for the present." 

There is no further record to tell us whether one 
of the buildings was actually taken to Fort Pitt. 



appendix g 


AGREEMENT 

THIS AGREEMENT mad© in duplicate this 18th day 
of December A. D. 1911, between John H. Bertrand, of Prairie 
Grange in the Province of Alberta, Farmer, hereinafter 
called the Vendor, of the first part; and Earl R. Hill 
and James Jesse Lundy, both of Prairie Grange aforesaid, 
hereinafter called the Purchases, of the second part. 

The Vendor agrees to sell and the Purchasers 
agree to purchase the fractional north-east quarter of 
Section Twenty-two (22), in Township Thirty-nine (39), 

Range Seven (7), West of the Fifth Meridian in the Province 
of Alberta, containing by admeasurement one hundred and 
twenty-seven (127) acres, more or less, for the price or 
sum of Ten thousand One Hundred and Sixty Dollars ($10160.00), 
payable as follows: The sum of Two hundred and Fifty 
Dollars ($250.) upon the signing of this agreement (the 
receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged), and the balance on 
the times and in the manner hereinafter specified. 

The Purchasers agree to survey and subdivide the 
said lands and to submit to the Registrar for the North 
Alberta Land Registration District, the plans connected 
with the said survey and subdivision, within one hundred 
days from the date of this agreement. The Purchasers further 
agree to have the said lands offered for sale within sixty 
days from the date of the registration of the said plans 
by the said Registrar. 







( 2 ) 


The Purchasers agree to pay to the Vendor fifty 
per centum of the money received on account of the sale of 
any portion of the aforesaid lands until the entire purchase 
price has been fully paid, (provided, however, that any 
assignment of this agreement by the purchasers to the 
Central Alberta Towns!te Company, Limited, shall not be 
effected by this clause) and the Vendor agrees to furnish 
the Purchasers, their executors, administrators or assigns, 
with a clear title to any portion of the said lands upon 
payment by them of the purchase price of the said portion 
which area, in the case of a subdivision, must include that 
portion of the streets and alleys adjacent to the lots or 
blocks included in the transfer of the aforesaid portion. 

The party of the first part shall have the privilege 
of buying back from the party of the second part, any portion 
of the above described property, not to exceed six acres 
in area exclusive of streets, at the rate of Eighty Dollars 
per acre, the party of the first part to have first, third 
and fifth choices of the blocks or portions thereof included 
in the said six acres or fraction thereof. 

The Parties of the second part agree that the 
said lands shall be sold at a rate of not less than One 
hundred and Sixty Dollars per acre, but nothing in this 
clause shall refer to or effect any assignment of this 
agreement by the parties of the second part or their executors, 
administrators or assigns to the Central Alberta Townsite 
Company, Limited. 


. ■. 


. - '.V ) 












. 



. 





. 








. 




. 













. 





■ 

- 







. 












. ■ • ' ' ■ . ‘ , • = 

. 


. 


■ - 


. 


■ 
















( 3 ) 


The Parties of the second part agree to pay to 
the party of the first part the entire amount of the purchase 
price of the aforesaid lands within seven years from the 
date of this agreement and to pay Interest at the rate of 
five per centum per annum on the unpaid portion thereof from 
and after two years from the day of the date hereof till paid, 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have hereunto 
set their hand and seals the day and year first above 
written. 


SIGNED, SEALED AND DELIVERED 
in the presence of 


(Signed) A.E.BOYD ) 


(Signed) J.H.BERTRAND 
E.R.HILL 
J.J.LUNDY 


CANADA ) 

) 

PROVINCE OF ALBERTA ) 

) 

TOWIT: ) 


I, Alma E. Boyd, of the town of 
Lacombe in the Province of Alberta, 
stenographer, make oath and say: 


1. That I was personally present and did see John H. 
Bertrand, Earl R. Hill and James J. Lundy, named in the 
above instrument, who are personally known to me to be 
the persons named therein, duly sign, seal and execute 
the same for the purposes named therein. 

2. That the said instrument was executed at Lacombe 
aforesaid, and that I am the subscribing witness thereto. 

3. That I know the said parties, and they are in my 
belief of the full age of twenty-one years. 

SWORN before me at Lacombe in the ) 

Province of Alberta, this 1st day ) A.E.Boyd, 

of February, A.D. 1912. ) 

(Signed) A.M.MacDonald 
A Notary Public 

in and for the Province of Alberta. 


. 1 ; ' 


$ 







. 



, • 





; 

. 



. 


. 

. 



. 

• 






. 

. 

. 



■ { 











THE ROCK Y MOUNTAIN HOUSE AREA 

t??c 0 fisTp£ T 1 ' f «s- lo: 

3,515. present population of 4092, and the latter 


ft. b. is: 

A 
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































MOUNTAIN HOUSE SHEET 
























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































