














(3.X MBBIS 
wmmmrn 




University of Alberta 
Printing Department 









Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyoforientatiOOkuef 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A STUDY OF THE ORIENTATION PROCEDURES FOR NEW TEACHERS 
IN SELECTED SCHOOL SYSTEMS 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL ADMINISTRATION 


by 

Sister M. Constance Kuefler, C.S.J. 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


April 1959 





























SYNOPSIS 


iii 


This survey which studied the procedures used for orientating new 
teachers in the Separate School Systems of Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge 
covered 66 schools and drew information from 61 administrators, namely, 
superintendents and principals, and 149 teachers who in 1957-58 were 
working for the first time in one of the given schools. Some of these 
were entering the profession; some had taught for one or more years. 

Most teachers, even those with experience but new to a school 
system, need some help to become acclimatized and they must become orient¬ 
ated and feel that they belong before they can meet their pupils with 
professional competency. The writer hopes that the information derived 
from administrators and teachers and presented in this survey will make 
clear the fact that the people most concerned with the problem of orient¬ 
ation realize its importance. Administrators in general, however, seem 
to rate the help given by a specific technique higher than the teachers 
do. 

Differences between the help needed and the help received were quite 
large in the following instances: planning for and working with gifted 
and retarded pupils, developing better personal qualities as a teacher, 
and making effective use of community resources. In others, the assitance 
given seems to be considered quite adequate. 

Human relations problems among the teachers appear to create very 
little difficulty and the fact that responses from administrators and from 
teachers run so parallel indicates that on most of the areas covered the 




: , : r> ' ^ 




. 

. 

. 

.. ' r _ ;■ t .. • . ' '>! t ■ • il'. ' •' ! ■ ■'' ; 

; . ... 




.U vy>ii J * ■■••• '1' •' ' '■ »" ' ' '■ ft : ■ ;L ' '• 

j •r-; . r.'.J \> •••'• : ■ ' ■ fv 




’> <.j. i;i n... : ir.'J -f -V St.- • '•* ' 




•■wi - : ‘ ■ 


■; i f. .:. 'j * i'-. 


t ; A • . .. . : -ii : •; ■ <• - 1 ■ • -W ; ■ * • ; - : '' 

. . . ! ' ,i - • 

. 


. 


■ 

. 

/?•, / ,• , :• , Jf>3 j)my *#<*• '*«'* • ^ ^. { ' « : \ n: 'V:* ‘ 


. :• : • -’7 ■.. • • :i ~ 4% 






. . s 


' 

- . . ■ 












: 1 ....: ' c. m.» r-u -,1 \ • * r r -""■ 


.... ! i . • 








;; } i ■ . i -V- .' .... . ; v • a i>U\ Cl UA ■ 







iv 

two groups are in agreement. Differences are mainly in degree rather 
than in kind. 

It would seem that in view of the assistance gained by teachers in 
the school systems having orientation programs, those responsible for 
planning and conducting pre-service and in-service orientation activities 
for classroom teachers should expand and intensify their efforts. 




V 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The writer wishes to express sincere thanks to the members of the 
Division of School Administration, Dr. H.T. Sparby, and Mr. H.C. Melsness 
who suggested the procedure to be used in the organization of the thesis. 
The helpful advice and critical observations pertinent to its development 
are gratefully acknowledged. The writer also expresses her gratitude to 
Dr. S.C.T. Clarke for his interest and assistance in preparing the 
questionnaire for the survey, to Messrs. A.A. O'Brien, Superintendent of 
the Edmonton Separate Schools, R.A. Cannon, Superintendent of Calgary 
Separate Schools, J.V. Vantighem, Assistant Superintendent of the Calgary 
Separate Schools, R. Kimmitt, Superintendent of the Lethbridge Separate 
Schools, for valuable information and the kind permission to conduct the 
survey in their respective systems. A word of thanks is also in order to 
the teachers who gave their time for completing the questionnaire, to 
Reverend J. Kuefler, O.F.M., S.T.D., and Mrs. Paul Matisz who contacted 
all personnel for completing the questionnaire in the Calgary and Leth¬ 
bridge schools, and to the many staff members of these school systems who 
gave their generous assistance. 






... , ; i • 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED . I 

Need of Study ... 2 

Purpose of Present Study .. 6 

Limitations of Study . 8 

Definition of Terms . 8 

Method of Study ... 9 

II. REVIEW OF LITERATURE . 11 

Summary of Recommended Principles and 

Procedures . 23 

Time of Induction and Orientation Programs . 24 

Pre-School Procedures . 25 

In-service Procedures . 26 

Administrators' Support . 28 

Evaluation of Procedures . 28 

III. COLLECTION OF DATA . 31 

Description of Population for Study .... 31 

Description of Survey Instrument . 33 

Pilot Study . 35 

General Distribution .. 36 

Distribution of Questionnaire in Edmonton . 36 

Procedure of Distribution in Calgary . 37 

Description of the Distribution in Lethbridge .. 37 


Conclusion 


38 














































vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

IV. ANALYSIS OF DATA ON ORIENTATION PROCEDURES . 39 

I. Classification of teachers . 39 

II. Frequency of Use of Orientation Techniques . 42 

Administrators' Responses . 43 

New Teachers' Responses . 45 

Comparison of These Responses . 47 

Administrators' Viewpoints Compared . 49 

New Teachers' Viewpoints Compared . 51 

III. Usefulness of Orientation Techniques . 51 

Administrators' Responses .. 53 

New Teachers' Responses . 55 

Comparison of These Responses . 57 

Administrators' Viewpoints Compared. 59 

New Teachers' Viewpoints Compared. 61 

General Conclusion . 61 

V. ANALYSIS OF DATA ON HELP RECEIVED BY NEW TEACHERS . 65 

1. Sources of Help ..... 65 

11. Types of Help Needed and Received .. 68 

Types of Help Needed by First-Year Teachers . 70 

Comparison of Responses of the Three Systems . 72 

Types of Help Received .. 74 

111. Attitude Towards New Teachers. 78 












































viii 


CHAPTER PAGE 

VI. ANALYSIS OF DATA ON SEVERITY OF ADJUSTMENT 

PROBLEMS . 80 

Analysis of Replies of All New Teachers ... 81 

Comparisons of Responses of the Three Cities . 83 

Comparisons: First-Year and Experienced Teachers . 85 

Effectiveness of Orientation Programs . 91 

General Conclusions . 94 

Vll. SUMMARY, FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS . 97 

1. Summary .. 97 

11. Findings . 98 

111. Recommendations .. 99 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . 102 

APPENDIX A: Questionnaire . 109 


APPENDIX B: Analysis of Questionnaire 


117 




































LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

1. Number of Teachers Coming to Alberta . 4 

11. Growth of Teaching staff in the Edmonton R.C. Separate 

School System . 6 

111. Enrolment in the R.C. Schools of Three Cities of Alberta, 

1957-58 . 31 

IV. Number of New Teachers in Comparison with Total Number of 

Separate School Teachers . 32 

V. Distribution of Questionnaires and Number of Returns .... 38 

VI. Number of Years of Training, Beyond Grade Xll, of 149 New 

Teachers . 40 

VI1. Number of Years of Teaching Experience in Grades from 

One to Twelve . 41 

Vlll. Types of Orientation Programs Used in the School Term, 

1957-58 . 42 

IX. Frequency of Use of Practices as Reported by 61 

Administrators . 44 

X. Frequency of Use of Practices as Reported by 149 

New Teachers .. 46 

XI. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Frequency of Use of 

Practices for Three Schools Taken Together . 48 



























X 


TABLE , PAGE 

Xll. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Frequency of Use 

Indicated by Administrators . 50 

Xlll. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Frequency of Use 

Indicated by New Teachers.... 52 

XIV. Usefulness of Practices as Reported by 61 Administrators . 54 

XV. Usefulness of Practices as Reported by 149 New Teachers .. 56 

XVI. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Usefulness of 

Practices for Three Schools Taken Together .. 58 

XVI1. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Usefulness of 

Practices Indicated by Administrators .. 60 

XV111. Weighted Totals and Rank Order of Usefulness of 

Practices Indicated by New Teachers .. 62 

XIX. Amount of Help Received by New Teachers from 
Superintendents, Supervisors, Principals 

and Fellow Classroom Teachers, 1957-58 . 66 

XX. Amounts of Certain Types of Help Needed and Received by 

New Teachers .. 69 

XXI. Amounts of Certain Types of Help Needed and Received by 

First-Year Teachers .. 71 

XXII. Amounts of Certain Types of Help Needed by 

New Teachers .. 73 



















zi 

TABLE PAGE 

XXI11. Amounts of Certain Types of Help Received by 

New Teachers . 75 

XXIV. Attitudes of Regular Staff Towards New Teachers . 79 

XXV. Rank Order of Seriousness of Adjustment Problems and the 

Total Percentages of the Teachers Who Received Help 

Upon Each. 82 

XXVI. Analysis Re: Seriousness of Adjustment Problems 

and Help Received in System A . 130 

XXV11. Analysis Re: Seriousness of Adjustment Problems 

and Help Received in System B .... 131 

XXV111.Analysis Re: Seriousness of Adjustment Problems 

and Help Received in System C .... 132 

XXIX. Analysis Re: Seriousness of Adjustment Problems 

and Help Received by First-Year Teachers . 133 

XXX. Analysis Re: Seriousness of Adjustment Problems 

and Help Received by Experienced New Teachers . 134 

XXXI. Average Severity Ratings and Per Cent Help Received for 
Adjustment Problems, According to Type of 

Program Received ...... 92 


































LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Amounts of Help Needed and Received by New Teachers . 77 

2. Percentages of New Teachers Who Reported Help 

with Adjustment Problems . 88 

3. Average Ratings of Severity of Adjustment Problems . 90 

4. Percentages of New Teachers Who Reported Help with Adjustment 

Problems by Type of Program. 93 

5. Average Ratings of Severity of Adjustment Problems by 

Type of Program. 95 


















CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 


In these days of rapid turn-over in teaching personnel, the problem 
of orientating the new teacher to his responsibilities is becoming increas¬ 
ingly acute. The great development in the economy of Canada, particularly 
in Alberta, during the last several years, has brought a change in the 
methods of recruiting and orientating employees into business organizations 
and into school systems. A generation ago when there were more applicants 
than jobs, young people seeking employment tried to find employers and to 
make themselves and their services satisfactory. 

The roles are now reversed. At present, the city Separate school 
systems, contrary to previous policy, are forced to seek out and to accept 
teachers who have no experience. The school officials realize that they 
must exert themselves to make the conditions of teaching sufficiently 
attractive to recruit new teachers to replace those who retire or leave 
the profession. The Educational Research Service reported that: 

When only a few new teachers are appointed in a school 
system in any one year, their orientation poses few problems. 

However, when the turnover increases and a school system finds 
that perhaps as many as 30 per cent of the teachers will be 
new, as has sometimes happened in recent years, school officials 
feel that they must organize the induction of new teachers on 
an orderly basis so that schools may operate efficiently from 
the first day. Experimental orientation programs have been so 
successful that in a number of school systems they are being made 
a permanent part of the in-service program. However, it has 
been found that teachers already in the system benefit by having 
a period before the opening of school for preparation of their 







(•J.i •• O:: 


j t ■ ■ . . ■ 1 . - 


• •; / • ,: :• nl: ,:.i v>. m; 

" J i • ■ 4 ' ' 




, ; » >, ■ . ' } . - ! i .L- I 








' 


’ i." 




;I r . 



! -< . H .. : 


n: 








■ : « ' ■ 


■ I 


, 


.1 a ..i. j i"> ‘-. i ■ ■■'. mom 


.or-iq. : at&:>&;■ i ■ . r mi :<.r i .. :.)'j ’>v 

i. : ■ , . . : : : . : 






2 


work and consultation on the general program.^- 

The Educational Research Service^ wrote in March 1952 to 184 city- 
school systems known to have specific plans for orientating new teachers. 

The letter asked for brief descriptions of their orientation programs and 
copies of materials prepared for the benefit of new teachers. Replies were 
received from 88 school systems in 35 states. The reports indicated a 
growing realization that better teaching and happier teachers resulted 
from giving the new teachers help in bridging the gap between theory and 
practice. 

Need for Study 

At the present time Canada is experiencing a serious teacher shortage 
and it appears likely that this situation will continue for some years. 
Opinions regarding the extent and duration of the shortage have been expressed 
by various authorities. In a recent study of provincial population trends , 
Professor Card of the University of Alberta offered this prediction: 

The number of teachers required per year to offset loss to the 
profession and to provide for increased school enrolments is in 
the order of 1,000 to 1,100 from 1952 to 1956, 1,200 to 1,375 from 
1957 to 1961 and from 1,375 to 1,500 from 1962 to 1966. 3 


^-National Education Association, Research Division and American 
Association of School Administrators. Teacher Orientation Programs in 
City School Systems . Educational Research Service Circular No. 8, 1952. 
(Washington, D.C.: The Association, September, 1952) p.l 

2 lbid . 

^.Y. Card, Population Trends in Alberta Affecting Teacher Demand and 
Supply , p.2 The Alberta Journal of Educational Research, 1:3, (September, 
1955), p. 17 

















;i ■ r • V .:; ; . 


" 1 i ' ■ ' 


' ■ 






.> .fit 


. ' 




:> I :.M, ..i J, : 

j:; .... A • r, . .- 

. 


. 'U b . (O J... Q :.i V "■ .i. 

; 

■j ; . - V-. . • •a. U<>S 

‘ ' c < ' • " ' ! - '% 

. 




, 








3 


A bulletin issued by the Alberta Catholic Education Association 
says that the present shortage in Canada is likely to continue, reaching 
by 1966 the alarming total of 25,000 teachers.^ 

From a report given at the Teacher Recruitment and Retention 
Conference, the future problem of recruiting and orientation seems to be 
still greater. 

By 1980, we will require (in Canada) an elementary teaching force 
67,000 larger than today’s 103,000; and an increase of 20,000 on 
today’s secondary school teaching force of 17,000. 5 

The long range program of this conference was to develop methods which 

would result in retaining more teachers in the profession. The following 

were considered: methods of inducting new teachers into teaching; 

internship following pre-service; provision of more help from superintendents, 

principals and visiting teachers. 

A more recent article has re-stated the teacher shortage in much 
the same way. 

Within the next ten years Canada will need 46,000 new teachers 
to take care of the enrolment Increase alone. This does not make 
any allowance for replacement of those who leave the profession.^ 


Editorial, ’*The Teacher Shortgage," Alberta Catholic Education 
Association Bulletin , VII No. 2 (Dec. 8, 1953), p. 1 

^ ’Minutes of the Teacher Recruitment and Retention Conference," 
Edmonton, (October 20, 1956), p. 3 (Mimeographed). 

^The Canadian Teachers' Guide, (Nelson’s, Toronto, Ontario 
Autumn 1957) Vol. VIII No. 1. p. 5 











j S It:- 'll 


I 







. j 




r 


, vjV; r.it-rl. 


(U . . •. . 


• t ?. 1 : 





, 


, ;■! \ . ; 

* C 


...;iM n ) I DV.~ •.» • • •’> ' 



.• : •: ■ •>., e ... • . ! • 

i ;i :. .1 ■ : 

: . , j'X >.iL; , >j- :■ ; ; - >< i 


/: 


i. i> . J *■. * 


'..• 





4 


Mr. D. Cameron, the Registrar of the Department of Education, 
pointed out in his reports 7 8 that there was an increasing interest in the 
opportunities offered in Alberta classrooms. During 1953-54, there were 
more than 700 letters of enquiry from teachers in England, Wales, Scotland 
and North Ireland. For every non-Alberta teacher who finally qualifies for 
teaching authority and establishes residence in Alberta, there are another 

o 

nine who seek advice on certification and working conditions. Table 1 
shows an increase in the number of teachers coming to Alberta from the 
British Commonwealth and from other countries outside the Commonwealth. 

TABLE I 

NUMBER OF TEACHERS COMING TO ALBERTA 


Year From other From the British From other Total 

Parts of Canada Coimnonwealth Countries 


1950 

174 

7 


181 

1951 

187 

6 

1 

194 

1952 

197 

11 

6 

214 

1953 

239 

31 

4 

246 

1954 

226 

46 

17 

289 

1955 

239 

64 

28 

331 

1956 

196 

37 

5 

238 

1957 

263 

32 

10 

305 


If the teachers from our own province who have returned to the 


teaching profession or who have just entered the teaching profession were 


7 Alberta Department of Education, Annual Reports 1950-57 

8 Ibid. 















:. :j . 








\ 











5 


included, a truer picture of the number of new teachers in Alberta would 
be obtained. With the prospect of the influx of teachers from abroad, 
and the acceptance of teachers with little training, helping new teachers 
get off to a good start has become a conpelling administrative problem. 

Q 

The data in Table II shows that in the Edmonton Roman Catholic 
Separate School System during the last ten years, there was an increase of 
238 teachers, which is approximately 63.5 per cent. For the term of 
1954-55, there were 35 new teachers, who include the 14 teacher increase 
and 21 replacements for teachers who resigned from the staff.This 
number represents 15 per cent of the total staff of 228. In 1955-56, 
there were 61 new teachers or 23 per cent of a total staff of 267. For 
1957-58, there were 75 new teachers or 23 per cent of a total staff of 
325. 

A perusal of the editorials, correspondents' columns, summaries of 
conventions of school trustees, of superintendents and administrators 
reports, of teachers' conventions and of Home and School Conferences in 
current periodicals bears out the same conclusion. To meet this crisis, 
school boards are forced to implement some form of orientation prior to 
the opening of school. With some school systems having as high as thirty 
per cent of their staff new to their jobs each year, orientating new 

9 Ibid . 

information was obtained from the secretary of the Edmonton 

Separate School Board. 



- , . ; , . . ■ ■ • ■ ' • c ' i: 

. 

* 

.. ■ : 


- ■ <; ■ ' > ■ ' &■ ■ 1 •’ ; 

, . , .• • ■' ■ ■ .. 






6 


teachers surely becomes an urgent administrative problem.^ The adage, 
"An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure," is applicable in this 
situation. 

TABLE II 

GROWTH OF TEACHING STAFF IN THE EDMONTON ROMAN CATHOLIC 
SEPARATE SCHOOL SYSTEM 


School 

Year 

Number of 
Teachers 

Yearly Increase in 
Teaching Staff 

1949-50 

137 


1950-51 

157 

20 

1951-52 

176 

19 

1952-53 

190 

14 

1953-54 

214 

24 

1954-55 

228 

14 

1955-56 

267 

39 

1956-57 

295 

28 

1957-58 

325 

30 

1958-59 

375 

50 


Purpose of Present Study 

Literature in the fields of school administration and supervision 
is full of advice on how we can get new classroom teachers off to a good 
start. Much of the advice is sound in theory; much of it is plain common 
sense with which no one could quarrel. Hardly anyone will disagree that 
school systems should welcome new teachers into the community, that care¬ 
fully planned and organized orientation programs should be carried on every 


Start: 


^American Association of School Administrators. 
Teacher Orientation . Washington, D.C., 1956, p 


Off to a Good 

. 2 . 





























7 

year, and that all new teachers,to become solidly acclimatized, should 
receive much help from principals, superintendents, and fellow classroom 
teachers. 

An effective plan of orientation can assure initial confidence and 

may cause the difference between a new teacher's success and his failure. 

Modern teacher-education programs provide many enriching experiences for 

the beginning teacher, but too often, the newly employed teacher is compelled 

to resort to time-consuming, frequently disheartening, trial-and-error 

methods in meeting problems with which he has a professional right to expect 

some initial assistance. During this earlier period these problems create 

a "triple-threat barrier to good teaching"-- the measurable inadequacies 

that decrease the teacher's value of himself, to the school system, and, 

12 

most expensively, to the children themselves. 

As in other fields of activity, however, endeavours frequently fail 
to meet expectations. The measurement of the extent to which school adminis¬ 
trators do what ought to be done with and for new teachers is one of the 
objectives of this study. The several other objectives are as follows: 

1. To find out to what extent a selected list of initial and in-service 
orientation techniques for new teachers are employed in selected cities 
of Alberta. 

2. To determine the role played by the administrators and teachers in 
the induction programs. 

^^Benedict M. Amar, "Helping the Beginning Teachers," The 
National Elementary Principal . XXXII No. 1 (September, 1952), pp. 144-146 









i V . ... t • 











, 


■ : . 


' 
















■ - 






* ■ 

•, . . . ■ ; ■ ■ ■ ■ . 


-.i . j< • 
















■ 











) ■ - ' 







8 


3. To discover what types of help new teachers feel they need and what types 
they receive. 

4. To determine the attitude of experienced teachers toward new teachers 
on their staff. 

5. To identify the most serious adjustment problems of the new teachers 
and the extent to which the schools provided assistance with such problems. 

Limitations of Study 

This study was limited to Separate School teachers who were serving 
their first year in a particular school in a regular teaching job in one 
of the three cities, Edmonton, Calgary, and Lethbridge. 

Among the reasons for choosing the Separate School Systems in these 
cities for this study were: (1) the number of teachers which they employed 
was considered large enough to insure that the investigation would yield 
sufficient data, and (2) the writer's experience in the Edmonton Separate 
School System made it easier to contact the superintendents, principals and 
teaching staffs. 

Facts reported in this study are indicative of conditions existing 
in the school year 1957-58. They do not necessarily give an accurate picture 
of conditions existing either before or after that year. 

Definition of Terms 

In this thesis, "new" teachers are those who are teaching in a 
different school this year than they were last year. They include, there¬ 
fore, both experienced and inexperienced teachers; also those both new and 
old to the school system. 









.. f 






ii 








■ 









. 












• ■ 






















































9 


13 

The term orientation literally means "turning toward the east" 

From this concept there has developed the necessity for establishing right 
relationships as one enters upon teaching, that is, to make satisfactory 
adjustments. The new teacher's personal and professional development in 
his position must not be left to chance; rather the experiences of all 
the teachers and the whole system ought to be made available to him. 
Orientation is defined in the Dictionary of Education 1 ^ as the process of 
making a person aware of such factors in his school environment as rules, 
traditions, educational offerings, for the purpose of facilitating effective 
adaptation. Spears states that this orientation of new teachers to a school 
system is in essence the introduction to later in-service study .^ 

Method of Study 

A questionnaire, formed partfy from studies of Strickland,^ Tower,^ 

18 

and the Research Division of National Education Association, was used to 


13 

William A. Yaeger, Administration and the Teacher . (New York: 

Harper and Brothers, 1954) pp. 159-73. 

14 

Carter V. Good, Dictionary of Education . (McGraw-Hill, 1945,p.283 ) 

^ H. Spears, Curriculum Planning Through In-Service Programs (Englewood 
Cliffs, N.J. Prentice-Hall, Inc. 1957) pp. 261-263 

E.C. Strickland, "Orientation Programs for New Teachers in Ohio Schools, 
Educational Research Bulletin , XXXV No. 7, (October, 1956) pp. 169-175 

^ M.M. Tower, "Orientation and In-Service Education Practices in Ninety-One 
School Systems in the United States." Educational Administration and Super¬ 
vision XLII (March, 1956) pp. 181-190 

18 

National Educational Association, Research Division, "First-Year 
Teachers in 1954-55," Research Bulletin XXXIV (February, 1956) pp. 1-48 





























10 


obtain data concerning the frequency of use and help gained from orientation 
procedures and in-service practices; the role of the administrators and 
the teachers in helping new teachers; the help the teachers felt they needed 
and received; and the extent to which orientation programs alleviated the 
adjustment problems of the new teachers and the general values of orienta¬ 
tion programs for new teachers. 

Information on the most commonly used practices for helping new 
teachers was obtained by personally contacting new teachers on the Separate 
School staffs in Edmonton. Questionnaires were sent to new teachers in 
Calgary and Lethbridge for the pilot study. The results of this pilot 
run with the teachers and the principals were examined by the writer and 
a consultant. Further revisions were suggested, the final draft re-checked 
by the consultant, and copies were made for the final distribution. 

The investigator sent questionnairs to the superintendents, principals, 
and new teachers of Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge R.C. School Systems. 
Superintendents, principals and new teachers responded to Part One of the 
questionnaire which dealt with the frequency with which twenty selected 
orientation practices were employed in the schools covered by this study. 

Part One also dealt with the amount of help gained from these orientation 
procedures. Parts Two, Three, Four and Five were completed by the new 
teachers only. Upon return of the questionnaire replies, and after the 
completion of the interviews, all data were analyzed, tabulated and compared 
in percentage and in graph form. 













' 


. ■ fl 





























































CHAPTER II 


REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 

A variety of induction practices that have been designed to help 
the new teacher in personal and professional problems was noted from a 
survey of literature on orientation procedures. Although many appeared 
glamorous and very successful, a careful examination of them revealed a 
pattern of services that are often limited to helping the beginning teacher 
during the first week or two of school, leaving him without assistance 
during the crucial year ahead. 

In 1942 the superintendents of 1,756 systems reported the following 
induction practices: specific help in obtaining living quarters, 82 per 
cent; conferences with new teachers soon after school opened, 71 per cent; 
provision of personal copies of rules and regulations governing the school 
system, 67 per cent; reception, tea, or social functions earlier in the 
year, 47 per cent; the earlier reporting of new teachers for special 
meetings and discussions, 24 per cent.^ 

In a study conducted by the North Central Association in which more 

than three hundred schools participated, conclusions based on the opinions 

expressed by both teachers and principals showed a list of ten most useful 
o 

techniques: 


NEA., Research Division, "Teacher Personnel Procedures: Selection 
and Appointment," Res. B. XX (1942) Encyclopedia of Educationa l Research 
pp. 1432-1433. Edited by Walter S. Monroe, N.Y. Macmillan Co., 1950 

^C.A. Weber, Educational A dministration and Supervision . (New York: 
MacMillan Co. 1942) pp. 691-695 























. , Wfc 

' 












. 












. ’ - _• < * ' 

. 




■ : , ; 


. 

. . 


. 














■ 




. 


. 

. 























12 


1. Organizing teachers into committees to study problems. 

2. Organizing studies of special topics - general staff meetings. 

3. Providing a professional library and browsing-room for teachers. 

4. Having teachers give reviews of articles in current educational 
magazines. 

5. Giving special financial awards for participation in programs of in- 
service education. 

6. Engaging co-operatively in a systematic evaluation of the school using 
the criteria of the Co-operative Study of Secondary School Standards. 

7. Carrying out a well-planned attack upon the problems of curriculum 
development. 

8. Holding forums where parents, pupils, teachers, and board members 
participate. 

9. Attending summer workshops. 

10. Visiting teachers in one’s own school or in other schools. 

Tate reported that the induction practices in small schools found 
most helpful by both teachers and superintendents were: individual confer¬ 
ences with superintendents prior to school opening, conferences following 
classroom visits by superintendents and general teachers’ meetings early 
in the school year to explain administration, organization, routine and the 

3 

like. Induction practices given high rank in value by teachers but of less 
value by administrators were: consulting older established teachers regarding 

3 

M.W. Tate, "Induction of Secondary School Teachers," School Review , 
(March, 1943) pp. 150-157 




















' 





' „■ i 




















* 


. . ■ 










. , . . >Ta! 






. . i . ' ■ • i 








■ 




, . , , - 








■ U 


. Z I 


.... ’ > • 1 : '• : • 






. 


. 






• . 


































13 


new teachers' problems, teachers' guides, manuals or courses of study 
covering instructional practices, curriculum, routine and professional 
reading suggested by the superintendent. Induction practices ranked low 
in helpfulness by the teachers meetings just before the opening of school, 
administrative and supervisors' bulletins and plans, outlines and instructional 
units prepared by the teacher's predecessor. 

Wallace made a study of the problems of induction from the teacher's 

point of view and found that many of these problems would have been solved 

4 

by means of the interview. Administrators usually indicated a possibility 
of an interview with the principal prior to the opening of school, but 
few teachers, if any, took advantage of this opportunity. In this recent 
comprehensive study of induction techniques, many of the problems mentioned 
are akin to ours; personal visits to school systems, the use of a check 
sheet and the co-operation of 136 newly inducted teachers were used as a 
method of procedure. 

Wallace found that techniques employed in orientation programs were 
many and varied. The earliest procedures were, of course, extremely formal 
and stiff because they were concerned primarily with providing the teacher 
with information essential to meeting his classroom obligations. It was 
also his opinion that since conditions in each school system are unique, 
it is fruitless to list techniques found to be useful in schools. In a 
particular school system, the important thing to remember is that by organ¬ 
izing the staff to work co-operatively on the problem of orientation, 

4 

Morris S. Wallace, "New Teachers' Evaluation of Induction Techniques," 
North Central Association Quarterly XXV (April, 1951), pp. 381-94. See also 
(Oct. 1950), pp. 238-251 and Jan. 1951), pp. 291-309, as quoted by C.A. Weber, 
Personnel Problems of School Administrators, (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 
1954) pp. 56-71 









. 




. ■ ... 


...... ■ . 


'i > 1 } 














the techniques and devices most appropriate to the situation are almost 
certain to be developed. 

In an experiment, Matthew Whitehead sought information regarding the 
role the teaching staff play in the orientation of new teachers. He found 
that a friendly gesture, a tour of the building, the meeting of colleagues, 
the acquaintance with and the location of school supplies, forms, and 
equipment were devices which made for educational economy."* The teachers 
in this study pointed up the fact that principals in North Carolina were 
aware of the "coldness" with which many novice teachers had been received 
in the past. Teachers agreed that orientation was most effective to them 
when it was given by the principal. 

In the fall of 1951, Modesto City Schools felt that a two-day - 
orientation meeting for new teachers only should be held.^ Emphasis was 
placed on the teaching of the "Three R's" New teachers had the opportunity 
to handle basic books, to receive pamphlets and bulletins, to see exhibits 
of student-made materials and to participate in group discussion. As an 
in-service technique much work was done to implement the Language Arts 
Guide. Samples of work included in the guide by Modesto boys and girls 
helped the new teacher see what was meant by the integrated approach to 
language. In order to help the teachers understand the guide, they were 
encouraged to keep a class scrapbook containing samples of written work 

^Matthew Whitehead, "Teachers Look at Supervision," Educational 
Leadership (November, 1952) pp. 102-3 

^L.C. Downing, "How a Coordinator Works with Teachers and Principals, 
Educational Leadership . (November, 1952) pp. 110-112 












; i ') 

. 




, ;■;> ■■ 












' 


. 




















15 


throughout the year. A series of tape recordings showing various phases 
of oral language was begun. These techniques not only helped the boys 
and girls recognize their needs but the recordings themselves served as 
excdlent teacher-education material. 

Mitchell studied orientation programs of nineteen school systems 
in the United States and found them very promising.^ Many people parti¬ 
cipated in planning and executing the orientation programs, which included 
lectures, discussions, workshops, tours, special social functions, and 
informal gatherings. No evaluation of techniques was devised for this study 
but Mitchell concluded that: 

1. Effective orientation programs for teachers new to a system result 
in more effective teaching. 

2. Careful planning in advance by teachers working with administrators 
is the most promising practice. 

3. There is considerable lag between what administrators say is done and 
what is actually done. 

4. The most promising techniques are those which are co-operative in 
origin and practice. 

5. Teachers should play larger roles in programs of orientation. 

6. Orientation programs carried out by teachers are more effective than 
those carried out by administrators. 

Mitchell contradicts the findings of Whitehead given above. 

^Madeline Mitchell, "Teacher Orientation." Master's paper . School 
of Education, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., (1952) as quoted 
in Weber, 0 £. cit., pp. 56-57 













- 

. 








- v 


. • .' 


; ■ / :,i.. . . ... ; : ■'. • -. U 

. : . 

......... 

. 




. 






iA.) f : i . '• .i • ' .... 






, . 

. c - .. • , • . 




, 


..... I. ■; ■ j . s 




. 










. u -J. 

























16 


A survey made by nine people in various parts of the United States, 
found that there was a need to make new people feel that they are wanted 

g 

and accepted by the group. In Richmond, "Big Brother or Sister" programs 
included help and advice on personal problems, such as locating a place to 
live, where to shop,how to travel about the community and often to see 
that a newcomer is invited to a church of his own choice. The teachers in 
Myrtle Creek, Oregon, said they liked the fresh bouquets of flowers best 
during their first days at school. Perhaps Wiles would call this "super- 
visory lagniappe." Friendly reminders of reports, the time and manner 
of making them out and explanations of the testbooks in use were appreciated. 
The teachers liked the handbook which contained procedures for ordering 
visual aids, making field trips, and the purchase of special materials for 
art and science classes. In Pueblo, Colorado, teachers attended a luncheon 
with business representatives. Following the luncheon, businessmen 
accompanied the teachers on visits to industrial plants. 

The Educational Research Service in 1952 received brief descrip¬ 
tions of orientation programs and copies of materials prepared for the 
benefit of new teachers from 88 school systems in 35 states.^® The 
techniques most commonly in use were: pre-school induction programs 
consisting of conferences with superintendent, supervisor or principal 
with the purpose of helping classroom teachers with their most pressing 


Lester George ejt al ., "Orientation of New Teachers", Childhood 
Education, XXX (September, 1953), pp. 9-11 

^Kimball Wiles, Supervisio n for Better Schools (Prentice-Hall 1952) 

p. 112. 

^^N.E.A. Research Circular No. 8 0 £. cit .» pp. 1-4 


















' 

. 




. 


. 


.a ' : •. - 








• ' 








' .=■ 





.. ■ 

. 

; 








■ 










. 


; l.i&t 








i ■ 








- 







17 


problems - social, personal, and professional. Some programs gave new 
teachers a ccnplete introduction to the organization and policies of the 
school system. Specialin-service opportunities were extended to new 
teachers in 42 school systems. Arrangements were made for special meetings 
and workshops. Teachers received time to visit other schools. A teacher- 
helper and demonstration lessons were provided for the new teachers. 

In the same survey, 62 systems reported social activities that 
varied from coffee breaks to an all-afternoon and evening picnic. Thirty 
cities mentioned teacher sponsors who gave valuable help to the new teacher. 
The teacher sponsor usually welcomed the new teacher, helped the newcomer 
locate a place to live, acted as a guide to meetings and other activities, 
introduced the principal, and thereafter, was available to help with 
questions that the new teacher did not wish to take to the principal or 
supervisor. Fifty-one school systems reported that they had handbooks, 
directories, leaflets or packets of materials for new teachers. Twenty- 
seven reported some participation by community groups or agencies in 
orientation programs for teachers which included luncheons, complimentary 
tickets to plays and concerts, or sight-seeing tours. Some assigned new 
teachers to the more attractive classrooms, least difficult teaching programs 
and classes. The chief obstacle to the successful orientation programs was 
a lack of money to pay the teacher for extra time before the actual opening 
of school. 

The survey also found that it was helpful, in planning better programs, 
to ask the opinion of new teachers regarding oiLentation procedures which had 
been followed. Those responsible for teacher orientation programs have 

























* 

' 







18 


discovered that classroom teachers wanted time for conferences with 
principals and supervisors, and time to work in their own school buildings 
to get ready for the first days with the pupils. New teachers wanted help 
with practical problems not with discussions of theory and philosophy. 

The NEA Research Division's Study of first-year teachers grew out 

of a similar work carried on by the Virginia Education association in 
11 

1952-53. An especially useful section of the report dealt with the help 
needed and received during the first year of service. These first year 
teachers were frank in admitting that they needed a lot of help, but 
frequently the type of help received was not the type required. Information 
concerning their needs should be useful to institutions responsible for 
education of teachers and to school administrators and other experienced 
leaders who plan orientation programs for them. 

Typical novice teachers, it was found, received more help from 
fellow classroom teachers than from anyone else. The majority felt they 
needed either some or considerable help with such problems as keeping and 
making out official records and reports, understanding and using specialized 
services of the schools, understanding the goals of the school, planning 
for and working with gifted and retarded pupils, handling disciplinary 
problems, and in understanding and using courses of study and curriculum 
guides. As for types of help received, the majority reported some or 
considerable help with two problems: keeping and making out official records 
and reports, and understanding the goals of the school. 

U NEA Research Bulletin XXXIV, q£. cit. p. 5 







19 


An Education Brief in 1956 has reported a digest of some recent 
information received in the Office of Education about ways being used in 
local school systems to help teachers in elementary schools grow in 
effectiveness. Some time honoured devices such as the letter of welcome, 
the official handbook, and the one-day pre-school meeting have been 
improved. New ways have been added with emphasis on: 

1. Better initial orientation into community and school. 

2. Better pre-school acquaintance with the school system. 

3. More help during the entire first year. 

Although the teachers reporting found observation, staff-meeting, travel 

and professional reading to be most worthwhile, there is evidence that 

other experiences can be valuable if they are well planned. Workshops 

have frequently been rated high, as have consultation, supervision, 

committee work, and college courses. 

In 1956, Tower made a study of Orientation and In-service Practices 

13 

in 91 school systems in the United States, as well as in the Indianapolis 
14 

Public Schools. In the first study, 91 superintendents were asked to 
check the extent to which use had been made in their school systems of 

12 

Gertrude M. Lewis and Elsa Schneider, Education Brief .No. 33, 
United States Office of Education, (August 1956) pp. 1-19 

13 

Tower, o£. cit ., (March, 1956) pp. 181-190 
U Ibid .. (April, 1956) pp. 219-29 
















. 













t 















■ 

. 

























































5 

* 























































20 


the employment of a selected list of induction and orientation practices. 

It was significant that 96 per cent of the school systems employed 
’’regularly" the practice of providing new teachers with handbooks, courses 
of study and other school publications. At least 90 per cent of the 
schools used the following practices "regularly”: (1) Orientation 
meetings prior to the opening of school, (2) supervisory and/or consult¬ 
ant services for new teachers and (3) small group or individual confer¬ 
ences with new teachers by the principals. 

School administrators were asked to appraise the value of 16 
practices to new teachers. The two that they ranked as most valuable were: 
(1) elementary principals hold small group and/or individual conferences 
with new teachers to discuss their common problems and (2) supervisory 
and/or consultant services. It is significant that all except 5 per cent 
of the administrators thought that new teachers gained "much" help through 
small group or individual conferences with principals. Similarly, in the 
Indianapolis Public Schools teachers gained most help from (1) March 
Conference, (2) individual conferences with consultants, (3) courses of 
study, and (4) assistance from other teachers. Handbooks,^ used 
"regularly" by 96 per cent of the 91 schools reporting, proved to be 
reservoirs of help to newcomers. 

Handbooks, many developed by teachers and some using suggestions of 


15 

Handbooks referred to are published by the respective school 

offices. 



♦ 





















. 









































, 




















. 








■ 


, 



21 


new teachers, are plentiful. There is Off to a good Start , May 1956, 
an attractive small handbook, prepared by the American Association of 
School Administrators. It points out the kinds of help new teachers need, 
things to be done to give that help, and the people responsible for seeing 
that help is forthcoming. 

The Elementary School Program in California , April 1957, sets forth 
in question-answer form the information a teacher might wish to have in 
approaching new responsibilities. It may be used as a guide by the 
superintendent, supervisor, and principal. The teacher may use it as a 
source of information in group or individual conferences with parents or 
other community members seeking to understand the elementary school 
program. 

The Handbook for the Beginning Teacher , 1949, used in Indianapolis, 
welcomes the new teacher, explains the advantages of living in that city, 
describes the school system, the nature of the pre-school week, the school 
philosophy, the classroom aids available and how to secure them, resources 
for teaching, and some of the opportunities for professional improvement. 

Phimister^ published the Induction Programme for New Teachers , 
in 1956, a booklet of about twenty five pages, now in use in Toronto. 


16 

Z.S. Phimister, "Introducing the New Teacher Into the School 
System,"Mimeographed copy of an Address delivered in Edmonton C. E. A . 
Short Course , (May 16, 1957) pp. 1-9 












. 















. 

■ 

. 






■ 

. 




. • 

. . . ■ .. 











22 


It contains messages of welcome, business details and simple statements 
about various phases of the school curriculum and organization. Phimister 
stated that as a result of the orientation techniques the schools get under 
way in September more readily and with less annoyance. The new teacher is 
more quickly assimilated into the life of the new school. This results in 
greater satisfaction in his work, with consequent desirable results in 
staff relationships, and in teacher-pupil relationships. The efforts which 
are made to have the new teacher gain satisfaction from her work pay 
dividends in the classroom where the young teacher is able to be more 
effective in a shorter time than would otherwise be the case. 

A recent study in Ohio^ revealed that out of a sample of 1,242 new 
teachers from 561 school systems well distributed throughout the state, 
only 36 per cent of new teachers were provided with organized orientation 
programs while 35 per cent had only incidental programs, 24 per cent had 
none at all, and 5 per cent failed to reply. Just how effective were the 
provided programs? Superintendents and new teachers considered them 
certainly worthwhile. But as research studies have shown that people's 
thoughts are not always in accord with their stated opinion, Strickland 
set about to get more reliable information. One method he used was to 
learn the extent to which the programs alleviated the adjustment problems 
of new teachers. Very little evidence had been previously presented. 
Strickland reported that beginning teachers, 33 per cent, were more 


17 

Strickland, loc . cit. 












23 


concerned than new teachers, 67 per cent, about getting approval of the 
principal or supervisor, learning routine, getting help with discipline, 
learning the extent of their authority, getting a cooperative attitude 
from pupils, and finding teachers of their own ages. 

The 38 problems selected for use in the above questionnaire were 
those most frequently mentioned in educational writings pertaining to 
the subject of teacher adjustment. According to the findings, the most 
serious adjustment problems centered about the administrative and 
supervisory functions of the school systems, and most of the serious 
problems were in the area of supervision. The correlation between the 
rank orders of the severity of the problems and the percentages that 
received help was only 0.20. Obviously, the school systems failed to 
provide assistance in proportion to the seriousness of the adjustment 
problems. 

What about the effectiveness of the orientation programs in 
alleviating these problems? As might be expected, a much greater number 
of teachers with incidental programs reported help than was reported by 
teachers with none whatsoever. The data pointed out quite clearly the 
superiority of organized planning. New teachers from schools with 
organized programs rated most problems as much less serious than did 
the teachers from the schools with incidental or no programs at all, 

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDED PRINCIPLES AND PROCEDURES 


Most educators and researchers agreed that superintendents of schools 









,i i,.L. . -•? i .. Jj v ,.. ;■ u- >'.i 


t 






. i m ■'(•. 













.! 0 


i • 






24 


are becoming increasingly aware of the responsibility of orientating both 
the experienced and inexperienced teachers to the new school situation and 
that administrators and supervisors should appraise their induction and 
in-service education program and make deletions, additions and other 
changes to meet the needs of teachers in their school systems. 

Man has always had an instinctive fear of the unknown. The young 
new teacher, and/or the experienced teacher new to a school is no exception. 
He will be beset by varying degrees of hopes and fears, desires and 
frustrations, attitudes and opinions, from the moment he makes application 
to a school board until he is established in a community and has ’’found 
his legs,” so to speak, in effective classroom teaching. The new teacher 
would like to demonstrate his true competence and ability, rather than be 
forced to labor while fettered by the chains of uncertainty, a position 
unique to his being new. To help these teachers get adjusted to their 
new environment and duties certain principles governing procedures have 
been evolved. 

Time of Induction and Orientation Programs 

Most writers say that a school’s well organized induction program 
should begin before the opening of the school year. Proper assistance 
during this first stage will be a real contribution toward the smooth 
integration of the new teacher. The length of the orientation period will 
depend both on the adaptability of the new teacher and on the areas to 
be explored. Among the latter we may mention the school itself, the 








1 



. 







i 














, 








j: 











! . . . ... “ ; .. i • 













25 


teacher's position in the school system, the staff with whom he will be 
associated, and the community. Although the inductive guidance may last 
only from a few weeks to a few months, the total probationary period is 
determined by law in several states from one to three years. 

Pre-school Procedures 

An alert administrator or principal will, first, assign each new 
teacher to an established teacher on the faculty whose responsibility it 
is to advise, help and counsel. Such a sponsor is known by such names as 
"Big Brother," "Big Sister," and, more objectionably, "Buddy." He should 
be an experienced teacher and, especially, young enough in service vividly 
to remember the problems of the first year. This teacher sponsor usually 
helps the newcomer locate a place to live, introduces him to members of the 
community, acts* as a guide in pre-session board and staff meetings, and 
generally, counsels him in such other connected activities. He may help 
the new teacher select the books and order the supplies the latter will 
need in his particular teaching assignments. 

Both the school administrator and the teacher sponsor will see to 
it that the inductee is not overwhelmed. Anybody would be quite bewildered 
after a week's whirl of sight-seeing, meeting strangers, pre-session work¬ 
shops, showers of assignments, volumes of advice and secretive, confid¬ 
ential warnings! No new teacher can digest such a mass of material 
instantaneously. It should be understood that a young teacher will not 
be burdened with too many responsibilities, meetings, or a heavier 
teaching load than the more experienced teachers. It should also be 




' ' •. 







... ■ 1 J 



• . 








' 







-■ 




M 




: 





f ) ...a-,., -?A'r 


H - J * 










j 


-:,i). . r-(l 


. i 






!.■ v '. 



















26 


remembered that a new teacher will want some time to find his bearings 
and to prepare the lessons for the first days of school. Consequently, 

Big Brother, after having shown the newcomer around, would do well to offer 
him a day by day plan of activities for the pre-school period and welcome 
any questions for information as the integration process continues. 
Ultimately, this pre-school orientation should ensure that the new teacher 
has seen the material structure of the school, the community, the essential 
elements of the administrative machinery, and his own teaching assignment. 

I n-service Procedures 

After a new teacher has made a satisfactory adjustment to his new 
environment, he needs continued guidance in his new teaching experiments. 
Hence an "in-service" orientation program is required. This program should 
be the product of cooperative thinking, planning, and execution on the part 
of the entire professional staff, presented in a true professional manner. 

The principal taking the initiative, together with the other teachers, should 
draw up in advance a program based on specific purposes. Although these 
orientation procedures will be accurate and authoritative, they will also be 
flexible enough so that they may be changed to suit the children's and new 
teacher's needs and interests. 

Some writers offer a variety of suggestions for this in-service 
orientation program. "The teacher's big brother should contact the new 
teacher at the end of the first day of school 'to check on how things went 
that day' and to help with problems which may have arisen during the 










... > • 

. : ■ ■ ' , ■ ■ 





. 










• i '• 


... * ■ 



; ‘: ■ 








■ J 











i 










27 


18 

day." The school should hold regular meetings and workshops of all the 
teachers for the specific benefit of the new teacher. Time off to visit 
other schools and classrooms should be given to him. Useful and timely 
demonstration lessons should be arranged. Helping teachers (not members of 
the regular supervisory staff) should be provided to assist him in working 
out his teaching techniques. Special help should be given during the 
usual supervisory program. 

The principal will furnish the new teacher with a "handbook” 
consisting of leaflets, directories or packets of material which are 
distinct from curriculum guides and courses of study prepared for all 
teachers. Such "handbooks" usually include a short community-school 
description, information about the city, the school system, and teachers' 
professional organizations. A check list of typical items to be found in 
an Alberta "Teachers’ Handbook" would include: 

1. Code of Ethics - Alberta Teachers' Association. 

2. Alberta Teachers' Association - Local Executive Members. 

3. School System or Division Organization: 

(a) Chairman and members; 

(b) Board meetings, special meetings, dates of meetings; 

(c) Duties of principals, assistant principals and teachers. 

4. City map with location of schools, churches, stores, and recreational 

centers. 

5. School directory. 


18 

Eye G. Glen, Willard R. Lane, The New Teacher Comes to School, 
(New York: Harper and Brothers, 1956), p. 344 








. 


, . • - 

. 






- 














. 

•: '.a. <i - 

< ■ . .. : . . . . ■ ... ■■ 

■ ' . i ■- t 




■ ■ ;• 














■ ;,| ,i . .. ■ ■; • • ■ • ■ 


;ki ' - u 


....... . ■ . 

.... 

■ ■ .... 


■ -- ■ 






• • 




. . 


i .i 




r.M-:a t ; ;. / i v . 

■ 


... 


.' i .. • , ;■ 




. 





















28 


6. School calendar. 

7. Statement of policy on such matters as discipline, promotion of pupils, 

pupil absences, etc. 

8. Description of school services: book rentals, professional library, 

school libraries, cumulative records, group insurance plans, test¬ 
ing programs, opportunity classes, guidance services, supervisory 
services. 

9. Approved housing accommodations and locations. 

10. Summaries of policies on sick leave, leaves of absence, salaries, and 

other matters affecting teachers’ official relationships with the 
system. 


Administrators * Support of Program 

The orientation program should have the full support of the 

department of education and the school board. The department of education 

is the legal authority whose specific purpose is to establish policies for 

the best interest of the schools. 

The integration of new members of the staff into the regular 
organization in order that the (total) group may function on the 
best possible basis is one of the most important functions of 
administration.*9 


Evaluation of Procedures 

The induction and orientation of a new teacher is a continuous 
process which requires periodic evaluation to discover weaknesses and 
strengths. The program's purpose is "to assist the new teacher in be- 


19 

Melvin Voxland, "Orientation of New Teachers," National 
Association of Secondary School Principals . Vol. XL, (April, 1956) 
pp. 90-91 









■ 

i ' . ' • i i I . 




■ . , - • . : ' l 







...... 



... •: ■ ' ■; .Si 

: « 1 > ■ ■ /• ' ■ 






. : 





. . 

. J 



• > 



■ 


. 


■, '.... i ; .' P uOj. 

■ 








' i • 




. 

. 




29 


coining a happy, confident, and competent member of the school system and 
of the community."* Obviously, the system of giving help before the 
opening of the school and afterwards of encouraging the new teacher to 
take advantage, as best he can, of any helpful in-service opportunities, 
would seem to be quite inadequate. More objectionable still is the 
practice often followed, unfortunately, of not taking care of the more 
pressing problems before the opening of school and of deferring every¬ 
thing else indefinitely. Good organization is the vehicle for good 
orientation. It is a means not an end. And, "It must be reviewed 
critically from time to time to ascertain whether the best possible 
procedures are being used in providing new teachers with help and inform¬ 
ation which will make them happier and more effective in their new 
positions. 

Evidence indicated that the new teachers in organized orientation 
programs were much less annoyed by adjustment problems than were the 
teachers who had no orientation programs at all. All evidence revealed 
a glaring need for more and more organized orientation programs for new 
teachers in the elementary and secondary schools. The results of the 
studies showed beyond doubt that the orientation programs provided for 


20 

Glen and Lane, op . cit ., p. 363 

21 


Ibid., p. 334 




30 


new teachers were very beneficial. 

Researchers in general recognized the evaluation of techniques as 
a difficult process; much remains to be done in improving this aspect of 
the orientation programs. 






CHAPTER III 


COLLECTION OF DATA 

As was stated in Chapter One, this study was confined to a sur¬ 
vey of the initial and in-service techniques of orientation as used in 
the Roman Catholic Separate School Systems of Edmonton, Calgary and 
Lethbridge. 


Description of Population for Study 

A table of the enrolments of the Separate Schools of the three 
cities is given in Table III.* 


TABLE III 

ENROLMENT IN THE R.C. SCHOOLS 
OF THREE CITIES OF ALBERTA, 1957-58 



No. of 
Schools 

Enrolment 

No. of 
Teachers 

Edmonton R.C. 

38 

9,858 

337 

Calgary R.C. 

23 

4,969 

158 

Lethbridge R.C. 

7 

1,147 

46 

Total 

68 

15,974 

541 


It is difficult to give an accurate reporting of school buildings, 


May 7, 


*D. Cameron, Registrar of Department of Education, Letter, 
1958. 










32 


current enrolments and numbers of teachers in Edmonton, Calgary and 
Lethbridge for the school year 1957-58. The problem is that nothing 
stands still. However, on the basis of operation reports submitted 
to the Department of Education by the superintendents of schools, 
during the fall of 1957, the figures for the school year 1957-58 
are as follows:^ 

In Table III the three largest Roman Catholic Separate School Systems in 
Alberta, located in the cities of Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge have 
been represented. Listed are the total enrolment, the number of teachers, 
and the total number of schools for these three cities as compared to the 
total number of Separate School teachers in these Systems, as presented 
in Table IV. * 3 


TABLE IV 


NUMBER OF NEW TEACHERS IN COMPARISON WITH TOTAL NUMBER 
OF SEPARATE SCHOOL TEACHERS, 1957-58 


School System 

New Teachers 

Total 

Percentage 

A 

105 

337 

31 % 

B 

40 

158 

25 

C 

16 

46 

35 

Grand Total 

161 

541 

30 % 


^Ibid. 

3 

Information from Superintendents of R.C. Separate Schools in 
Edmonton, Calgary, and Lethbridge (March, 1958). 








' 

: . - ■ - ■ • ♦: 

■ 






33 


Table IV also shows the distribution of the questionnaire to the 
three cities as mentioned but designated as "School System A," "School 
System B," and "School System C." There are then, according to Table IV, 
337 teachers in School System A, of whom 105 or 31 per cent are new. 

The rest of the table is read in the same manner. One notes that School 
System C has the highest percentage of new teachers. The average 
percentage of new teachers for the three cities combined is 30 per cent. 

Description of the Survey Instrument 

One of the fundamental considerations in the construction of 
questionnaires is whether or not they are capable of fulfilling the 
particular purposes for which they are to be used. Moreover, such 
significant factors as the cost, ease of administration, user accept¬ 
ability and the usefulness of results must be taken into account. With 
the specific purposes of the study of the orientation procedures in 
selected school systems in mind, as well as the practical considerations 
involved in the construction, distribution and collection of data, it 
was decided to use parts of the questionnaires from related studies by 
Tower,^ Strickland,^ and the National Education Association.^ The cover 

4 

Tower, o£. cit., pp. 181-90, 219, 261-69. 

^Strickland, loc . cit . 

%EA Research Bulletin . "First-Year Teachers in 1954-55," Vol. 
XXXIV No. 1 (February, 1956) 






, , i>$ 





■ >"< 

















v 






34 


page called for personal data about the respondent, such as the number 
of years of training, the number of years of experience in various 
grades, and the type of orientation program, if any, that the res¬ 
pondents had had during the year 1957-58. The questionnaire itself 
was divided into five main parts, each part dealing with a major aspect 
of the study. 

The studies by Tower 7 8 provided information on orientation pro¬ 
cedures carried out in ninety-one school systems in the United States. 
The investigator personally contacted new teachers on the separate 
school staffs in Edmonton for information on the practices in vogue at 
the time of this study. From this information and from personal ex¬ 
perience, Part One of the questionnaire was constructed to determine 
the frequency of use and relative usefulness of procedures used to help 
new teachers. 

Parts Two, Three and Four of the questionnaire were taken from 
the questionnaire used by the National Education Association for a 

o 

research study of First-Year Teachers in 1954-55. The purpose of 
Part Two was to evaluate the amount of responsibility that is taken by 
supervisors, principals and classroom teachers for helping new teachers. 
Part Three listed nine of the commonly recommended types of help accord¬ 
ing to literature on orientation programs. This part aimed to discover 
the areas in which new teachers needed help and received help. To de¬ 
termine the extent to which new teachers are welcomed by 'old timers' 
on the staff. Part Four consisted of one major question. 


7 Tower, o£. cit., pp. 219-29 

8 

NEA Research Bulletin, loc . cit . 




) 





.. 




. 












. 

' 


. , . t 






■; .. U..tr l -ij.-Li' i'.v --Vf - i i' : ''' « ' •‘ i : ‘ 












.... j • 

. - 


> 




■ 


















' 

. 




: • ■ • 

t . . : ■ . 




, 




. 


; 




. 



35 


In order to determine to what extent orientation programs alleviate 
the adjustment problems of new teachers. Part Five of the questionnaire 

i Q 

was constructed from a table given in Strickland s report. The res¬ 
pondents rated the severity of the problems by using a three-point 
scale and they indicated with which problems they had received help in 
order to evaluate the effectiveness of the orientation programs in alle¬ 
viating these problems. 

In order to fulfil the objectives of this study as stated on page 
eight of this thesis, the questionnaire was constructed to: 

1. Determine the frequency of use and relative usefulness of pro¬ 
cedures used to help new teachers. 

2. Evaluate the amount of responsibility for helping new teachers 
that is taken by supervisors, principals and classroom teachers. 

3. Discover the areas in which new teachers felt they need help and 
receive help. 

4. Determine the attitude of experienced teachers toward new teachers 
on the staff. 

5. Determine to what orientation programs alleviate the adjustment 
problems of new teachers. 

Pilot Study 

Following the first draft of the questionnaire, a pilot study was 
made with cooperation of 10 new teachers and 10 principals on the Separate 
School Staffs in Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge. The results of this 
pilot run with the teachers and the principals were examined by the writer 
and a consultant. Further revisions were suggested, the final draft re- 


Strickland, loc . cit. 






. , . J > 

: . ... .. j . .1 .. • : 


- 


■n 


... 




• • . 

< 


. 

- 

. 

. 

* 

. 

. 




... 


. 


























■ 





. - 

. 



36 


checked by the consultant, and copies made for distribution. A copy 
of the questionnaire is included in Appendix A. 

General Distribution 

This study, then, concerned the 161 teachers who in the year 
1957-58 were in their respective schools for the first time. All 62 
principals and 10 other administrators were asked to participate in 
this study. A strictly anonymous procedure was used in collecting 
data. All data were collected during a two week period following 
April 20, 1958. 

Distribution of Questionnaires in Edmonton 

In Edmonton, the superintendent, Mr. A. A. O'Brien, provided 
the investigator with a list of 36 schools and 105 new teachers. The 
principals were contacted personally after an Administrators' Associa¬ 
tion Meeting in early March, 1958. Thirty-three questionnaires were 

distributed. Questions were permitted during the completion of the 
questionnaire. 

During the week of April 20th, letters as found in Appendix A, 
were sent to the principals and the new teachers of each school. The 
letters explained the nature and the purpose of the survey. Question¬ 
naires were distributed at a special meeting, by personal contact, and 
by mail. Respondents were given verbal directions for answering the 
questionnaire and all were requested to ask any questions about any part. 
All but three of the teachers returned their questionnaires. Two of 
the returns were disqualified because they were only partly completed. 




. 


t 

• > . .1 .1 ' < ■ >■ '• ’} c *' '• • c ■. 


















* 

* 




> 


3 'io ■ ry\.*t;hh:'rj 'n 








. 


„ 


































37 


Procedure of Distribution in Calgary 

The Calgary new teachers and principals were contacted personally 
by a friend of the writer during the week of April 20th, 1958, The 
Assistant Superintendent, Mr. Van Tighem, graciously permitted this per¬ 
son to contact the teachers during the school day. All principals had 
received correspondence explaining the nature of the study. 

The study in Calgary covered 20 principals and administrators, 
and 40 new teachers. At each school the principal and the new teachers 
of the staff met together. As at Edmonton, so here, the respondents were 
given directions for answering the questionnaire and were free to ask 
questions. Questionnaires were returned by 19 principals, 1 Assistant 
Superintendent, and 33 of the 40 teachers. 

Description of the Distribution in Lethbridge 

In Lethbridge, the Superintendent, Mr. R. Kimmit, provided the 
investigator with the names of 4 schools, 4 principals and 12 new teachers 
for the survey. Permission was granted to conduct this survey after 
school hours and letters were sent out. Subsequently, another 3 schools 
and 4 teachers were added to the list. A personal contact was made with 
all concerned during the week of April 20, 1958. 

Here again, the principals and new teachers of each school staff 
were grouped together for the completion of the questionnaire during which 
time the respondents were free to ask questions. Seven principals, one 
superintendent and 16 new teachers returned the questionnaires. 




, 









* 


, 






' 

’ - 

. 








. , 

v'l 

' : < t . ■ , ' : 


















, 

. 

, 























38 


Conclusion 

The total number of questionnaires distributed to administrators 
and new teachers, and the number returned in each of the selected cities 
is shown in Table V. There was a 94 per cent return from new teachers 
and 92 per cent from administrators. 

TABLE V 

DISTRIBUTION OF QUESTIONNAIRES AND NUMBER OF RETURNS 


School System 

A 

B 

C 

Total 

From Administrators 





Distributed 

38 

20 

8 

66 

Returned 

33 

20 

8 

61 

From New Teachers 




' 

Distributed 

105 

33 

16 

154 

Returned 

102 

33 

16 

151 


Following the completion of the questionnaires in each of the 
selected cities, all papers were returned to the investigator who checked 
them. The results were recorded separately for each part and for each 
city. From these records an analysis has been made in Chapters Four, 
Five, and Six. 













CHAPTER IV 


ANALYSIS OF DATA ON ORIENTATION PROCEDURES 

Data received from the returned questionnaires will be analyzed 
in the three following chapters according to the various sections of the 
questionnaire. The five parts, in their original order, are: orienta¬ 
tion techniques, sources of help, types of help needed and received, 
attitude towards new teachers, and adjustment problems. The results 
obtained from all five parts of the survey are shown in tables, each of 
which is described and provided with a descriptive title. Further tables 
in Appendix B provide a summary in percentage form of the findings for 
each School System studied for each part of the questionnaire. 

Data received from the cover page of the questionnaire and Part 
One will be analyzed in this chapter. The chapter will be divided into 
three sections. The first section will treat the classification of 
teachers; the second the frequency of use of orientation techniques; 
and the third the usefulness of orientation techniques. 

I. CLASSIFICATION OF TEACHERS 

This section deals with the amounts of education new teachers 
have had, their years of experience and the type of orientation they 
have had during the year 1957-58. 

Of the 161 new teachers listed, 151 responded to the questionnaire. 
Two incomplete papers were disqualified. Of these 149 teachers, 26 were 
inexperienced and 123 were experienced. 


, v . 








. .. X 


jL 
















: ■ 
















i 






to J;; ■ 











Si 








40 


On the cover page of the questionnaire the respondents were asked 
to indicate the number of years of training they had beyond Grade XII. 
All the new teachers included in this survey had at least one complete 
year of training beyond Grade XII. A summary of the number of years 
of training which the teachers indicated they had received is summarized 
in Table VI. 

TABLE VI 

NUMBER OF YEARS OF TRAINING, BEYOND GRADE XII, 

OF 149 NEW TEACHERS 


Years Training 

1 

2 

3 

5. Ed. 

B.A. 

Grad. 

Work 

No 

Reply 

Total 

No. of Teachers 

52 

33 

16 

23 

1 

u 

10 

149 

Per Cent of Teachers 

35% 

22 

I 

n 

■ 

15 

i l 

1 

1 

1 

9 

7 

1 

100 


It may be noted that 15 per cent of the teachers had graduated in 
Education, 1 per cent had an Arts degree, and 9 per cent had taken course 
work beyond the Bachelor's degree. There were 35 per cent with one year 
of training, 22 per cent with two years, 11 per cent with three years, and 
7 per cent did not indicate the number of years. 

The respondents were also requested to state the number of years of 
experience they had had in teaching any grades from one to twelve. Table 
VII presents a summary of these findings. The majority of the new teachers 
were experienced, only 17 per cent being in their first year, and over 65 
per cent having over 3 years experience. This was to be expected since 















41 

* 

the study was made in the three largest Separate School Systems where 
experienced teachers were placed on the staff to replace teachers who 
had resigned or to fill positions created by the increase of population. 

TABLE VII 

NUMBER OF YEARS OF TEACHING EXPERIENCE 
OF 149 NEW TEACHERS 


Years of Experience 

i 

2 

1 

3 

| | 

4-10 

Over 10 

r ~ . . . . 

Total 

School A 

15 

6 

14 

29 

36 

100 

School B 

9 

3 

2 ' 

15 

4 

33 

School C 

2 

- 

- 

8 

6 

16 

Total Number 

26 

I 

. 

16 

52 

46 

149 

' 

Percentage 

17 

6 

11 

35 

j 

31 

100 


Both the teachers and the administrators were asked to check the 


type of orientation program that was in vogue in their schools. They 
were to choose one of three possible types: no orientation program, 
some incidental orientation, or an organized program. A summary of 
this information, as indicated in Table VIII, reveals that 58 per cent 
of the teachers and 80 per cent of the principals and superintendents 
believed that incidental programs of orientation were in use in their 


schools. 












42 


TABLE VIII 

TYPES OF ORIENTATION PROGRAMS USED IN 
THE SCHOOL TERM 1957-58 


Respondents 

Teachers 

None 

Types of Orientation Program 
Incidental Organized No reply 

Total 

School A 

23 

52 

25 

0 

100 

School B 

4 

24 

5 

0 

33 

School C 

2 

10 

4 

0 

16 

Total 

29 

86 

34 

0 

149 

Administrators 

School A 

3 

29 

0 

1 

33 

School B 

1 

14 

5 

0 

20 

School C 

0 

6 

1 

1 

8 

Total 

4 

49 

6 

2 

61 


This classification of orientation programs -- incidental, 
organized, no orientation -- was used in the analysis of data for Parts 
Three and Five of the questionnaire. 


II. FREQUENCY OF USE OF ORIENTATION TECHNIQUES 

The questionnaire listed twenty selected orientation practices 
which could have been used in the schools covered by this study. Al¬ 
though records were not available to reveal all the orientation and in- 
service education practices in use, the list provided in the questionnaire 















43 


included those services which were described in the related literature. 

The investigator was familiar with all the techniques listed through 
experience as principal of a graded elementary and junior high school. 
Respondents were requested to write any additional orientation and in- 
service education practices that were of value to new teachers. 

On Part One of the questionnaire, the respondents were asked to 
check the extent of the employment of a selected list of induction and 
orientation practices in their schools. Each of the twenty items was 
to be marked in one of our ways: "never", "seldom", "occasionally", or 
"regularly". The replies from the administrators and teachers were 
summarized and analyzed separately and together. Further, the res¬ 
ponses were converted into percentages and the se in turn were changed 
into weighted scores and totalled. The rank order of the weighted 
scores of the principals' responses was compared with the rank order 
of the weighted scores of the new teachers' responses. Results of 
these comparisons are shown in Tables IX to XIII. As we shall see 
later, a similar comparison was made between the administrators' 
opinions and those of the teachers regarding the amount of help gained 
from these techniques. 

Administrators' Responses 

The administrators were asked to indicate the frequency with which 
the twenty practices were used. Their responses are summarized in Table 
IX. All percentages are expressed in whole numbers for convenience in 
presentation and explanation. 

Over 60 per cent of the administrators stated that the following 
techniques were used "regularly": general staff meetings. Board Bulletins, 
and orientation meetings held during the first week of school. 



... ;)■( .. 

- 

• , ... .. . ; . ■ 


■ ■ 

. 

- 








’ 

- 

. 












\ , ... 

. - . . 


. 


.... , . ; 






.... ’■ 










' •' ■ ' 

. 






■ '■ - • • • - ' ' 

♦ 


: .. : i :i .. > - .1 • 




44 


TABLE IX 

FREQUENCY OF USE OF PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY 61 ADMINISTRATORS 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reported Frequency of Use 




Re P L -X 

Never Seldom 

Occasionally 

Regularly 


No. 

% No. % No. % 

No. % 

No. % 


Board 


Bulletins 

1 

2 

0 

0 

2 

3 

20 

33 

38 

62 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

6 

10 

18 

29% 

13 

21 

18 

29% 

6 

10 

Indiv. Conf. 
Supervisor 

7 

11 

6 

10 

7 

11 

29 

48 

12 

20 

In-Service 

Workshop 

7 

11 

18 

30 

9 

15 

26 

42 

1 

2 

Depart. 

Pamphlets 

8 

13 

3 

5 

12 

18 

25 

42 

13 

22 

Teacher 

Guide 

8 

13 

28 

46 

6 

10 

10 

16 

9 

15 

Depart. 

Bulletins 

4 

6 

1 

2 

6 

10 

20 

33 

30 

49 

Professional » 
Publication 

7 

11 

13 

22 

6 

10 

11 

18 

24 

39 

Principal 

Demonstrates 

8 

13 

35 

58 

8 

13 

10 

16 

0 

0 

Supervisor 

Demonstrates 

7 

11 

29 

48 

10 

16 

14 

23 

1 

2 

Teachers * 

Help 

3 

5 

1 

2 

6 

10 

33 

54 

18 

29 

A. T. A. 

Local 

10 

16 

1 

2 

13 

22 

16 

26 

21 

34 

Supervisory 

Services 

3 

5 

1 

2 

6 

10 

18 

29 

33 

54 

Teaching 

Aids 

7 

12 

5 

8 

14 

23 

27 

44 

8 

13 

Staff 

Meetings 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 

5 

13 

21 

42 

69 

Board 

Handbooks 

4 

6 

19 

31 

1 

2 

11 

19 

26 

42 

Observe 

Others 

5 

8 

28 

46 

13 

21 

13 

21 

2 

4 

Orientation 

Meetings 

5 

8 

5 

8 

3 

5 

11 

18 

37 

61 

Pre-School 

Acquaint. 

9 

15 

13 

21 

7 

12 

18 

29 

14 

23 

Principal‘s 
Conference 

6 

10 

3 

5 

5 

8 

23 

38 

24 

39 


















■ 












; 


















































































































. 


- 



































































. 











45 


One half of the administrators believed the following techniques 
to be used regularly: Department bulletins and special supervisory 
services. About 40 per cent believed the following practices to 
be used regularly: Board handbooks, professional publications, and 
principals’ conferences. 

At least one-third of the administrators thought the following 
practices were used "occasionally”: Board bulletins. Department bulle¬ 
tins, and principals' conferences. Over one half of the administrators 
stated that new teachers occasionally received general help from the 
other teachers. At least 40 per cent stated that individual conferences 
with the supervisor, assistance in making teaching aids, in-service 
workshops, and Department pamphlets were used. 

Over half stated that the following practices were not being 
used: Principals' demonstration teaching, new teachers observe others, 
supervisors' demonstration teaching and an experienced teacher guide. 

New Teachers' Responses 

The new teachers were also asked to indicate the frequency with 
which the twenty practices were used. The results are shown in Table X. 

Practices stated by new teachers to be employed "regularly" in 
schools were: the use of Board bulletins — by more than 50 per cent of 
the teachers' activities of professional organizations, general staff 
meetings and Board handbooks — by 40 per cent; the use of Department 
bulletins, orientation meetings, and principals' conferences — by about 
25 per cent. 












i. • ( 











. 










































riM; CA 





46 


TABLE X 

FREQUENCY OF USE OF PRACTICES AS REPORTED BY 
149 NEW TEACHERS 


Orientation Reported Frequency of Use 

Practices No 

Reply Never Seldom Occasionally Regularly 

No. % No. % No. % No. % No. % 


Board 

Bulletins 

0 

0 

5 

4 

8 

6 

1 

34 

50 

34 

86 

56 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

4 

3 

62 

42 

51 

26 

17 

6 

4 

Indiv. Conf. 
Supervisor 

2 

1 

18 

12 

49 

1 

1 

33 

65 

44 

15 

10 

In-Service 

Workshop 

7 

5 

85 

1 

56 

26 

18 

23 

15 

8 

6 

Department 

Pamphlets 

2 

2 

27 

18 

36 

24 

65 

44 

19 

12 

Teacher 

Guide 

9 

6 

111 

| 

75 

11 

f 

7 

11 

7 

7 

5 

Department 

Bulletins 

2 

2 

16 

11 

37 

25 

47 

33 

;« 

31 

Professional 

Publications 

6 

4 

69 

J 

46 

22 

33 

18 

12 

34 

23 

Principal * 
Demonstrates 

2 

. 1 

2 

120 

80 

13 

i 

9 

14 

9 

0 

0 

Supervisor 

Demonstrates 

2 

2 

* 

*3 

33 

u 

23 

15 

2 

2 

Teachers‘ 

Help 

1 

1 

18 

U 

28 

13 

75 

51 

27 

18 

A. T. A. 

Local 

4 

3 

25 

17 

j 

22 

15 

29 

19 

69 

46 

Supervisory 

Service 

5 

4 

23 

16 

22 

' 

15 

58 

38 

33 

27 

Teaching 

Aids 

4 

3 

77 

52 

27 

18 

32 

33 

9 

6 

Staff 

Meetings 

1 

1 

7 

5 

29 

| 

19 

51 

* 

I 

61 

41 

Board 

Handbooks 

2 

2 

33 

22 

\ 

17 

11 

29 

19 

68 

46 

Observe 

Others 

2 

2 

117 

77 

8 

| 

6 

17 

. 

11 

5 

4 

Orientation 

Meetings 

5 

4 

45 

31 

24 

! 

15 

23 

15 

52 

35 

Pre-School 

Acquaintance 

4 

3 

62 

41 

37 

25 

25 

33 

21 

14 

Principals * 
Conference 

2 

2 

34 

23 

27 

18 

48 

31 

38 

26 

















. 


, ., ••• : •' >X'i' ■ I * ■ .■ • ••• '< 

. 










, 

, 



• 






' 









• 













. 





















. 

■ 









■ •. 













■ 





$ 

























■ 











' 
































. 




■ ■ • . . 

. ' 5 ■ C 







. V .... r" 








. 






' J : K ■ ■ ' 






47 


Other practices that were used "occasionally" by schools were: 
general help from other teachers, individual conferences with the super¬ 
visor and Department pamphlets — 44 per cent of the schools; Board 
bulletins. Department bulletins, special supervisory services, general 
staff meetings and principals' conferences — between 30 and 37 per 
cent of the schools. 

Practices "seldom" or "never" used by the three School Systems 
were: group conferences with the supervisors, and experienced teacher 
guide, principals' demonstration and new teachers observe others — 75 
per cent or more; in-service workshops, supervisors' demonstrations, 
professional publications, assistance in making teaching aids, and any 
pre-school acquaintance — by over 66 per cent. 

Comparison of these Responses 

In order that an over-all comparison could be made of the teachers' 
responses and those of their superiors, the weighted totals for the twenty 
practices were compared. Each of the twenty items was marked in one of 
four ways: "never", "seldom", "occasionally", and "regularly". Values 
were assigned to these responses as follows: never, 0; seldom, 1; 
occasionally, 2; and regularly, 3, After multiplying the percentages 
of responses to each item by the corresponding assigned value, the pro¬ 
ducts were totalled and recorded as weighted totals. 

According to these totals, as shown in Table XI, the principals 
and teachers placed the Board bulletins highest , general staff meetings 
second; but there was a slight difference in rank for the special super¬ 
visory services. A fair consistency appears in the weighted totals of 
the principals and those of the teachers in practically all the techniques 









- 




X-.'< I : ■ 1 — • v ' : ■ : > • ‘ > c - 1 'V ” 

■ 















■ 

— . 

; 

_ 

„> ' ~ 







... 

. ... 








' 

, 




■ 


a-, . 




. ;.i J 




„ 

















?:i*uOV V/'; 






... • < ■ 














48 


TABLE XI 

WEIGHTED TOTALS AND RANK ORDER OF FREQUENCY 
OF USE OF PRACTICES FOR THREE SCHOOLS 
TAKEN TOGETHER 


Orientation 

Procedures 

61 Principals 

Weighted Rank 

Totals Order 

149 New Teachers 

Weighted Rank 

Totals Order 

Board 

Bulletins 

255 

i I 

242 

1 

Staff 

Meetings 

254 

| 

2 

210 

2 

Supervisory 

Services 

230 

3 i 

172 

7 

Orientation 





Meetings 

224 

4 

150 

10 

Department 

Bulletins 

223 

5 

180 

5 

Teachers ' 

Help 

205 

e 

174 

6 

Principals's 
Conference 

201 

7 1 

158 

8 

A. T. A. , 

Local 

176 

8 

191 

3 

Department 

Pamphlets 

168 

i 

9 

148 

11 

Indiv. Conf. 
Supervisor 

167 

10 

151 

9 

Board 

Handbooks 

166 

11 

187 

4 

Professional 

Publications 

163 

12 

l 

108 

12 

Teaching 

Aids 

150 

13 

78 

15 

Pre-School 

Acquaintance 

149 

14 

101 

13 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

110 

15 

1 

80 

14 

In-Service 

Workshop 

105 

16 

63 

16 

Teacher 

Guide 

87 

17 

1 

36 

19 

Observe 

Others 

75 

18 

39 

18 

Supervisor 





Demonstrates 

68 

19 

52 

17 

Principal 

Demonstrates 

45 

20 

27 

20 













49 


listed. Practices ranked the lowest by teachers and administrators 
were: principals’ demonstration teaching, supervisors' demonstration 
teaching, new teachers observing other teachers, and an experienced 
teacher guide. 

In all cases, the principals' weighted totals were higher than 
those of the new teachers. The consistency with which the totals of the 
principals were higher would lead one to conclude that administrators 
believed that induction techniques were more frequently employed than the 
teachers believed them to be. One possible explanation is that the 
teachers were not aware that techniques were being used even when they 
got help from them. 

Administrators' Viewpoints Compared 

The weighted totals and rank orders of the administrators' res¬ 
ponses classified according to School Systems, are illustrated in Table 
XII. This table gives one basis for comparing the administrators' view¬ 
points. 

The practices which the administrators in the three School Systems 
ranked very similarly (1) as most frequently used were: staff meetings. 
Board bulletins, and Department bulletins, (2) as least frequently used 
were: principal demonstrates, supervisor demonstrates and new teachers 
observe others. 

The greatest dissimilarity was found in the use of: Board hand¬ 
books, ranked highest in System A, pre-school acquaintance, ranked highest 
in System C, orientation meetings, ranked lowest in System C and Alberta 
Teachers' Association Activities ranked lowest in System A. 














< 


















. . a 


' 



. 


c ; 


. XOf 







... :* i 







TABLE XII 


50 


WEIGHTED TOTALS AND RANK ORDER OF 
FREQUENCY OF USE INDICATED 
BY ADMINISTRATORS 


Orientation 

School 

A 

School 

B 

School 

C 

Procedures 

Weighted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Weighted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Weighted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

Bulletins 

267 

1 

255 

2 

212.5 

4.5 

Staff 

Meetings 

264.2 

2 

245 

3 

237.5 

3 

Board 

Handbooks 

251.5 

3 

75 

15 

37.5 

16 

Orientation 

Meetings 

245.2 

4 

230 

4 

112.5 

13.5 

Department 

Bulletins 

224.2 

5 

205 

6.5 

262.5 

1 

Supervisory 

Services 

223 

6 

265 

1 

175 

8.5 

Teachers' 

Help 

218 

7 

205 

6.5 

200 

6 

Principal's 

Conference 

212.1 

8 

195 

8 

175 

8.5 

Indiv. Conf* 
Supervisor 

188 

9 

170 

9.5 

62.5 

15 

Professional 

Publications 

175.5 

10 

145 

11 

162.5 

11 

Department 

Pamphlets 

160.5 

11 

170 

9.5 

175 

8.5 

Teaching 

Aids 

151.3 

12 

135 

12 

182.5 

7 

A.T.A. 

Locals 

145 

13 

215 

5 

212.5 

4.5 

Pre-school 

Acquaintance 

142.6 

14 

90 

14 

250 

2 

Observe 

Others 

133.6 

15 

5 

20 

0 

20 

In-Service 

Workshop 

130 

16 

55 

16 

125 

12 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

127.3 

17 

115 

13 

25 

17.5 

Teacher 

Guide 

117 

18 

25 

18 

112.5 

13.5 

Supervisor 

Demonstrates 

103 

19 

35 

17 

0 

19 

Principal 

Demonstrates 

72.7 

20 

10 

19 

25 

17.5 
















fj' 



































' , 











■ 


; i . ’ 

.. 


■ 





I 






51 


New Teachers' Viewpoints Compared 

From the tabulation of the weighted totals and rank order of 
the frequency of techniques as indicated by the new teachers for the 
three School Systems A, B, C, in Table XIII, we note that those 
practices ranked very similarly (1) as most frequently used were: 
staff meetings, Board bulletins, and activities of professional 
organizations, (2) as least frequently used were: principal 
demonstrates, supervisor demonstrates, experienced teacher guides, 
and new teachers observe others. 

The greatest dissimilarity was found in the use of: Board 
handbooks, ranked highest in System A, special supervisory services, 
ranked highest in System B, and pre-school acquaintance and Depart¬ 
ment bulletins ranked highest in System C. 

III. USEFULNESS OF ORIENTATION TECHNIQUES 

Also on Part One of the questionnaire the respondents were 
asked to appraise the value of the twenty listed practices to new 
teachers. They were asked to do this by indicating the amount of 
help that new teachers gained from each practice, using the ratings: 
"none," "little," "some," or "much". The replies from the 
administrators and teachers were summarized and analyzed separately 
and together. Further, the responses were converted into percentages 
and these in turn were changed into weighted scores and totalled. 

The rank order of the weighted scores of the principals' responses 
























, 

1 ( ' ■ : ■ 




. 









-'3 


; 



. 






. 


















. : . • 

■ : ■ . 






. 


„ 




v: -J f ; . . - • • ' < 






TABLE XIII 


52 


WEIGHTED TOTALS AND RANK ORDER OF 
FREQUENCY OF USE INDICATED 
BY NEW TEACHERS 


Orientation 

School 

A 

School B 


School C 


Procedures 

Weighted 

Rank 

Weighted 

Rank 

Weighted 

Rank 


Totals 

Order 

Totals 

Order 

Totals 

Order 

Board 







Bulletins 

266 

1 

207 

4 

193.8 

4 

Board 

Handbooks 

Staff 

241 

2 

87 

12 

56.3 

12 

Meetings 

A.T.A. 

206 

3 

219 

3 

217.8 

2 

Local 

185 

4 

237 

2 

150 

7 

Department 
Bulletins 
Teachers 1 

184 

5 

157 

8 

i 

225 

1 

Help 

Principal 1 s 

174 

6 

182 

5 

156.3 

1 

5.5 

Conference 

Orientation 

168 

7.5 

161 

6 

100 

8 

Meetings 

Supervisory 

168 

7.5 

138 

10 

88 

9 

Services 

167 

9 

261 

1 

50 

13 

Indiv. Conf. 

Supervisor 

Department 

159 

10 

160 

7 

75 

10 

Pamphlets 

Professional 

152 

11 

141 

9 

156.3 

5.5 

Publications 

115 

12 

114 

11 

43.8 

14.5 

Group Conf. 

Supervisor 

Pre-School 

94 

13 

66 

15 

31.3 

17 

Acquaintance 

Teaching 

89 

14 

84 

13 

206.3 

3 

Aids 

In-Service 

87 

15 

72 

14 

43.8 

14.5 

Workshop 

Supervisor 

78 

16 

24 

17 

62.5 

11 

Demonstrates 

Observe 

61 

17 

45 

16 

6.3 

[ 

20 

Others 

50 

18 

15 

18 

12.5 

19 

Teacher 

Guide 

Principal 

49 

19 

6 

19 

18.8 

18 

Demonstrates 

35 

20 

0 

20 

37.5 

16 










. 1 • 






















. 




' 












' ' - .' 





















■ 




"f, .j 










. 








- 







, .. ' . • .. 


- 



*. . . > .. 

f>. 1 1 ,'j 





. 


■■■ 



. . 





- 

. 



























53 

was compared with the rank order of the weighted scores of the new 
teachers' response. Results of these comparisons are shown in Tables 
XIV to XVIII. 

Administrators' Responses 

The administrators' responses are summarized in Table XIV. 
Practices considered to be of ’’some" and "much" value to new teachers 
were: Board bulletins and staff meetings - by 90 per cent of the 
administrators; teachers' help and supervisory services - by 80 per 
cent; Department bulletins, orientation meetings and principals' 
conferences - by 70 per cent. 

At least one-half of the administrators thought the following 
practices were of "some" and "much" value to new teachers: individual 
and group conferences with the supervisor, Department pamphlets. 

Board handbooks, pre-school acquaintance, professional publications 
and making teacher aids. 

Over one-half of the administrators either made "no reply" or 
indicated "no help" gained by new teachers for the following practices: 
new teachers observe others, an experienced teacher guide, supervisor 
demonstrates and principal demonstrates. 

It is interesting to note that the practices, which the 
administrators indicated new teachers had gained the most help from, 
were performed by different sections of our education system, namely 
the Department of Education, the School Board, the supervisor, the 




. ? I 












‘i . >t 





' i . 


. - i 









. 









TABLE XIV 


54 


USEFULNESS OF PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY 61 ADMINISTRATORS 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Amount of Help Gained 

Little Some Much 


No. % 

No. % 

No. % No. 7o No. 7o 


Board 


Bulletins 

3 

5 

0 

0 

Staff 

Meetings 

3 

5 

2 

3 

Teachers' 

Help 

5 

8 

0 

0 

Supervisory 

Services 

4 

7 

4 

7 

Department 

Bulletins 

7 

12 

2 

3 

Orientation 

Meetings 

6 

10 

4 

7 

Principals * 
Conference 

9 

15 

1 

1 

Individual 

Conference 

10 

16 

6 

10 

Supervisor 
Department * 
Pamphlets 

8 

13 

2 

3 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

13 

21 

9 

15 

Board 

Handbooks 

10 

16 

14 

23 

Teaching 

Aids 

13 

21 

1 

2 

Pre-School 

Acquaintance 

12 

20 

9 

15 

Professional 

Publications 

11 

18 

8 

13 

A.T.A. 

Local 

12 

20 

2 

3 

In-Service 

Workshop 

12 

20 

12 

20 

Observe 

Others 

13 

21 

22 

36 

Teacher 

Guide 

18 

29 

17 

28 

Supervisor 

Demonstrates 

21 

34 

17 

28 

Principal 

Demonstrates 

20 

33 

24 

39 




0 

0 

31 

51 

27 

44 

1 

2 

32 

52 

23 

38 

5 

8 

29 

48 

22 

36 

3 

■ 

5 

24 

38 

26 

43 

5 

8 

25 

41 

22 

36 

3 

5 

29 

47 

19 

31 

6 

10 

30 

49 

15 

25 

4 

7 

22 

36 

19 

31 

11 

18 

32 

53 

8 

13 

3 

5 

17 

28 

19 

31 

1 

2 

18 

29 

18 

29 

15 

25 

25 

41 

7 

11 

4 

7 

24 

38 

12 

20 

7 

12 

27 

44 

8 

13 

19 

31 

23 

38 

5 

8 

6 

10 

23 

37 

8 

13 

8 

13 

13 

21 

5 

8 

2 

3 

9 

15 

15 

25 

4 

7 

8 

13 

11 

18 

6 

10 

5 

8 

6 

10 


* 








■ 

. 

, >, > 

... 


































. > 









1 










■ 
















. 











. 







































. 

1 ' 
















. , . ' 7 ■ 








. ... .. 1 





55 


o 

faculty of the school itself. Mitchell concluded from her study that 
the most promising techniques are those which are cooperative in origin 
and practice. 

New Teachers 1 Responses 

The new teachers were also asked to indicate the amount of help 
which they gained from the listed orientation and in-service practices. 
Their responses are shown in Table XV. 

Practices considered to be of "some" and "much” value to new 
teachers were: Board bulletins - by 85 per cent of the new teachers; 
staff meetings, teachers' help, Board handbooks, individual conferences 
and Department bulletins - by 70 per cent; principals’ conferences, 
orientation meetings, supervisory services - by 60 per cent. 

Between 40 and 50 per cent of the new teachers thought the 
following practices were of "some" and "much” value: Department 
pamphlets, A.T.A. local, and group conference with the supervisor. 

Over one-half of the new teachers either made tl no reply" or 
indicated "no help" gained for the following practices: professional 
publications, teaching aids, supervisor demonstrates, in-service 
workshop, teacher guide, new teachers observe others, and principal 


^M. Mitchell, "Teacher Orientation," Master's paper . School 
of Education, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn., (1952) as 
quoted in Weber, op. cit ., pp. 56-57 






















. 


' 

















, l ■ )Y> ‘ ! i 

‘ * ‘ 

.' ' • ,•-j ... .... 




■ 






■ 






. 














; ■ 

. 


















TABLE XV 


56 


USEFULNESS OF PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY 149 NEW TEACHERS 


Orientation Amount of Help Gained 

Practices No 


Reply_None_Little_Some_Much 


No. % 

No. 7, 

. No. 7< 

, No. 

7o 

No. 7> 


Board 

Bulletins 

3 

2 

8 

5.5 

11 

7.5 

79 

53 

48 

32 

Staff 

Meetings 
Teachers * 

Help 

4 

3 

11 

8 

23 

15 

60 

40 

51 

34 

5 

3 

17 

12 

16 

11 

60 

40 

51 

34 

Board 

Handbooks 

6 

4 

30 

20 

5 

3 

55 

37 

53 

36 

Supervisory 

Services 

10 

7 

20 

14 

19 

12 

45 

30 

55 

37 

Indiv. Conf. 
Supervisor 

11 

7 

17 

12 

15 

10 

54 

36 

52 

35 

Department 

Bulletins 

7 

5 

16 

10 

22 

15 

59 

40 

45 

30 

Principal 1 s 
Conference 

5 

4 

31 

20 

16 

11 

40 

27 

57 

38 

Orientation 

Meetings 

9 

6 

40 

27 

6 

4 

37 

25 

57 

38 

Department 

Pamphlets 

9 

6 

27 

18 

36 

24 

64 

43 

13 

9 

A.T.A. 

Local 

6 

4 

36 

24 

34 

23 

57 

38 

16 

11 

Group Conf. 
Supervisor 

13 

9 

54 

36 

17 

11 

41 

28 

24 

16 

Pre-School 

Acquaintance 

12 

8 

59 

40 

25 

17 

29 

19 

24 

16 

Professional 

Publications 

15 

10 

59 

40 

19 

13 

38 

25 

18 

12 

Teaching 

Aids 

11 

7 

70 

48 

13 

8 

35 

24 

20 

13 

Supervisor 

Demonstrates 

13 

9 

82 

54 

7 

5 

28 

19 

19 

13 

In-Service 

Workshop 

17 

12 

77 

52 

14 

9 

27 

18 

14 

9 

Teacher 

Guide 

17 

11 

96 

65 

6 

4 

15 

10 

15 

10 

Observe 

Others 

14 

9 

103 

70 

6 

4 

12 

8 

14 

9 

Principal 

Demonstrates 

17 

12 

101 

68 

8 

5 

14 

9 

9 

6 


















































. 













■■■ ! 









! 


:I; 

GA A 








■ . . 


• i 



. • 





. v. 




I 








57 


demonstrates. Nearly 50 per cent also indicated that they had received 
no help by the pre-school acquaintance and the group conference with 
the supervisor. The reports of Tower's study** on a similar topic, with 
which this survey is in complete agreement stated that these same 
practices seemed to have had little value. 

Comparison of These Responses 

In order that an over-all comparison could be made of the 
teachers' responses and those of their superiors, the weighted totals 
for the twenty practices were compared. Values were assigned to 
responses as follows: "none," 0; "little," 1; "some,” 2; and "much," 
3. After multiplying the percentages of responses to each item by the 
corresponding assigned value, the products were totalled and recorded 
as weighted totals. 

According to these totals, as shown in Table XVI, the principals 
and teachers placed the Board bulletins highest , general staff meetings 
second , teachers' help third ; but there was a slight difference in 
rank for the special supervisory services. Practices ranked lowest by 
both respondents were: principals' demonstration teaching, supervisors' 
demonstration teaching, new teachers observing other teachers, and an 
experienced teacher guide. 


3 

Melvin Tower, "Orientation and In-Service Education Practices 
in Ninety-One School Systems in the United States," Educational 
Administration and Supervision XLII (March, 1956), pp. 181-190 

















, r : 













' • ) . - 




" t j .1 u. 


"i : I i < 



i'i‘ -rao:a / 




•j£ J 


j-i 




low 




;; 














58 


TABLE XVI 


WEIGHTED TOTALS 

AND RANK ORDER 
TAKEN 

OF USEFULNESS OF 
TOGETHER 

PRACTICES 

FOR THREE SCHOOLS 

Orientation 

61 Principals 

149 New Teachers 

Procedures 

Weighted 

Rank 

Weighted 

Rank 


totals 

order 

totals 

order 

Board 

bulletins 

233.9 

1 

210 

1 

Staff 
meetings 
Teachers 1 
help 

219.4 

2 

198 

2 

211.4 

3 

194 

3 

Supervisory 

services 

209.2 

4 

184.9 

5 

Department 

bulletins 

198.2 

5 

184.2 

7 

Orientation 

meetings 

193.2 

6 

168 

9 

Principal's 
conference 

181.7 

7 

180 

8 

Indiv. Conf. 
supervisor 

172 

8 

184.6 

6 

Department 

pamphlets 

162.1 

9 

136 

10 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

154 

10 

115 

12 

Board 

handbooks 

148.6 

11 

186 

4 

Teaching 

aids 

141 

12 

97 

15 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

140 

13 

102 

13 

Professional 

publications 

139 

14 

100 

14 

A.T.A. 

local 

131 

15 

131 

11 

In-service 

workshops 

124 

16 

74 

17 

Observe 

others 

120 

17 

48 

19 

Teacher 

guide 

106 

18 

54 

18 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

87 

19 

82 

16 

Principal 

demonstrates 

55.6 

20 

42 

20 













59 


In ail cases, the principals apparently believed that more help had 
been gained from all services than did the new teachers. The new teachers 
gave more value to two services: individual conference with the supervisor 
and Board handbooks, than the principals did. The consistency with which 
all the othet totals of the principals was higher than that of the teachers 
would lead one to conclude that administrators think the new teachers get 
more help from these services than they actually do. The greatest differ¬ 
ences in the weighted totals were shown in three practices which were not 
rated very high by the principals or the teachers but the principals gave 
more value to them. These practices were: in-service workshops, teacher 
guide and new teachers observe others. 

Administrators* Viewpoints Compared 

The weighted totals and rank orderof the administrators' responses 
for the amount of help gained are shown in Table XVII. This table gives 
one basis for comparing the administrators' viewpoints. 

The practices which the administrators in the three School Systems 
ranked very similarly as (1) most valuable services to new teachers were: 
Board bulletins, teachers' help and staff meetings, (2) least valuable 
services to new teachers were: principals' demonstrations, supervisors' 
demonstrations, and new teachers observe others. 

The greatest dissimilarity was found in the use of: supervisory 
services, Board handbooks, Department bulletins, pre-school acquaintance. 


and orientation meetings. 














TABLE XVII 


60 


WEIGHTED TOTALS AND RANK ORDER OF USEFULNESS OF PRACTICES INDICATED BY 

ADMINISTRATORS 


Orientation 

Procedures 

School 

Weighted 

Totals 

A 

Rank 

order 

School B 

Weighted Rank 

Totals order 

School 

Weighted 

Totals 

C 

Rank 

order 

Supervisory 

services 

275 

1 

195 

6.5 

62.5 

15 

Board 

handbooks 

225 

2 

65 

15.5 

50 

16 

Board Bulle¬ 
tins 

224 

3 

255 

1 

225 

2.5 

Staff 

meetings 

219 

4 

235 

2.5 

175 

6.5 

Teachers' 
help 

203 

5 

220 

5 

225 

2.5 

Orientation 

meetings 

195 

6 

225 

4 

100 

12 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

185 

7 

190 

8 

75 

14 

Principals 1 
conference 

180 

8 

195 

6.5 

150 

8 

Group conf. 
supervisor. 

178 

9 

160 

10.5 

37.5 

17 

Department 

bulletins 

167 

10 

235 

2.5 

236.5 

1 

In-service 

workshop 

148 

11 

65 

15.5 

175 

6.5 

Teacher 

guide 

147 

12 

45 

18 

87.5 

13 

Department 

pamphlets 

142.5 

13 

185 

9 

187.5 

5 

Teaching 

aids 

141 

14 

151 

12 

125 

9.5 

Professional 

publications 

140 

15 

130 

13 

125 

9.5 

Observe 

others 

138 

16 

15 

19 

0 

19.5 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

135 

17 

125 

14 

225 

2.5 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

130.2 

18 

50 

17 

0 

19.5 

A.T.A. 
local 

115 

19 

160 

10.5 

125 

9.5 

Principal 

demonstrates 

105 

20 

5 

20 

25 

18 
















61 


New Teachers 1 Viewpoints Compared 

The tabulations of the weighted totals and rank order of the amount 
of help gained from the use of orientation techniques, as indicated by 
the new teachers for the three Systems, are shown in Table XVIII. 

Procedures which the new teachers in the three cities ranked simi ¬ 
larly as (1) most valuable services were: Board bulletins, staff meetings, 
teachers' help, and principals' conferences, (2) least valuable services 
were: principals' demonstration teaching, observing others, experienced 
teacher guide, supervisors' demonstration teaching and group conferences 
with the supervisor. 

The greatest dissimilarity was found in the use of: Board hand¬ 
books, ranked highest in System A: special supervisory services and 
individual conference with the supervisor, ranked highest in System B; 
pre-school acquaintance, Department bulletins, and in-service workshops, 
ranked highest in System C. In general the weighted totals of System C 
are much lower than the weighted totals of the other two Systems. 

General Conclusion 

In summarizing the findings from Part One of the questionnaire, 
it may be pointed out first that the new teachers had had various amounts 
of training, and wide range of teaching experience; and that the majority 
of the respondents felt an incidental program of orientation was in effect 
in their School Systems. 

Administrators and new teachers indicated in their responses that 
the orientation procedures most frequently used, and thought most valuable 





















- 


. . . ... 

. 
















. 


























- 















1 


„ 
























62 


TABLE XVI11 

WEIGHTED TOTALS AND RANK ORDER OF USEFULNESS OF PRACTICES INDICATED BY 

NEW TEACHERS 



Orientation 

Practices 

School A 
Weighted Rank 
Totals Order 

School B 
Weighted Rank 

Totals Order 

School 

Weighted 

Totals 

C 

Rank 

Order 


Board 


handbooks 

227 

1 

96 

13 

93.8 

10 

Board 

bulletins 

224 

2 

197 

5 

150 

3 

Staff 

meetings 

202 

3 

216 

3 

143.8 

4 

Teachers 1 
help 

196 

4 

204 

4 

162.5 

2 

Supervisory 

services 

191 

5 

228 

2 

50 

14.5 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

187 

6 

234 

1 

96.8 

9 

Principals 1 
conference 

186 

7 

192 

6 

112.5 

7 

Department 

bulletins 

179 

8 

179 

7 

231.3 

1 

Orientation 

meetings 

178 

9 

171 

8 

100 

8 

Department 

pamphlets 

135 

10 

149 

9 

58.8 

13 

A. T. A. 
local 

134 

11 

122 

10 

125 

6 

Professional 

publications 

107 

12 

104 

12 

50 

14.5 

Teaching 

aids 

102 

13 

( 

95 

14 

62.5 

12 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

96 

14 

60 

16 

25 

17.5 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

95 

15 

87 

15 

44.8 

16 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

94 

16 

120 

11 

131.3 

5 

In-service 

workshop 

85 

17 

42 

17 

68.8 

11 

Teacher 

guide 

69 

18 

30 

18 

12.5 

20 

Observe 

others 

64 

19 

15 

19 

18.8 

19 

Principal 

demonstrates 

58 

20 

3 

20 

25 

17.5 














63 


to new teachers in the three School Systems, were: Board bulletins, 

staff meetings. Department bulletins and teachers' help. Two of the 

practices ranked highest by System B, namely, individual conferences with 

the supervisors and supervisory services, were also ranked by the adminis- 

4 

trators in the Indianapolis System as most valuable to new teachers. The 

nature of the pre-school acquaintance, ranked highest by System C., justifies 

the high value placed on this service. The majority of the administrators 

thought that a pre-school acquaintance program had some value to the new 

teachers, but they were not convinced that it is the best procedure, as 
5 6 7 * 

Tower, Strickland, and Tate, have found in their research work. 

From Tables IX and XIV we note some varied relationships in the 
ratings given by principals between the frequency of use and the usefulness 
of some procedures. The procedure which showed the lowest correspondence 
between frequency of use and usefulness was the activity of the professional 
organization -- the local A.T.A. — which was rated by 35 per cent of the 
principals as being regularly used, but by only 8 per cent as having much 
value. 

Principals and new teachers were in some agreement on the services 

/+ M.M. Tower, "Study of Orientation and In-Service Education Practices 
in the Indianapolis Public Schools," Education Practices in the Indianapolis 
Public Schools , XLII, (April, 1956) 

^Tower, op. cit . (March, 1956) pp. 181-190 

^E.C. Strickland, "Orientation Programs for New Teachers in Ohio 
Schools, " Educational Research Bulletin XXXV (October, 1956) pp. 169-175 

^M.W. Tate, "The Induction of Secondary School Teachers," School 
Review (March, 1943) pp. 150-157 















,. . It 






- 




. 


- . - . . 

• • 



















64 


which they thought most valuable; but the principals thought they were more 
valuable than did the new teachers. For example, the weighted totals for 
in-service workshops,and for new teachers to observe other teachers were 
124 and 120 respectively from the administrators' viewpoint, and 74 and 
54 respectively from that of the new teacher. 

Lastly, it may be noted, that the conclusions drawn from this 
analysis on the frequency of use of orientation procedures and the help 
gained from them are substantially similar to those mentioned in a study 

o 

made by Tower in the Indianapolis School System. 


^Tower, op . cit . (April, 1956), pp. 219-29 




CHAPTER V 


ANALYSIS OF DATA ON HELP RECEIVED BY NEW TEACHERS 
I. SOURCES OF HELP 

This first part of Chapter V is devoted to an analysis of the 
amount of help new teachers felt they received from: (1) superintendents 
and assistants, (2) principals, (3) supervisors, and (4) fellow class¬ 
room teachers. All the respondents were asked to report how much help 
they had received from each of the above mentioned sources, using the 
ratings: "much,” "some,” "little,” or "none," The number reporting and 
the per cent of new teachers reporting various amounts of help are shown 
in Table XIX for each of the three cities, as well as the total results 
for the 149 new teachers in the three Systems combined. 

Although 46 per cent of the respondents said they received some 
and much help from superintendents, 54 per cent reported either little or 
none from this source. The per cent reporting various amounts of help 
from superintendents varied widely in School Systems A and B. In the 
larger System A, 66 per cent of the new teachers reported little or no 
help, compared with 24 per cent in the smaller School System B. This 
result seems justified. School system A being the larger has a number 
of supervisors who take over the duties of helping the new teachers, and 
thus relieve the superintendents of these duties. 

Of all the respondents, 81 per cent reported much and some help from 
principals and 19 per cent reported little or none. Systems A and B teachers 
indicated that principals were the greatest source of help. In System C, 




' 

* 
















. 







, 


, . f.. ■ - " ■■ ■ ; J 


■ 
















. 

. * • 






. 

. ■ 



„ 





















66 


TABLE XIX 

AMOUNT OF HELP RECEIVED BY NEW TEACHERS 
FROM SUPERINTENDENTS, SUPERVISORS, 
PRINCIPALS AND FELLOW TEACHERS, 
1957-58 


Sources of help by 

No. 

Per cent of new teachers 

selected school system 

reporting 

reporting various amounts 
of help 


Much 

Some Little None 


From Superintendents 
and Assistant Sup’ts. 
School A 

100 

8% 

26% 

20% 

46% 

School B 

33 

28 

48 

15 

9 

School C 

16 

12 

44 

19 

25 







All respondents 

149 

13% 

33% 

18% 

36% 

From Principals 

School A 

100 

40% 

41% 

9% 

10% 

School B 

33 

52 

36 

9 

3 

School C 

16 

13 

56 

25 

6 


. - 

. . 




All respondents 

149 

40% 

41% 

11% 

8% 

From Supervisors 

School A 

100 

14% 

46% 

25% 

15% 

School B 

33 

28 

42 

9 

21 

School C 

16 

- 

6 

- 

94 







All respondents 

149 

15% 

41% 

19% 

25% 

From fellow teachers 

School A 

100 

36% 

36% 

15% 

13% 

School B 

33 

48 

34 

9 

9 

School C 

16 

13 

56 

25 

6 







All respondents 

149 

36% 

38% 

15% 

11% 









. 












i, . .. mt. •' 

, j ; i 













; 


















67 


69 per cent of the teachers received some and much help from the principals 
and equally as much from fellow teachers. 

New teachers in the larger School Systems A and B obtained consid¬ 
erably more help from supervisors. This is substantiated by the fact that 
60 per cent of the respondents in School A and 69 per cent of the respon¬ 
dents in School B, as conpared with 6 per cent of the respondents in School 
C, reported much and some help from this source. 

Apparently, new teachers get about as much help from fellow class¬ 
room teachers as from the principals. It is interesting to note that over 
one-third of the respondents reported much help from fellow teachers, while 
only 11 per cent reported no help from this source. 


• v 




























, • 


' 






- ■ 


/>* 





* . . 




.. 





■ 



























- 


- 



















68 


II. TYPES OF HELP NEEDED AND RECEIVED 

This second part of Chapter V is devoted to an analysis of data 
received from Part Three of the questionnaire dealing with several types 
of help which experts* say large numbers of beginning teachers used. 

Nine of the commonly recommended types of help are set forth in Table XX. 

For each type of help, respondents were asked to use the ratings: 
"none," "little," "some," or "much," to indicate how much help they felt 
they needed during their first year of service. They were also asked to 
rate one of the same four items to indicate how much help of each type 
they thought they had received. Table XX shows the distribution of total 
responses of the 149 teachers. To make the data easier to interpret, totals 
are shown for no help and little help needed and received, and for some 
and much help needed and received. 

The responses tend to validate the need for offering to new teachers 
all the nine types of help listed. There is greater need for some than 
for others. For instance, 27 per cent of the respondents indicated they 
needed much help in planning for and working with gifted and retarded 
pupils; a total of 60 per cent needed either some or much help in this area. 
On the other hand, only 6 per cent of new teachers felt they needed much 
help in developing better personal qualities as teachers; less than half 
felt they needed either some or much help. 

*NEA Research Bulletin . XXXIV, op . cit ., 

(February, 1956) 






- 


.... ■ ' 1 ' ' - J ’' '• 


, 












.,i A 










. 


.... . . » 




* 

- ' • 




• - . . • ... . ■ ■■} - : 














. 










. > ■ 



















TABLE XX 


69 


AMOUNTS OF CERTAIN TYPES OF HELP NEEDED AND RECEIVED BY NEW TEACHERS 


Per cent of new teachers 

Type 

Per 

cent of new teachers 

reporting various 

of 


reporting various 

amounts of help needed 

Help 

amounts of help received 

None Little Some Much 


None 

Little Some Much 


16 

24 

44 


16 

Understanding 

15 

30 

40 


15 


40% 


60% 


school goals 


457. 


557. 


24 

29 

41 


6 

Developing 

54 

26 

15 


5 


53% 


477. 


personal 

qualities 


80% 


207. 


18 

18 

46 


18 

Understanding 

34 

26 

27 


13 


36% 


64% 


and using 
school services 


60% 


40% 


24 

27 

31 


18 

Keeping and 

26 

31 

28 


15 


51% 


497. 


making records 
and reports 


57% 


43% 


32 

22 

29 


17 

Unders tanding 

41 

31 

23 


5 


54% 


46% 


& using courses 
of study 


727. 


28% 


35 

19 

29 


17 

Making use of 

63 

17 

17 


3 


547. 


46% 


community 

resources 


80% 


207. 


23 

30 

37 


10 

Handling 

30 

26 

26 


8 


53% 


47% 


disciplinary 

problems 


56% 


44% 


25 

15 

33 


27 

Planning for & 

47 

24 

24 


5 


40% 

' 

60% 


working with 
gifted & retarded 
pupils 


71% 


29% 


32 

19 

36 


13 

Getting acquaint-43 

22 

27 


8 


517. 


49% 


ed with community 

657. 


35% 



and its people 


















































... . a. 





























70 


About three-fifths of all reporting teachers indicated a need for 
some or much help in understanding the goals of the school. A slightly 
higher percentage reported a need for either some or much help in under¬ 
standing and using special school services. Help in this area covers a 
wide variety of problems such as how to obtain and use standardized tests, 
what procedures to follow in referring pupils to the guidance clinic, how 
to go about getting sets of basic and supplementary readers, and how to go 
about accelerating a pupil. It was in this area that most of the teachers 
indicated the need of some help. 

Types of Help Needed by First-Year Teachers 

In Table XXI, the data on the help needed by the 26 first-year 
teachers are tabulated separately. The responses tend to validate the need for 
offering these new teachers special help in all 9 types listed, because the 
percentages of the 26 first-year teachers were higher for each type than 
that of the 149 total teachers reporting. 

For instance, the less experience the teacher has, the more likely 
he is to need help in handling discipline problems, A total of 82 per cent 
of first-year teachers and 47 per cent of the 149 new teachers needed some 
and much help ri this area. 

Over 85 per cent of all first-year teachers said they needed some 
and much help in understanding and using special school services. The wide 
variety of problems in this area has already been discussed. About two- 
fifths of the first-year teachers required much help in planning for and 
working with gifted and retarded pupils, whereas, 74 per cent needed some 
and much help. 








TABLE XXI 


71 


AMOUNTS OF CERTAIN TYPES OF HELP NEEDED AND RECEIVED BY FIRST-YEAR TEACHERS 


Per cent of new teachers 
reporting various amounts 
of help needed 

None Little Some Much 

Type 

of 

Help 

Per cent of new teachers 
reporting various amounts 
of help received 

None Little Some Much 

15 

19 

47 

19 

Understanding 

19 

19 

35 

27 


34% 


66% 

school goals 


38% 


62% 

7 

39 

47 

7 

Developing 

55 

23 

15 

7 


46% 


54% 

personal 

qualities 


78% 


22% 

7 

7 

59 

27 

Unders tanding 

27 

27 

31 

15 


14% 


86% 

and using school 
services 


54% 


46% 

11 

27 

35 

27 

Keeping and making 19 

► 23 

39 

19 


38% 


62% 

records & reports 


42% 


58% 

19 

19 

47 

15 

Understanding and 47 

19 

23 

11 


38% 


62% 

using courses of 
study 


66% 


34% 

19 

19 

31 

31 

Making use of 

63 

19 

15 

3 


38% 


62% 

community resources 

82% 


18% 

3 

15 

43 

39 

Handling 

15 

15 

43 

27 


18% 


82% 

disciplinary 

problems 


30% 


70% 

11 

15 

35 

39 

Planning for and 

43 

27 

19 

11 


26% 


74% 

working with gifted 
and retarded 
children 

70% 


30% 

19 

31 

23 

27 

Getting acquainted with 35 23 

27 

15 


50% 


50% 

community & its 
people 


58% 


42% 





















































•, . . . 





J. 

. . . j i . i - 









72 


Comparison of the Responses of the Three Systems 

In Table XXII, the data on some and much help needed are tabulated 
and analyzed separately according to the size of the School System. The 
reports for some and much help in understanding and using special school 
services were: 64 per cent in System A, 76 per cent in System B and 38 per 
cent in System C. 

The problem of understanding and using special school services was 
far more serious in the two larger School Systems than in the smaller one. 
About half again as many teachers in Systems A and B, as in System C, said 
they needed some or much help of this type. This situation, of course, 
is understandable; the large school systems offer not only a greater number 
and larger variety of such services, but the process of using them involves 
more "red tape" and more conplicated procedures. 

In spite of the fact that 73 per cent of all the new teachers res¬ 
ponding had over four years of experience, many indicated they needed some 
or much help in understanding the goals of the school. They reported as 
follows: System A, 61 per cent; System B, 63 per cent; and System C, 50 
per cent. In System B, 63 per cent of the new teachers indicated the need 
for some or much help in understanding the courses of study. However, the 
most serious need expressed was for help in planning for and working with 
gifted and retarded pupils. In all three School Systems, the highest per¬ 
centage indicated "much" help needed in this area. In System A, 23 per 
cent; in System B, 36 per cent; in System C, 31 per cent. 






TABLE XXXI 

AMOUNTS OF CERTAIN TYPES OF HELP NEEDED BY NEW TEACHERS 


73 


Type of Help 


School A 


School B 


School C 



Some 

Much 

Some 

Much 

Some 

Much 

Understanding 

45% 


16% 

42% 


21% 

44% 

6% 

school goals 


61% 



63% 


50% 

Developing personal 

39 


5 

48 


9 

38 

6 

qualities 


44 



57 



44 

Understanding and using 

43 


21 

67 


9 

25 

13 

school services 


64 



76 



38 

Keeping and making 

27 


18 

45 


15 

25 

25 

records & reports 


45 



60 



50 

Understanding & using 

25 


18 

45 


18 

19 

13 

courses of study 


43 



63 



32 

Making use of community 

29 


17 

33 


21 

25 

6 

resources 


46 



54 



31 

Handling disciplinary 

39 


11 

39 


12 

19 

6 

problems 


50 



51 



25 

Planning for and work¬ 

36 


23 

30 


36 

19 

31 

ing with gifted and 
retarded pupils 


59 



66 



50 

Getting acquainted with 

37 


12 

36 


21 

25 

6 

community and its people 


49 



57 



31 









































. : L i 



. dd : d • 


. 


■ ■ 



. .. i. u 

■ : 


{ . ; .... . • ■ • : 

,7 ' ' ' ' \-S v .. ,■ <• * o 

.... 


■ 






U 


kt c , v-:.v. 


. / : : 

. ■■. . . • ■ ■ 

. 

. 

: • • • . . ; 

•. ■ * 











74 


Type of Help Received 

For the amounts of help received the right side of Table XX shows 
over one-half of the new teachers getting either some or much help in under¬ 
standing the goals of the school. About two-fifths felt they were getting 
either some or much help in the other problems: (1) understanding and 
using special school services, (2) making out and keeping official records 
and reports, and (3) handling discipline problems. However, only 29 per 
cent were getting some or much help in planning and working with gifted 
and retarded children, and only 20 per cent were getting some or much help 
in making effective use of community resources and developing better 
personal qualities as a teacher. 

Table XXI reveals a higher percentage of first-year teachers as 
having received some or much help in these same problems: handling 
discipline problems, 70 per cent; understanding school goals, 62 per cent; 
making out and keeping official records and reports, 58 per cent; and 
understanding and using school services, 46 per cent. Smaller percentages 
of the first-year teachers believed they were getting some and much help 
in the following: planning and working with gifted and retarded children; 

30 per cent; developing better personal qualities as a teacher, 22 per 
cent; making effective use of community resources, 18 per cent. 

The amounts of certain types of help received by new teachers in 
the three Systems is summarized in Table XXIII. Several relationships are 
immediately apparent. In general, the majority of the new teachers in the 
Systems A and B felt they were getting some or much help with understanding 
school goals. More than half of the new teachers in System B believed they 












., :. . . /: 














. . ■ . . 
















' 


■ ,. 




- ■■ 




















■ . 





■ 

■ 



* 

. 

. 





■ 

■ 








. 












* 






















TABLE XXIII 


75 


AMOUNT OF CERTAIN TYPES OF HELP RECEIVED BY NEW TEACHERS 


Type of Help School A _ School B _ School C 



Some 

Much 

Some 

Much 

Some 

Much 

Understanding 
school goals 

Developing personal 

40% 

14% 

45% 


24% 

25% 


6% 

54% 

16 7 

15 

69% 

3 

25 

31% 

6 

qualities 

23 


18 



31 


Understanding and 

31 

12 

24 


21 

6 


6 

using school services 

43 


45 



12 


Keeping and making 

29 

10 

30 


33 

19 


6 

reports & records 

39 


63 



25 


Understanding and 

22 

5 

30 


6 

13 


6 

using courses of study 

27 


36 



19 


Making use of community 

13 

4 

27 


3 

19 


0 

resources 

17 


30 



19 


Handling disciplinary 

27 

17 

33 


24 

6 


13 

problems 

44 


57 



19 


Planning for and work¬ 

29 

5 

15 


9 

6 


0 

ing with gifted and re¬ 

34 


24 



6 


tarded pupils 









Getting acquainted with 

. 30 

8 

27 


12 

6 


0 

community & its people 

38 


39 



6 











































76 

received help in: (1) keeping and making records and reports and 
(2) handling discipline problems. In all other areas, a very small 
percentage of the teachers felt they were receiving help. 

By comparing the sums of columns of some and much help needed on 
the left with the corresponding sums of some and much columns for help 
received on the right in Table XX, a rough measure of the differences of 
certain types of help can be obtained. Figure I shows this graphically. The 
help needed is charted in black and the help received is charted in red. 


The 

differences for the types of help are as follows: 



TYPES OF HELP 

DIFFERENCES 

1 . 

Understanding the goals of the school 

5% 

2. 

Developing better personal qualities 
as a teacher 

27% 

3. 

Understanding and using special school services 

24% 

4. 

Keeping and making out official records and reports 

6% 

5. 

Understanding and using courses of study and 
curriculum guides 

18% 

6. 

Making effective use of community resources 

26% 

7. 

Handling disciplinary problems 

3% 

8 . 

Planning for and working with gifted and retarded pupils 

31% 

9. 

Getting acquainted with the community and its people 

14% 


This scale represents the differences in total scores of some and much help 
needed as compared with the amount of some and much help received. For 
example, 47 per cent of the respondents needed some and much help in devel¬ 
oping better personal qualities as a teacher, but only 20 per cent said they 
received much help. About two-thirds said they needed help in understanding 

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































78 


and using special school services, but over one-half said they received 
little or none. There were twice as many who felt they needed some and 
much help as they received in: (1) planning for and working with gifted 
and retarded pupils, and (2) making effective use of community resources. 
There is no question but that School Systems need to do more for teachers 
in these areas. 

III. ATTITUDE TOWARDS NEW TEACHERS 

To determine the extent to which new teachers are welcomed into the 
ranks of the more experienced teachers on the staff, respondents were 
asked, "When you first started to teach, what was the general attitude of 
most of the other members of the staff towards you?" A choice of three 
answers was given: "friendly," "indifferent," or "unfriendly." 

Of the 149 new teachers who answered the question, 9 in 10 (91 per 
cent) said "friendly’,' less than 1 in 10 (9 per cent) said "indifferent," 
and none said "unfriendly." Apparently in the great majority of schools, 
there is no serious problem of morale which tends to separate the "old 
timers" on the staff from the newcomers. The number reporting they encoun¬ 
tered an "indifferent" attitude was very small. On the other hand, school 
administrators and experienced classroom teachers may well show concern 
over the proportion who felt they encountered an indifferent attitude on 
the part of regular staff members. Table XXIV shows that the new teachers 
in the small School System C encountered slightly more indifference (13 
per cent) than the new teachers of System A (10 per cent) and much more 
than those in System B (3 per cent). 



79 


TABLE XXIV 

ATTITUDES OF REGULAR STAFF TOWARDS NEW TEACHERS 


School System 


Friendly Indifferent Unfriendly Total 


A 

90 

10 

0 

100 

B 

32 

1 

0 

33 

C 

14 

2 

0 

16 


Total 


136 


13 


0 


149 














CHAPTER VI 


ANALYSIS OF DATA ON SEVERITY OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS 

Some educational leaders have been skeptical of the need for 
orientation programs. As one school superintendent said, "If a teacher 
has been recommended by the Faculty of Education, he should be a com¬ 
petent teacher." Perhaps this attitude is one reason why most schools 
in systems have not yet provided organized orientation programs for 
new teachers. 

In this survey only 17 per cent of the 210 administrators and 
new teachers said that organized programs were provided, while 64 per 
cent had only incidental programs, and the remaining 19 per cent had no 
orientation programs at all. 

Just how effective were the orientation programs that were pro¬ 
vided? Were the teachers simply under the impression they had an 
organized program or did the teachers of the organized programs receive 
more help in alleviating the adjustment problems? Relative to these 
questions Part Five of the questionnaire consisted of 38 adjustment 
problems. The new teachers were requested to rate the severity of the 
adjustment problems by using the scale given on the questionnaire. 

The scale values for the left side of the problems is as follows: 
0, no difficulty; 5, some difficulty; 10, much difficulty. The response 
received for all 149 teachers was totalled and averaged for the severity 
of the problems. On the right side of the questionnaire, they were to 
place a check mark, against only those problems with which they received 




81 


help. The total check marks for the amount of help received was changed 
to percentage form. These problems were placed in rank order of severity 
in Table XXV. This method was used for the replies from the three Systems, 
which are analyzed separately. An analysis was also made of the first- 
year teachers* replies in comparison with those of the new teachers who 
were experienced. 

Before one can ascertain whether or not these orientation programs 
were really worth while one must learn the extent to which they alleviated 
the adjustment problems of the new teachers. Very little research evidence 
has been presented regarding the effect of orientation programs on many 
specific adjustment problems of new teachers. In order to evaluate 
orientation programs, it was necessary to identify the most serious adjust¬ 
ment problems of the new teachers and the extent to which the schools pro¬ 
vided assistance with such problems. 

Analysis of Replies of All New Teachers 

The information summarized in Table XXV was compiled from the replies 
to Part Five of the questionnaire. The 38 problems selected for use in the 
questionnaire were those most frequently mentioned in educational writings 
pertaining to the subject of teacher adjustment. The order in which the 
problems are arranged in the Table XXV, their severity rank, was deter¬ 
mined by averaging the severity ratings assigned to each problem by the 
teachers. According to these findings, the most serious adjustment prob¬ 
lems centered about the area of getting enough books and supplies, and 
obtaining visual or audio teaching aids. Next in order of seriousness 
was getting clear-cut records, reports, having too few department or 







TABLE XXV 


82 


RANK ORDER OF SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND THE 
TOTAL PERCENTAGES OF THE TEACHERS WHO RECEIVED HELP UPON EACH 


Severity Adjustment Problem Per Cent 

Rank Helped 

Order 


1. Obtaining enough books and supplies. 62 % 

2. Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids. 40 

3. Getting clear-cut information concerning school. 55 

4. Learning routine, records, reports. 64 

5. Too few department or grade-level meetings. 15 

6. Securing group meetings for problems. 23 

7. Finding out what supervisors think of your work. 35 

8. Finding time for personal recreation. 18 

9. School marks, evaluating pupil progress. 44 

10.5 Organizing and planning classwork. 30 

10.5 Learning about community traditions. 36 

12. Learning the extent of your authority. 38 

13. Securing information about the course of study. 40 

14. Having enough class visits by supervisor. 13 

15. Understanding the school philosophy. 36 

16. Obtaining help with discipline problems.... 54 

17. Overcoming antagonistic attitudes of pupils. 31 

18. Getting teaching assignment early. 17 

19. Teaching outside area of preparation. 14 

20. Tolerating cliques of other teachers. 6 

21. Getting enough conferences with supervisor.... 13 

22. Getting access to supervisor when in need. 19 

23. Securing good living accommodations. 12 

24. Caring for extra-curricular activities. 15 

25. Finding adequate recreational facilities. 15 

26. Having more problem pupils than other teachers. 17 

27. Getting feeling of acceptance by faculty. 17 

28. Carrying heavier load than other teachers. 12 

29.5 Securing co-operative attitude of teachers. 17 

29.5 Getting school to support modern methods. 11 

31. Having poorer classroom facilities than others. 11 

32. Getting sympathetic attitude of supervisor. 14 

33.5 Getting to teach classes for which employed... 15 

33.5 Finding teachers your age. 9 

35. Obtaining friendly attitude of community. 13 

36. Having many unrelated class preparations. 7 

37. Accepting restriction on personal life. 5 

38. Loneliness, finding social opportunities. 10 














































.. -J 



















































83 


grade-level meetings, securing group meetings for problems, and finding 
out what the supervisors think of their work. The problem of organizing 
and planning classwork ranked tenth. The next five moderately severe 
problems concerned: learning about community traditions, the extent of 
authority, interpretations of the course of study, supervisory visits, 
and understanding school philosophy. According to the amount of severity 
in the averages, very little difference was shown for the problems ranking 
16 to 20. Averages are given in Appendix B. These problems all dealt 
with the actual teaching of the pupils, assignment of teaching, and tolera¬ 
ting cliques among other teachers. The problems of supervision and living 
accommodations ranked next in seriousness for all teachers. The last ten 
problems, which were of least concern to new teachers, were: co-operative 
relations of the teachers and supervisor, getting modern equipment and 
classroom facilities, adjusting oneself to the community, and finding 
social and recreational opportunities. 

Table XXV also summarized the help teachers believed they received 
in coping with each of the problems. The table, shows little relation 
between the rank order of severity of the problems and the rank order of 
the percentages that received help. The problems in which teachers in¬ 
dicated that they received the most help were: learning routine, records, 
reports; obtaining enough books and supplies; getting clear-cut information 
concerning school; and obtaining help with discipline problems. 

Comparisons of Responses of the Three Cities 

Did the teachers of the larger System A, where fulltime supervisors 
are employed, report less difficulty with adjustment problems than did the 








J 


c. 


- 1 ' - 1 ' ■ > ^ : 










■ 


■ 

i , • ' 


....... ■ i, j . - - ■ 








84 


teachers in the smaller districts of Systems B and C? Actual averages 
of the amount of help received are tabulated separately for each of the 
three cities. These tabulations have been placed in Tables XXVI to XXVIII 
in Appendix B. The new teachers of System A considered most of the 38 
problems mentioned in the questionnaire as less severe than did the new 
teachers from the other two systems. The five problems which each city 
listed as the most serious are as follows: 

Average Severity Adjustment Problems Received Help 


System A 

4.1 Obtaining enough supplies 62 % 

3.8 Learning routine, records, reports 64 

3.8 Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids 38 

3.3 Finding out what principal or supervisor 

thinks of their work 37 

3.2 Getting clear-cut information concerning 

school policies 55 

System B 

5.6 ' Obtaining enough books and supplies 61 7. 

4.2 Getting clear-cut information concerning 

school policies 55 

3.8 Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids 42 

3.5 Too few department or grade-level meetings 18 

2.9 Securing information about the course 

of study 36 

2.9 Getting teaching assignment early 30 

System C 

5.6 Securing group meetings for problems 44 % 

5.0 Finding out what principal or supervisor 

thinks of their work 13 

4.7 Getting information on school policies 56 

3.8 Learning routine, records, reports 38 

3.8 Too few grade-level meetings 19 

3.4 School marks, evaluating pupil progress 13 

Teachers in Systems A and B were more concerned than those in 


System C about the seriousness of the problem of getting enough books 













' .. .. y. j; . •>>. : j j :; 


A m-J - 




. . . . • . 




. 





















■ 












. • . ....... 

, -■ ... ■■ O. — 5 : : f . 

. . - j 
_ j, . ■... ,•- u * Uvv 



. .. 









85 


audio-visual and teaching aids. Teachers in Systems £ and C rated too 
few department or grade-level meetings as a serious problem. All respon¬ 
dents were concerned about getting clear-cut information concerning school 
policies. A higher percentage of the teachers in System A than in Systems 
B and C, indicated they had received help with all problems with one ex¬ 
ception, namely, in obtaining audio-visual aids. 

Comparisons of First-Year and Experienced Teachers' Responses 

Of the 149 new teachers, 17.5 per cent were beginners and 82.5 per 
cent were new teachers who had various amounts of previous experience. In 
order to ascertain whether the beginning teachers considered the adjustment 
problems more serious than the new teachers did, it was necessary to analyse 
the replies for these two groups separately. 

The severity order in which the problems are arranged in Table XXIX, 
and included in Appendix B, was determined by averaging the severity ratings 
assigned to each problem by 26 teachers. Table XXX in Appendix B shows the 
severity order in which the 123 new experienced teachers rated the adjustment 
problems. The problems which each group listed as most serious are as 
follows: 






86 


First-Year Teachers 


Severity Average Adjustment Problems Received Help 


5.5 

Learning the extent of their authority 

58 % 

5.2 

Obtaining enough books and supplies 

69 

4.8 

Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids 

35 

4.4 

Learning routine, records and reports 

73 

4.0 

Getting clear-cut information concerning 



school policies 

62 

4.0 

Obtaining help with discipline problems 

73 

Teachers 

with More Than One Year of Experience 


4.1 

Obtaining enough books and supplies 

60 % 

3.5 

Getting clear-cut information concerning 



school policies 

54 

3.4 

Learning routine, records and reports 

62 

3.3 

Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids 

41 

3.2 

Securing group meetings for problems 

24 

3.1 

Too few department or grade-level meetings 

15 


The new experienced teachers considered most of the 38 problems 
mentioned less severe than did the beginning teachers. The latter were 
more concerned than the former about learning the extent of their author¬ 
ity, organizing and planning classwork, and obtaining help with discipline 
problems. New experienced teachers were more concerned with securing 
group meetings for problems and having department or grade-level meetings. 

Tables XXIX and XXX illustrate the percentage of beginning and 
experienced teachers who received help in coping with each of the problems. 
In most instances, a higher percentage of the first-year teachers reported 
help received with the problems than did the experienced teachers. The 
order in which the problems are arranged along the base line in Figure 2 
from left to right, indicate 38 orientation problems, as listed on page 89 
for reference. Figure 2 is a graphical representation of the percentages 
of new teachers who reported help with adjustment problems. The red line 











: 


• ■ ' ...... i'J 


j ..., Ui ..... : Ji.. ... ' •) ;•* . . : ’ 

> : . . 'r U, ... - • 

... - ■ c ...■• 

- ■ . 

XUO'J 


.. 










i ,:.V- . 4 


... 




- 

. 

.... ,. . •: . • ■ - 

... ..... ... ■ .: . ■« >■•••• • • . 

... . . 

... . . ■' • - ; ' • • . •• 

. , ... . . « ....... ■■ . ' ■ • 


. -r. ... o . .4 


j-.; ^ ; ■.'.I,.: a", j'v-a ••••'. ■.'.ioj* .‘>u'4 mi ■ -■■•mm • m«mj 


; j i. , . / ~ ' i( . 0 ‘ '4xl < .• J 1 tjAUA i»U r ' 

■ , , ", : ... j ii- i.v a ■ ■ ; -->iij. 


- ■ - ■ ■ 4 . 








< .i; , ,;.. >::■ y. o c J- -> m., - 




.. ... 


. 7 .. .'.'. i'-'i ■ - . .4 ; •'* ' ’ 1 ' 1 




•.. ;,i i bi t .1 


... 


. 




; ...... ,o .. . .. .. , 4 .o.i; 1 j * i - • ; • ■ • • • 


;. . . ..... 


■ .> UU) 


: ■ ■ ■ . - 


4 


j ... . 

. . ■;.... r 

« . - 

A',.,,..- • 

' 

:• ■ . ... 

. 




87 

charts the per cent responses of the first-year teachers and the black 
line graphically charts the per cent responses of the experienced new 
teachers. 

The graph shows that 73 per cent of the first-year teachers reported 
help with the second problem, learning routine records and reports, while 
only 61 per cent of the experienced teachers received help with this pro¬ 
blem. Likewise, 73 per cent of the first-year teachers reported help 
with Problem 9, obtaining help with discipline problems, but only 50 per 
cent of the experienced teachers reported help with this problem. The 
remainder of the graph may be interpreted in the same way. The data in 
this figure, however, point out quite clearly that during the year 1957-58, 
the first-year teachers received considerably more help than other new 
teachers on the staffs of the three School Systems. 

As to the severity of the adjustment problems. Figure 3 shows 
that first-year teachers rated most problems more serious than did the 
experienced teachers. Average ratings were based on the three-point scale 
given in the questionnaire. For example, for problem one - finding out 
what the principal or the supervisor thought of their work - the first-year 
teachers rated it, 3.7; the experienced teachers rated it at 3.0. The 
red line on the graph illustrates that most of the problems were rated more 
severe by the first-year teachers, than by the teachers of more experience 
as chartered by the black line. 








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































89 


LIST OF THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS 


1. Being evaluated by supervisors 

2. Learning routine, records, reports 

3. Obtaining books and supplies 

4. Understanding clearly school policies 

5. Finding time for personal recreation 

6. Understanding the school philosophy 

7. Learning about community traditions 

8. Securing group meetings for problems 

9. Getting help with discipline problems 

10. Evaluating pupil progress 

11. Obtaining teaching aids 

12. Securing information about curriculum 

13. Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

14. Learning the extent of your authority 

15. Securing good living accommodations 

16. Organizing and planning classwork 

17. Getting support for modern methods 

18. Too few grade-level meetings 

19. Caring for extra-curricular activities 

20. Getting teaching assignment early 

21. Finding teachers your age 

22. Getting access to supervisor 

23. Teaching outside area of preparation 

24. Having class visits by supervisor 

25. Finding recreational facilities 

26. Carrying heavier load than others 

27. Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

28. Having poor classroom facilities 

29. Getting conferences with supervisor 

30. Having unrelated class preparations 

31. Securing co-operation of teachers 

32. Being accepted by faculty 

33. Finding social opportunities 

34. Getting sympathy of supervisor 

35. Having more problem pupils than others 

36. Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

37. Accepting restriction on personal life 

38. Teaching classes for which employed 





, t 





1 , . ''"," . ' J » 

....... . J • • j • ■ . > . ■ • - ■ ' • - : - 



... 



. j . 










a . . . 




o 




... . u | 


. i ; . ... . • - 


- . - • ■ 
J , . • i 


. . 


.. • i 


-■ 







111 M II11114 


9 ° 


Average 

Severity 

Ratings 


lCLi 

9 - 

a_ 

7 - 


1 , , . 

i i \T\ \\ 















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































91 


Effectiveness of Orientation Programs 

Another question, that of the effectiveness of the orientation 
programs in alleviating the above mentioned problems may be raised. 

In order to evaluate the helpfulness of an organized and incidental 
program, the data from the replies of the 149 new teachers were categ¬ 
orized under "organized," "incidental," and "no" orientation program. 
There were 34 teachers under the organized program, 86 for some incid¬ 
ental program, and 29 who indicated no orientation program. The data 
for the average ratings of severity of adjustment problems and the 
percentage of help received for each problem are given in Table XXXI. 

Figure 4 shows graphically that a much greater percentage of 
teachers from the organized orientation program (red line) reported 
help received with the problems than of teachers from schools which 
had the incidental program (solid black line), or no program at all 
(broken black line). For example, the graph shows that 47 per cent of 
the teachers from the organized program reported help with the first 
problem, finding out what the principal or supervisor thought of their 
work, while only 33 per cent of the teachers who had incidental pro¬ 
grams and 28 per cent of the teachers who had no orientation program 
reported help with this problem. 

Likewise, 68 per cent of the teachers from the organized program 
reported help with Problem 10, school marks and evaluating pupil progress, 
but only 28 per cent of the teachers who had no orientation program re¬ 
ported help with this problem. A higher percentage from the incidental 
program reported help than was reported by teachers with no orientation 







TABLE XXXI 


92 


AVERAGE SEVERITY RATINGS AND PER CENT HELP RECEIVED FOR 
ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS, ACCORDING TO TYPE OF PROGRAM RECEIVED 



Organized 


Incidental 

No Orientation 

Numbers 

Average 
s Severity 

Per Cent 
Helped 

Average 

Severity 

Per Cent 
Helped 

Average 

Severity 

Per Cent 
Helped 

1 . 

3.9 

47 1 

2.6 

32 7o 

3.6 

28 % 

2. 

4.1 

71 

2.9 

62 

4.4 

52 

3. 

3.8 

74 

4.2 

53 

5.2 

62 

4. 

3.1 

68 

3.5 

58 

4.5 

31 

5. 

3.8 

29 

2.4 

10 

2.8 

28 

6. 

2.1 

41 

1.9 

35 

3.9 

34 

7. 

2.5 

48 

2.3 

30 

3.6 

28 

8 . 

2.6 

44 

2.8 

20 

3.4 

10 

9. 

2.2 

68 

2.3 

50 

4.0 

45 

10. 

3.1 

68 

2.5 

45 

2.4 

28 

11. 

3.2 

47 

3.4 

40 

2.8 

28 

12. 

2.5 

47 

3.4 

33 

3,1 

45 

13. 

1.3 

44 

2.7 

30 

2.1 

17 

14. 

2.1 

50 

3.0 

38 

2.4 

21 

15. 

1.8 

15 

1.4 

6 

1.9 

17 

16. 

2.6 

38 

2.8 

29 

2,1 

14 

17. 

.9 

15 

.7 

12 

1.4 

7 

18. 

2.5 

15 

3.1 

17 

4.3 

7 

19. 

1.5 

18 

1.6 

17 

1.4 

7 

20. 

1.6 

18 

1.7 

20 

3.1 

7 

21. 

.9 

21 

.8 

8 

1.4 

0 

22. 

1.6 

26 

1.5 

21 

2.2 

3 

23. 

3.1 

18 

1.5 

17 

1.7 

3 

24. 

1.9 

18 

1.6 

12 

2.1 

7 

25. 

1.9 

12 

1.5 

19 

2.1 

3 

26. 

1.5 

12 

1.0 

12 

1.4 

14 

27. 

.4 

6 

.6 

3 

1.7 

7 

28. 

1.2 

9 

1.1 

15 

1.0 

3 

29. 

1.6 

17 

1.6 

14 

2.4 

10 

30. 

1.2 

9 

1.5 

9 

1.9 

7 

31. 

.3 

24 

1.1 

16 

1.6 

14 

32. 

1.2 

26 

.8 

15 

2.6 

14 

33. 

.9 

9 

.5 

9 

.7 

7 

34. 

.9 

18 

.8 

12 

1.9 

10 

35. 

1.8 

18 

1.3 

22 

.9 

0 

36. 

.6 

21 

.8 

13 

1.2 

7 

37. 

1.3 

15 

.5 

5 

1.3 

0 

38. 

.9 

24 

.6 

12 

1.7 

14 


* The numbers refer to the problems as listed on page 89 









: i 
































Per Cents 
of Responses 




































































































































































































































































asanoqasH lo 
jhooi 



iJJH viyrTHO'U^-: "oW :"H2H0A3.T' V®t.*50 CJ0ATI4SDH3H 

qo ;rivr M :iiyCuiHOH$-fTHSMTBtftQA HfXW 

; , ; /|i y.CTAT'ffiIHO rl j 1 







































94 

program whatsoever. Thus, data in Figure 4 point out quite clearly the 
superiority of the organized orientation program in providing the help 
needed. 

As to the severity of the adjustment problems. Figure 5 shows 
that new teachers from schools with the organized orientation program 
rated most problems as much less serious than did the teachers from 
schools with the incidental program, or none at all. In Figure 5, the 
base line index numbers are shown for every tenth problem listed on 
page 89. The organized program is chartered graphically by a red line, 
the incidental program by a solid black line, and no program at all by 
a broken black line. For example, teachers from the organized program 
rated problem 3, getting books and supplies, as 3.8, those of the in¬ 
cidental program rated the problem at 4.2. Many of the ratings show 
that the incidental program was equally as effective as the organized 
program, and much more effective in helping the new teachers than no 
orientation program at all. 

These data show that teachers from schools that had orien¬ 
tation programs were less annoyed with their adjustment problems than 
were those who had none. Figure 5 also shows unmistakable evidence of 
the superiority of the organized orientation program over the incidental 
program. 

General Conclusion 

No doubt many teachers failed to rate the problems as being 
as serious as they really were. This seemed evident in spite of the 
fact that the teachers did not sign the questionnaire and even though 





; i I* . . ,> . ir: 




. <■; ,ii v , ■: 1 * .u\ . 

Xi \i .. .1 

. 

.. , ..'J .... ... 

UO O J .5. . ■ J 




. ■ . . 


... 


i ' -■ - - 

: 

: . 2 , .. ■ . : . . ..... 

; , . i /,• . i'i J }■ \. U.J - - ' • ■ - 

: I : ...... ... 


... . . , : , 


:. < . . j :>/ ; j ■/. , J 


...... . . , ' - . •' . 

i’lii . ■.•; ' - ../:•. • 5 i ! •• ••• • • 

, .... .. .. : , . ' 4 -• : ■ - ' - ■ ^ 

.. ■: s i , . . > j ’i.lj ,-r. / y :.' . . i. . ’ i. .'... 1) r.U 

: . .1 . •/.. ' .• ■ » • ■ -• - - ■ •: ••• • 0 
. . . ... . . ... . , ■) ■ ■ :■ ; , ■ • ••.’■ • J - J 

, . . 

-.,. ... .' L. . . . . . j ; '3 " • • •• 

.- . . 

, 1 .... ...... . . -v ■ 

... .... ...... ... 

■ 

- . ; 


. . i. I 




. . ... ' ■ ■ I■ 

U ■ .' .. J.:.. 

. • ... - ‘ ■ 

. . . C-: ■ . .... 




J;6l Oti 









..... 



. 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































96 


they were assured that their reports would be kept strictly confidential. 
As one teacher remarked, "I am perfectly satisfied where I am; I have 
no desire to change." Another reported, "There are certain things for 
which I simply would not express an evaluation, because I wish to remain 
loyal to my staff and school system." The comparison of the ratings of 
the problems by the teachers according to types of orientation programs, 
nevertheless, revealed unquestionable evidence of the superior help that 
new teachers received in school systems which had organized programs. 

This is especially true since the teachers were not aware that comparisons 
of their ratings would be made according to types of orientation programs. 

To summarize briefly, only 23 per cent of the 149 new teachers 
were provided with organized orientation programs, but the evidence in¬ 
dicated that the new teachers in organized orientation programs were much 
less annoyed by adjustment problems than were the teachers who had none 
at all. This evidence revealed an obvious need for more and more organ¬ 
ized orientation programs for new teachers in the Separate School Systems 
of Edmonton, Lethbridge, and Calgary. Most certainly, the results of the 
study showed beyond doubt that the orientation programs provided for new 
teachers were very much worthwhile. 






0 blno' 




: .. ■ 


( .. ■ 




... . 




; 


. • 



i ... . . . 


... 


> , . 


..... ... 




. . - 











. 





CHAPTER VII 


SUMMARY, FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

I. SUMMARY 

This survey was carried out in the R.C. Separate School 
Systems of Edmonton, Calgary, and Lethbridge to investigate the pur¬ 
ported need for further orientation procedures for new teachers in 
these systems, and the efficiency of such procedures as were in effect. 

The writer examined the sources of help for new teachers, 
the help needed and received, the attitude of staff members toward new 
teachers, the severity of adjustment problems and the extent to which 
the schools provided assistance with such problems. 

A questionnaire, constructed on the basis of related studies 
by Tower, 1 Strickland,^ and the National Education Association,^ proved 
beneficial to the investigator in pursuing the objectives of this study. 

Evidence was collected (a) from 149 teachers, who were serving 
their first year in a particular school in a regular teaching position 
and (b) from 61 administrators among whom were principals, supervisors, 
superintendents and their assistants. 

^Tower, loc . cit . 

^Strickland, loc . cit . 

3 NEA Research Bulletin XXXIV, loc . cit . 




98 


II. FINDINGS 

From an analysis of the data received certain findings were 

revealed: 

1. In the three systems the techniques which were repeatedly 
noted as most frequently used and of most value to new teachers were: 

Board bulletins, staff meetings, Department bulletins, supervisory ser¬ 
vices and teachers* help. 

2. Administrators rated most of the suggested orientation tech¬ 
niques as being more frequently used, and more valuable, than did the new 
teachers♦ 

3. The typical ’’new teacher" felt that she obtained more help 
from fellow teachers and principals than from anyone else. 

4. As might be expected, inexperienced teachers felt that they 
had more problems than did those who had had experience. 

5. Wide differences were revealed between teachers' estimates 
of amounts of help needed and amounts of help received, particularly in 
the following areas: planning for and working with gifted and retarded 
pupils, developing better personal qualities as a teacher, and making 
effective use of community resources. 

6. The effectiveness of orientation techniques in the schools 
which had organized orientation programs was superior to that where only 
an incidental program was in use. Even an incidental program, however, 
appears to be preferable to no program at all. Evidence indicated that 
the new teachers in schools having organized orientation programs were 


- 

:af 

Ca 


V :ii 

: . }'£! 

ir.+ij Sh:).r. 

. 

, i •. • ■ 

.. . . a 


. . 



V . t.'.V 


i ... 


a a h 3 ! 


(t 


.. 




; -■ . 





! a! iili. 




. • • ■ . 


... >u 




..;a ■ J 


; 'a :jli j'J ' ./•• _ J a. 


... . 




,.Jf 




: .1 . < ;a: 




.. .: .. . : / /. -. ;■ j .. ■ 


.... . .. ■ . .. . ' o.: . • . • is q ■ ■■ ■ 

) .. , . , ... .. .... : •. v. ,■; , 3 . -■ a • >-• •' i 

.... ; . . . ., .. ,. . i . '■ q 

. . jL. a.— . . •• • v • v • • ;■ ■■ ■■ • ■ < • 


: 


....... - ■ ■ .... 

..; ,;,. .; i :a a. a. •* .a a 

.... « ■ ■ - . • ■ • 

.. a . . , - .... .... 


f.u. iq j; ; aV..; lyjix 1 . ....t ■ 1 a.,;. o<.»?.•:> 





. 







99 


much less annoyed by adjustment problems than those in other schools. 

These findings are supported by (1) a survey carried out by 
the National Education Association,^ in which first-year teachers were 
frank in admitting that they needed a great deal of help, but stated that 
the type of help which they received was not what they needed most, and 

(2) the results of an Ohio study-* which showed beyond doubt that orien- 

\ 

tation programs provided for new teachers were very much worth while. 

III. RECOMMENDATIONS 

As a result of the findings of this study, the writer wishes 
to make the following recommendations. The first three recommendations 
are directed to school administrators and the fourth is for students who 
are seeking topics for investigation in the field of educational research. 

1. Since the orientation techniques - Board bulletins, staff 
meetings, Department bulletins, supervisory services and teachers' help - 
were most frequently used and of most value to new teachers in the 
Separate School Systems in Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge, it is re¬ 
commended that the administrators in these Systems consider a more exten¬ 
sive use of these procedures by adopting them as part of their organized 
orientation program. 

2. Since the administrators rated most of the suggested 
orientation techniques as being more frequently used, and more valuable, 
than did the new teachers, it is recommended that the suggestions of 

4 Ibid. 

^Strickland, loc . cit . 







100 


teachers who have been through an orientation program should be 
evaluated. In investigations set up to assess existing procedures, 
consideration should be given to what the "oriented group" have to 
say. A frank and objective appraisal should be made of what has worked, 
what has not been done well, and what has not been done in Separate 
School Systems in Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge. Thus, those in a 
position to improve the situation may be made aware of the importance 
to the welfare of their schools of an organized orientation program. 

This may encourage them to implement the findings of their study of 
orientation processes within their respective systems. 

3. Since the findings in this survey show the efficacy of 
orientation, the administrators should plan an orientation and in-service 
program to remedy the following deficiencies which have been discovered: 
the lack of help in (1) planning for and working with the gifted and 
retarded pupils, (2) developing better personal qualities as a teacher, 
and (3) making effective use of community resources that are available. 

4. To the student undertaking research in the division of 
educational administration: in view of the agreement between the results 
of this survey and those of American research, that future investigations 
on a larger scale be made in the Separate Schools of Alberta, of the 
other provinces of Canada and perhaps in Canadian schools in general, to 
evaluate existing procedures so that a worthwhile orientation program 
might be implemented by all school administrators. In this way all new 
teachers would receive the amount and type of help they needed most. 



' 





101 


Feeling secure in their work teachers would have fewer personality 
problems and would be freer to devote themselves to their pupils, and 
thus raise the tone of education in their particular areas. Research 
should result in such positive action. 






BIBLIOGRAPHY 


t&r: 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


REFERENCES ON ORIENTATION PROGRAMS FOR TEACHERS 

A. BOOKS 


Bartky, J. A. Supervision as Human Relations . Boston: D. C. Heath & Co., 
1953. 

Elsbree, Willard S., and Reutter, E. Edmund, Jr. Staff Personnel in the 
Public Schools . New York: Prentice-Hall, 1954. 

Eye, Glen G., and Lane, Willard R. New Teacher Comes to School . New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1956. 

Good, Carter V. Dictionary of Education . McGraw-Hill, 1945. 

Jacobson, P. B., Reavis, W. C. and Logsdon, J. D. The Effective School 
Principal . New York: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1954. 

Moore, Harold E., and Walters, Newell B. Personnel Administration in 
Education . New York: Harper and Brothers, 1955. 

Spears, Harold. Curriculum Planning Through In-Service Programs . 

Englewood Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1957. 

Weber, Clarence A. P ersonnel Problems of School Administrators . New 
York: McGraw-Hill Book Co., 1954. 

Wiles, Kimball. Supervision for Better Schools . New York: Prentice- 
Hall, 1952. 

Yeager, William A. Administration and the Teacher . New York: Harper 
and Brothers, 1954. 


B. PUBLICATIONS OF THE GOVERNMENT, LEARNED SOCIETIES, 
AND OTHER ORGANIZATIONS 


Alberta Catholic Education Association Bulletin 1948-1952. Official Organ 
of the Alberta Catholic Education Association published quarterly 
by Survivance Printing Ltd., 10510 - 109 Street, Edmonton, Alberta. 

















.1 










i 




« . 




.L 









104 


Alberta Department of Education. Annual Reports , 1950-1957. Edmonton, 
Queen's Printer. 

American Association of School Administrators. Off to a Good Start : 
Teacher Orientation . Washington, D. C.: The Association, a 
Department of the National Education Association, 1956. 

California State Department of Education. The Elementary School 

Program in California : Handbook for the Orientation of Teachers , 
(revised), Sacramento 14, California. Vol. XXVI, Bulletin No. 2, 
1957. 

Lewis, M. G. and Schneider, E., Education Brief . No. 33, United States 
Office of Education, (August, 1956) 

National Education Association, Department of Elementary School 

Principals. Bases for Effective Learning . Thirty-first Yearbook. 
Washington, D. C.: The Department, 1952. 

National Education Association, Research Division and American Asso¬ 
ciation of School Administrators. Teacher Orientation Programs in 
City School Systems . Educational Research Service Circular No. 8, 
1952. Washington, D. C.: The Association, (September, 1952). 

National Education Association, Research Division. "First-Year Teachers 
in 1954-55." Research Bulletin 34:1-48; (February, 1956). 


C. PERIODICALS 


Albraham, Willard. "How Are Your New Teachers Doing Now?" Educational 
Leadership XI (February, 1954). 

Amar, Benedict M. "Helping the Beginning Teachers," The National 
Elementary Principal . XXXII No. 1 (September, 1952), pp. 144-146. 

Anderson, Harold, A. "Orientating the New Teacher This Fall," School 
Review LX (September, 1952), P. 325. 

Barrat, Thomas K. "Help Your New Teachers," American School Board 
Journal CXXXII (June, 1956), p. 49. 

Bartels, Martin H. "Do Your Beginning Teachers Succeed," American 
School Board Journal CXXXII (May, 1956), pp. 33-34. 

Booth, Miriam B. "Helping the Beginning Teacher," Educational 

Administration and Supervision XXXI (January, 1948), pp. 53-60. 


























- 


C v -cJ I, (J 

J: J_ Oi i 









* -J.I O i 






, J r.' ja. , J .. ft . c : i.~ ..c 




o. 


h'H 3 



j’.ujj >.i f.v ■ -Ci - jift ' . . • i c J ' 

* d A. - > ' ,nu V-i 4 i. ' * ' ' -.) . < 'I.iuK v <. -Atfc „ AdA*’A 1 

■, < /' - j • s ,.u. ). ii.: * A : t ^ 

* • - A' * (- -‘A < - • . > ■ ‘ . : 

i.. \ < :• .i .... .r ... '.A.. - ■■.-<-iV c - 

„ 1 ■: 1 *. Ij < (i. t . - • w) J -- w:' J .li\ -■ L 

i'JH. ■- j [H/C < '■ " ViSJ i.’iti < Si I 

. A - c ,« a < , J . 1 - :: .w i. o(, . Xoodt^u 




. .. . 

IA 


i !• . i. 









105 


Card, B. Y. Population Trends in Alberta Affecting Teacher Demand and 
Supply , p. 2, The Alberta Journal of Educational Research 1:3 
(September, 1955), p. 17. 

Conklin, William. "Initial Orientation of New Teachers," American 
School Board Journal CXXV (May, 1952), pp. 38, 83. 

Conklin, William. "In-Service Orientation of the New Teacher," American 
School Board Journal CXXV (July, 1952), pp. 29-30. 

Downing, L. C. "How a Co-ordinator Works with Teachers and Principals," 
Educational Leadership (November, 1952), pp. 110-112. 

Ebey, George W. "How Portland Greets Its New Teachers," N ation 1 s 
Schools XLII (December, 1948), pp. 28-30. 

George, Lester., and others. "Orientation of New Teachers," Childhood 
Education XXX (September, 1953), pp. 9-11. 

Haynes, Vivien. "When a Good Start is Planned," Childhood Education 
XXIX (September, 1952), pp. 22-25. 

Homeier, G. A. Custer. "New Teachers Want Just Treatment, Positive 

Information," Nation 1 s Schools LIV, (September, 1954), pp. 51-53. 

Homeier, G. A. Custer. "How to Be Nice to New Teachers and Keep Them 

in the Profession," Nation 1 s Schools LIV (October, 1954), pp. 50-51. 

Lewis, Bess A. "Super" vision and the Beginning Teacher," Educational 
Leadership IV (November, 1946), p. 117. 

Morrow, Robert D. "Orienting Teachers and Pupils in Tuscan," Nation 1 s 
Schools XLVII (February, 1951), pp. 40-42. 

Prehm, Hazel. "New Teacher: The School Staff Can Help Him," Journal of 
the National Education Association XXXIX (September, 1950), 
pp. 436-37. 

Reynard, Harold E. "Beginning Teachers Select Their Schools," Educational 
Research Bulletin XXXVI (May, 1957), pp. 183-187. 

Shelly, Paul A. "Better Orientation for New Teachers," School Review 
LX (March, 1952), pp. 157-159. 

Spears, Harold. "What Disturbs the Beginning Teachers?" School Review 
LIII (1945), pp. 458-463. 

Stratton, Hazel S., and Ritcher, Charles 0. "I Feel Like an Old Hand," 
National Education Association Journal XL (May, 1959), pp. 334-35. 


































106 


Strickland, Evert C. "Orientation Programs for New Teachers in Ohio 

Schools,” Educational Research Bulletin XXXV No. 7, (October, 1956), 
pp. 169-175. 

Tate, M. W. "Induction of Secondary School Teachers," School Review 
LI (1943), pp. 150-157. 

Tower, Melvin M. "Orientation and In-Service Education Practices in 
Ninety-One School Systems in the United States," Educational 
Administration and Supervision XLII (April, 1956), pp. 219-29. 

Voxland, Melvin. "Orientation of New Teachers," National Association 
of Secondary School Principals XL (April, 1956), pp. 90-91. 

Whitehead, Matthew. "Teachers Look at Supervision," Educational 
Leadership (November, 1952). 


D. ENCYCLOPEDIA ARTICLE 


Research Division, NEA., "Teacner Personnel Procedures: Selection and 
Appointment," Research Bulletin XX (1942) pp. 1-79. Encyclopedia 
of Educational Research p. 1432. Edited by Walter S. Monroe. 

New York: Macmillan Co., 1950. 


F. UNPUBLISHED MATERIALS 


Cameron, D. Registrar of Department of Education. Letter . 

(May 7, 1958). 

Minutes of a One Day Conference, "Teacher Recruitment and Retention," 
Mimeographed Copy, Edmonton, (October 20, 1956), pp. 3, 10. 

Phimister, Z. S., "Introducing the New Teacher Into the School System," 
C.E.A. Short Course . Edmonton, Mimeographed Copy (May 16, 1957), 
pp. 1-9. 
















) ? A 


.. . • - ’ 

. ly 


r 


./GC.u 0 i ", 5 .. i‘ 1 f/ a 


A V 


• M", t \ / 


m 





n 






/ 










107 


H. NEWSPAPERS 


Barclay, Dorothy. "The Tests That Teacher Must Pass," New York Times 
Magazine . (February 19, 1956), p. 48. 

Canadian Teachers' Guide . VIII No. 1, Nelson's, Toronto, Ont. 

(Autumn, 1957), p. 5. 




















































APPENDIX A 














. 

.. 








■ 


















. 




















































109 


Instructions for Administering the Questionnaire 

As you are aware, during the past few years we have been faced 
with serious administration problems: supplying sufficient numbers of 
teachers and inducting teachers into our schools. A variety of tech¬ 
niques have been designed to help in personal and professional problems. 
Although many appear very successful, a careful examination of them may 
reveal a pattern of services that is limited in its assistance to new 
teachers. It is important for each school system to study the effective¬ 
ness of the provisions it makes for helping new teachers in adjusting 
quickly to their positions and to the school communities. One method of 
ascertaining whether or not these orientation programmes are really 
worthwhile is to learn the extent to which they help new teachers. 

In order to evaluate these techniques, I have proposed, "A Study 
of the Orientation Procedures for New Teachers in the Selected Separate 
School Systems of Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge. M 

To carry out this study, I have constructed a questionnaire for all 
new teachers to answer: i.e., all new teachers who are new to their 
present school as of September 1, 1957. In order to compare the adminis¬ 
trators* viewpoint with the teachers' viewpoint, it is hoped that all 
principals, supervisors, assistant superintendents and superintendents 
will complete PAGE ONE OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE. 

The data received from the questionnaire will be analyzed to 
appraise the methods of orientation and to endeavour to determine which 
procedures should be continued and which dropped. Your co-operation will 
be of great value and assistance. 

1. Please fill in all the information wanted on the front page. 

2. If you are an administrator (principal), give your viewpoint, as you 
know new teachers to use these techniques and obtain help from them. 

3. On Page One you are asked to place a check mark in the box on the 
left side of the page to indicate the frequency the listed technique 
has been used. Fill in the box on the left side of the named pro¬ 
cedure. If you don't know anything about such a procedure as name - 
place no check mark. If you know about these procedures but they 
are not used this year in your school - check never box. 

4. Some procedures are used quite frequently but they do not give the 
teacher much help. On the right side place a check mark in one of 
the four blocks to indicate how much help a new teacher gains from 
these procedures. 

5. On Page Two some of the items may seem to repeat themselves but I 
would like you to check them again. Check the box on the right side 










110 


and the box on the left side. We do want your honest opinion, so 
check what you feel helped you most in the things that you needed 
help. 

6. On Page Three we have a list of items that have been submitted by 
new teachers as problems during their first year of teaching. We 
call them adjustment problems. It usually takes some time to 
become adjusted to a new school, new staff, new community and new 
subjects to teach. Some of these are more serious than others. 
Grade the seriousness of these problems by placing "10" most 
serious, "5" less serious and "0" that are no trouble at all. 

7. On the right side place a check mark in the boxes opposite the 
problems with which you received help. 

8. Do not sign your name. 

9. Your help and co-operation is much appreciated. 


, ' 


uox0lqc S3 • ■ ■ oox o•'i:ou ■ 

i v J x/.il i'.X :o .'0 r £ : • >kJ. :0.i 1O.: D. r-u .■ w :;o ■); - 

- 

L , ii i yv.n-i ) il :Lo 3 3 1.1 n s /./ sou'iiY f.> 0 'B'i flO .d 

tC . fUTB . C . I - : 

(jj h.’.j ... ■-■. fj'ir; JX * slots. 0' o< q 3ro- < ■.■:■ ?rj Mr i'iBO 

w. x i .i: j:. ^A.;LXi-fv CO x 5 i i‘Cxo c w,<0 ts -r •> r. tjboxbb 

, ; .• ; . . - - - - , - • - 

•jiidr; 'll" y L M'"iq .seaiiJ x f fc^ftfcijo/u'yd axkvxb 

iv.'-. • ■ :... ' or!i t soul 00 B 


nXjiooqqo xx/'C-X j XXO; : jIo:.>bo b o..»B.Cq J OBJ it'* 

„ v Ji ; > V!:■ .. . H x v .J Ji:w axis •i’ to q 




:l 


111 


A ST JDY OF THiCi OkIiACTaTIuK TECHKI^UiirS IK YOUR SCHOOL SYSTiitf 

Administrators and supervisors are agreed on the need for 
jielping the beginning teachers. A variety of techniques have been 
designed to help in personal and professional problems. Although 

I iany appear very successful, a careful examination of them may reveal 
i pattern of services that is limited in its assistance to new 
,eachers. It is important for each school system to study the effec- 
,iveness ‘of the provisions it makes for helping new teachers in adjus¬ 
ting quickly to their positions and to the school communities. .One 
Method of ascertaining whether or not these orientation programmes 
lire really worth while is to learn the extent to which they help new 
I eac.hers. 

Your reactions as a teacher who is new to the school this last 
lertember constitute the real test of the effectiveness of the 
Orientation procedures of your system. Your frank and honest 
|Poraisal of these procedures will be helpful for determining which 
procedures should be continued and which dropped,. You may wish to 
,dd techniques which you have found useful. 

INSTRUCTIONS 


1. Superintendents and principals - complete this page and pa^e one 

2. ' Teachers new to Present School - who are teaching for the first 

time this vear in the present, school, complete the questionnaire. 

It ~ ~ ~ ~ ” 

I City.a . Your position (check) Teacher ?_ 1 principal 1 — .! 


q 


supervisor 



Assistant 


Superintendent 



Superintendent 



JR TEACHERS ONLY 


, Grades t aught,(circle) 1, 2, 3, 1, 3, 6, .7, 8, 9 , 10, 11, 12. 

I; Years of experience you have had in teaching any' grades one to 
twelve 

Check one f—{ Since September of last year 



am in my second year of teaching 
am in. my_year of teaching 


Humber of years of education beyond Grade All 
host recent year you have taken such training_ 


m TLA CHLitS AKD PRIN CIPA LS 

| our school there is:(check one) _ 

1. No orientation program - — 1 

2. Some incidental orientation L_J 

| 3. An organized program j_J 






























E 


V 




•’V’ 




■■yr _ .9 099 tul'? 

••• 4 $ 1 h "r\ o 



■kri 


v x. ■“ ■« •- ■' ^ ■ ‘ » •" r • 

- T cn.. i ’6 3’.' • "'Cf. u; ■ 9 : *;; f3; •;9 : * n - 

' 3,0 3 

. ■ . > ,• - ■, r 33. 

. ;r j : J ' 9 II ' . 

.i t ;■ ;/i ■ ; - 5 : 3 . : v ■' h ■; : 








J9 : 

. . 


3 .. 



| rt 0 V‘ . • f! ’ i 0 cl 

: . ' 3 

1, ,i If: - : ■ ■ : : ■ 

U .. . . ■. 

] ! .I ;cr.r-ViMq 




■(, ? } £S CfXO'sSi 




’ 

; . :■■■ 

9T . l: : >'. o 




j: isb 

: ..3 


O ■ 3 3.9 


"fri o 


. .,.3 




; k .3’,. 


;ei: r : /i*3iTi 


■ 


i 




FREQUENCY 


ORIjmvTATIOL TECHEI A xi»S 


Pa Gil 0 HE 


HELP 

IAIIvLD 


112 


DIRECTIONS : 

On the left chec < the frequency with which the 
beginning teacher encounters this orientation 
in your school, :id on the right the amount of 
help it provides 




jliU U 


ririaa 

D Cj a 

j a a a 

If Ej D Cj 
o □ a cj 
(□pa 7 
□ □□□ 8 
].'□□□ 9 


3. 

4. 

5. 


6 . 




i—■ 11. 

12 . 


j lJGL 
i □□ □ 

T: GJ Cl! 13 -* 

I! L J □ I S 

pQPii 

J □ □! { 


14. 

I 15 ' 

- 16 . 

-.17. 


I O □ LJ 


;18. 


JCJUU 


. 


10. 


J LJ □ L 


, 20 . 



0 

: I 

I 

1 1 

0 

•P 

o j Jd 

£ 

■P 

i hi i ° 

o 



rj 

1 

H ! 

[ rajs 


1. Bulletins from the School Board Office 


Group Conference with the suoervisois 
followin'? classroom visitation 
Individual Conference with the supervisor |—j 


LlfQP 




In-service workshops: i.e. arithmetic, 


social, studies, science 


, language, writin? 


O 


(( iG 


Pamphlets and other literature from the 
Department e.g. Guidance, Reading, Health 
An experienced teacher is assigned as a —j 

guide and helper during your first year 
Bulletins from the Department of Education*-— 
the Co irses of Study e. g.Enterprise, Health 
Frofesiional publications e.g. Grade 
Teacher 

Demonstration teaching by Principals 


□i: 

o 


Demonstration teaching by Supervisors 
General help from other teachers 


□ 

□ 

□ 


I i 


i LJ 


Activities of Professional Organizations- 
Local A.T.A. 

Special Supervisory services e.g. Physical 
Education. Music, Art, Guidance, Religion 
Assistance in making teaching aidls or 
devices 

General Staff meetings 


Handbocks for teachers from the board offic 
containing board regulations and policies 
New teachers are given the opportunity to 
observe other teachers within the system 
during regular classroom instruction 
Orientation meetings are held - at your 
central school and with your Principal 
in the school during the first week of 
school 

Any pre-school acquaintance-i.e. letter 
of welcome, teas for teachers, tours of 
the city, individual conference with the 
principal, assistance in .ocatino- housing 
Principals have ~roup and/cm individual 
conferences with new teachers for guidance 
in using school equipment e.r library 
and problems concerning instruction. 


t_Ll 

□ I 

DuD 

□ □□U 

□ □□□ 

ilj □□ □ 

□ □□c 

ljcicjQ 

tjucri: 

□ □□□ 


Hi n 


□□□□ 
□ 


Include any additional technique^) watTf which 
you are acquainted apd chP.rk aG a hn.r Q -- 
















































PARTTWO 


113 

Page Two 


pn each line below check(/) ONE BOX to indicate how much help you 
nave received this year from the various persons mentioned 


L. From Superintendents and Assistant 
Superintendents ... 

much 

□ 

Some 

□ 

Little 

□ 

None 

□ 

2. From principals . 

□ 

cm 

cm 

cm 

). From supervisors . 

im 

□ 

cm 

□ 


f. From fellow classroom teachers ... 

a 

□ 

a 

o 


? ART THRLil HE LP NbEDn D AND RE CEIVED 


^heck ( J) for each "type of possible help" listed below. OLE BOX on 
the LEFT SIDE to indicate how much help you NEEDED this year and One 
iOX on the RIGHT SIDE to indicate how much help you received. 


Amount of Help Needed 


'one 

Little 

Some Much 

m 

□ 

□a 1 - 

o 

j_i 

m 

a o' 

D 

U 

an 3 - 

□ 

□ 


h 

i 

□ 

am 5 ' 

□ 

a 

□ci 6 - 

b 

□ 

□Pg 

b 

a 

□□ 

m 

u 

aa 9. 


TYPES OF POSSIBLE HELP Amount of Help Received 


None Little Some Much 


Understanding the goals of 
the school 

Developing better personal 
Qualities as a teacher-voice 
poise emotional control, etc. 
Understanding and using 
special school services- 
standardized test results, 
health, remedial reading, etc 
making out and keeping 
official records and reports 
Understanding and using 
courses of study and 
curriculum guides 
Making effective use of 
community resources 
Handling disciplinary 
problems 

Planning for and working 
with gifted and retarded 
pupils 

Getting acquainted with the 
community and its people 


□ 

a 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

a 

□ 

□ 

□ 

a 

□ 

a 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

a 

□ 

D 

□ 

u 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 


ART FOUR 


ATTITUDE TOWARDS NEW TEACHERS 


heck one answer(V) 


en you first started to teach, what was the general attitude of 
ost of the other members of the staff towards you? 


riendly 


Indifferent . Unfriendly 


































r 


,h c ’Cf , 

■ ■ :;.~f ' 


C- 


'L. v 
"n.:rr 


' .w 


1 J 




•'I' 




? .i I 


' : ' i 


.^V-Lw ‘ r •• t. 


y .y.'“" u • v -o.['3a 

- rU ' BZfy. f 

..by . -f.V0 9.-i 

2 lZi§ 09 . ; ; rr b, y 

a.- A_ . •J/Tjj 

G - - £L" 


■U Q Q f 

yj g o L 

I 1 r~i . . r 


: - Gr-rv. 


: ll 

L O'" 


OJJ. 


HE'-: 


-l- ■ / 1 ■ 


■ i 


’ y • , -3 : 


J *■• ^ 


o fv 


! — J t/r. 


\~V ; - r- 


c 


• s i 

T; 


L ,, 


I , f 


r 


O i 

D i 


• ■ ; 
? : LL- r $ SvV 
y -Lv :g e , 

1 P#£ Vi;., 


j 

‘?sy 

y Tc. 


-3 O L 


Lll 

D 


% 


■71 ; -• 




;:aj 

- < •. 


! "a 

< 


' 1 V ' <•■ 


dr.-:-V 


.? Li 


1 r j 

r~i 

- ij Oo :V i: , f,, . 

b 7 Lb 


? { 

, — 



s-LL r; . 

• L ; /Lr. • v 

?... ...... 


• — : 


„L- -t : y 


J 1 j 


( \, 


•' 1 


■ ’XL 


lb 


EbScimy;,:; jg,/ 


0 •••• 


.■ L 








114 


i 

\RT FIVE SjlV^RITY O F THE ADJUSTMENT PROBLE MS PAGE THREE 

’RECTIONS: Rate the Severity of the adjustment problems by using* the scale. 
Scale:(0, no difficulty; 5, some difficulty; 10, much difficulty) 
Place a check mark against those with which you received help. 


r ,verity adjustment problems received 

HELP 

■ 5 10 

. 1. Finding: out what principal or supervisor thinks of your work 

. 2. Learning routine, records, reports . 

. 3. Obtainining enough books and supplies . 

.. A. Getting clear-cut information concerning school policies ... 

.. 5. Finding time for personal recreation . 

.. 6. Understanding the school philosophy . 

. 7. Learning about community traditions . 

. 8. Securing group meetings for problems . 

j. 9. Obtaining help with discipline problems . 

j. 10. School marks, evaluating pupil progress . 

. 11. Obtaining visual or audio teaching aids . 

..... 12. Securing information about course of study . 

. 13. Overcoming antagonistic attitudes of pupils . 

I . 14. Learning the extent of your authority . 

..... 13. Securing good living accommodations ..... 

;. 16. Organizing and planning classwork . 

. 17. Getting school to support modern methods .... 

.. 1$. Too few department or grade-level meetings .. 

19. Caring for extra-curricular activities . 

. 20. Getting teaching assignment early .. 


i 




21. Finding teachers your age . 

22. Getting access to supervisor when in need . 

23. Teaching outside area of preparation ... 

24. Having enough class visits by supervisor . 

25. Finding adequate recreational facilities. 

26. Carrying heavier load than other teachers ... 

27. Tolerating cliques of other teachers .. 

28. Having poorer classroom facilities than other teachers 

29. Getting enough conferences with supervisor . 

30. Hav ing many unrelated class preparations .. 

31. Securing co-operative attitude of teachers . 

32. Getting feeling of acceptance by faculty . 

33. Loneliness, finding social opportunities ... 

34. Getting sympathetic attitude of supervisor .... 

35. Have more problem pupils than other teachers . 

36. Obtaining friendly attitude of community . 

37. Accenting restriction on personal life . 

38. Getting to peach classes for which employed. 

PLEASE CHECK TO SEE THAT YOU DO NOT MISS THE RIGHT HAND 
COLUMN 

ALL PROBLEMS ARE RELATED TO THE NEW TEACHER 











































































































‘"*'As,r‘J«3. .' c - : o,; 

1 W 'V . 1 .-::: : &3os . w^.: . . 

• , - . ' *" —.Jg J ^n£c.r'f . '• > • ■) ; r . 

J.-JJv;. . .. 

'■'low 'Xi/ov ',.. „ , "... ... 

.... • -v..., ■ -... 

.. . . .." ■ ‘ 

.. " •. £'v. ... : : .. T . 

". — foa-i- ' • '. ...VI, A '" T ',J 

‘ *. ' : .. ; ; c>iom . 

.. 

.. ■■ --fi-l 

.••••:. . - v... 

. . . \. J iO£X[ ■ ... 

."•. .. ■■ . n 

. . - • .'.f. x/ ; . 1: n-u 

9 * v • • ’ • ? 

. 

; f■ .f. r .; ^ 

., , * ‘ i (. *: ‘ 1 •/;: •. 

’ ' * ’ " T ° ; ' r ' bo:' V.. ' ' o VI - r 'V*-- - - * 

. * * '.. ' . - n-i x 

.• ' fff' :,: f' A - :: o..,. . ■ ■ ” •' 

. vv.:v v , .. 

. ' j. x x ; l: : . ‘ I.., *1 - 

■ ".._ ' : ; , ' '"'it': x: ‘ At 

:::::: . V >;v -S 

. . . . 

■ ■■ ■' r -cu;.i^ ... 

. f V, ... r v>!: ,. r , ;; ■■■'■ • f 

' ‘I.:.: < , ‘‘ V 

.■ • • • - v .-u Vt ; ... •ia-'v''.', c? . f.f ’ 

" *; v 1 .-r 

‘ ■ ■'- 1 ' *}%{:. [ v . . .cv 

' • t . , , ( ; . . : ■ i' • ■" :f T?: • . h ’i 

. ; ; * '• " , 

, : ■ ", ■ ; - r «■ rsty^i 

: a ^ ...." 7 -a . 

•; .. ; • ... . u ;-~+9o\: ; ...., f f * ' . . 

r ‘ ^ ** 

. .. - -a ; J?* ' . ; : r • ’ 

; f .• ■ ■ v r,-. •’ . '' f ' • f 1 . ■■ ■... - ; v _ . - : 

J V; * ' ; * • 


.' r 












115 


9624 - 108 Avenue 
Edmonton, Alberta 
April 19, 1953 


Dear 


As you are aware, the problem of orientation of new 
teachers is often a difficult one for both principals 
and new teachers. To secure a recent survey, I have 
obtained permission to give teachers who were newly 
appointed on their present staff during 1957-53, a 
questionnaire, the items of which I have obtained from 
my own experience and related literature. 

This survey will not only benefit me, but other 
principals also, because I am willing to share my findings 
with them. 

May I ask a great favor? Would you please be kind 
enough to meet me at Sacred Heart School 10804 - 96 St., 
for a few minutes any time between 4-15 and 6:00 on 
Wednesday , April 23rd. Or if it would be more con¬ 
venient to contact me at Sacred Heart Convent, 

9624 - 108 Avenue, any evening up to 10 o’clock, before 
April 30th, I shall be glad to interview you at your 
convenience. 


Yours gratefully, 


Principal, St. Francis School 






9624 - 10# avenue 
Edmonton, Alberta 


116 


To the PRINCIPAL: 

Your permission is requested to have a questionnaire distributed 
through your schools. 

As you are aware, during the past few years we have been faced 
vith serious administration problems: supplying sufficient numbers 
)£ teachers and inducting teachers into our schools. A variety of 
techniques have been designed to help in personal and professional 
problems. In order to evaluate these techniques I have nroposed, 
a Study of the Orientation Procedures for New Teachers in the 
Selected Separate School Systems of Edmonton, Calgary and Lethbridge.' y 

To carry out this study, I have constructed a questionnaire for 
111 new tea c hers to answer; i.e. all new teachers who are new to their 
>resent school as of Sept. 1 , 1957. In order to comoare the 
j.dministrator ! s viewpoint with the new teacher f s viewpoint, it is 
.oped that all prihcioals, supervisors, assistant superintendents and 
i ur^erintendents will complete PAGE ONE of the questionnaire. 

The data received from the questionnaire will be analyzed to 
ppraise the methods of orientation and to endeavour to determine 
hich procedures should be continued and which dropped. 

For validity ourooses it is necessary that the questionnaire 
e given in April. The University authorities have granted me 
emission to use a personal acquaintance to contact your teachers, 

nd exolain the questionnaire. For your city .... 

ias kindly consented to do this. 


Your cooperation will be of great value and assistance. 














APPENDIX B 


ANALYSIS OF QUESTIONNAIRE 





FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM A 


118 


Orientation No Occasion- Regular- W'ghted Rank 

Practices _ Reply Never Seldom ally _Ly_ Totals Order 


Board 


bulletins 
Group conf. 

3 % 

0 % 

3 

supervisor 
Indiv. conf. 

12 

18 

21 

supervisor 

In-service 

12 

3 

9 

workshop 

Department 

18 

12 

12 

pamphlets 

Teacher 

21 

3 

21 

guide 

Department 

21 

21 

15 

bulletins 

Professional 

12 

3 

3 

publication 

Principal 

18 

9 

12 

demonstrates 

Supervisor 

21 

34 

18 

demonstrates 

Teachers* 

18 

24 

15 

help 

A.T.A. 

9 

0 

9 

local 

Supervisory 

27 

0 

27 

services 

Teaching 

9 

0 

3 

aids 

Staff 

18 

0 

21 

meetings 

Board 

3 

3 

3 

handbooks 

Observe 

9 

0 

0 

others 

Orientation 

12 

6 

36 

meetings 

Pre-school 

12 

0 

3 

acquaintance 
Principal* s 

24 

16 

6 

conference 

15 

3 

0 


18 7o 

76 % 

276 

1 

40 

9 

127 

17 

49 

27 

188 

9 

55 

3 

130 

16 

24 

31 

161 

11 

25 

18 

117 

18 

24 

58 

224 

5 

18 

43 

176 

10 

27 

0 

73 

20 

40 

3 

103 

19 

45 

37 

218 

7 

19 

27 

145 

13 

43 

45 

223 

6 

52 

9 

151 

12 

12 

79 

264 

2 

21 

70 

252 

3 

40 

6 

134 

15 

12 

73 

245 

4 

27 

27 

143 

14 

33 

49 

212 

8 







. .ll ■ 


.il'U .:. ri-. : ±X ’ .L d ' J,,- 'S.> U. Tv. u, 1 X..j :. X ; ’ .V-■ „;.!i .0 

. . • i IX H! 1 i . - 1 .. . 







. 

v X 


j. 




m ■. 


« , * 

. 


i 

!o 


.f ■ 


, . a. 

.... 


. v . 

.iii(1 

. ■ ; 


Oj J ... j. 

. oil > 

i; _• J .... .ui :> 

c-::■; *.>; / u u ■ 

i*V, ■ i it . ;.i ’ .j 

[ 






j 



ii - 

. • 




, 

V 














. 

. . 

.. •;■(..ltd 
■ . . i . 

,. r • Divi 







FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM B 


119 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

Never 

Seldom 

Occasion¬ 

ally 

Regular¬ 
ly 

W*ghted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

0 % 

0 % 

0 % 

45 7o 

55 % 

255 

2 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

5 

30 

30 

20 

15 

115 

13 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

5 

10 

15 

55 

15 

170 

9.5 

In-service 

workshop 

0 

65 

15 

20 

0 

55 

16 

Department 

pamphlets 

5 

5 

20 

60 

10 

170 

9.5 

Teacher 

guide 

5 

90 

0 

5 

0 

25 

18 

Department 

bulletins 

0 

0 

20 

55 

25 

205 

6.5 

Professional 

publication 

0 

40 

10 

15 

35 

145 

11 

Principal 

demonstrates 

0 

95 

0 

5 

0 

10 

19 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

0 

70 

25 

5 

0 

35 

17 

Teachers* 

help 

0 

5 

10 

60 

25 

205 

6.5 

A.T.A. 

local 

0 

5 

20 

30 

45 

215 

5 

Supervisory 

services 

0 

5 

5 

10 

80 

265 

1 

Teaching 

aids 

5 

20 

30 

30 

15 

135 

12 

Staff 

meetings 

0 

0 

5 

45 

50 

245 

3 

Board 

handbooks 

0 

70 

0 

15 

15 

75 

15 

Observe 

others 

0 

95 

5 

0 

0 

5 

20 

Orientation 

meetings 

0 

10 

10 

20 

60 

230 

4 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

5 

40 

25 

25 

5 

90 

14 

Principal* s 
conference 

0 

5 

25 

40 

30 

195 

8 






- 




■ •<-.. .•. ’.. v.(.. ;cl .I-. VULl '/«. ;' ; i 

r i .. • ■ •; .il ,Xi'k 


■j 


- 


1 


c 












t,. 




: 


<.’A (xo xlivJ no i-xQ 


, D 1 i 

■v<j aiv xv 4tij a 
o v 

- .. 

0 . qi ■ .d.V.\C,.v 

C J; J X i 

Jsj.'-.U ; 

- : . 

:;ij. j ' > ±. u >. i 
. VA oj J i . 

. :f - 

A ■_i J. „1 ,1 

- .v 

- < . 
A.yA l "i : j auiOi.-jivB 

f , . . 






c j; 


- 

. . 

/ ■ 

. : . . 

Li 11 

, f ' . : ... 




















FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY SCHOOL ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM C 


120 


Orientation No Occasion- Regular- W'ghted Rank 

Practices_Reply Never Seldom ally_ly_Totals Order 


Board 


bulletins 
Group conf. 

0 % 

0 % 

12.5% 

supervisor 
Indiv. conf. 

12.5 

75 

0 

supervisor 

In-service 

25 

37.5 

12.5 

workshop 

Department 

12.5 

12.5 

25 

pamphlets 

Teacher 

0 

12.5 

12.5 

guide 

Department 

12.5 

37.5 

12.5 

bulletins 

Professional 

0 

0 

12.5 

publications 

Principal 

12.5 

25 

0 

demonstrates 

Supervisor 

12.5 

62.5 

25 

demonstrates 

Teachers' 

12.5 

87.5 

0 

help 

A.T.A. 

0 

0 

12.5 

local 

Supervisory 

12.5 

0 

0 

services 

Teaching 

0 

0 

50 

aids 

Staff 

0 

12.5 

12.5 

meetings 

Board 

12.5 

0 

12.5 

handbooks 

Observe 

12.5 

62.5 

12.5 

others 

Orientation 

12.5 

87.5 

0 

meetings 

Pre-school 

12.5 

37.5 

0 

acquaintance 

Principal's 

0 

0 

0 

conference 

12.5 

12.5 

0 


62.5 % 

25 % 

212.5 

4.5 

12.5 

0 

25 

17.5 

25 

0 

62.5 

15 

50 

0 

125 

12 

62.5 

12.5 

175 

8.5 

12.5 

25 

112.5 

13.5 

12.5 

75 

262.5 

1 

25 

37.5 

162.5 

11 

0 

0 

25 

17.5 

0 

0 

0 

19 

75 

12.5 

200 

6 

50 

37.5 

212.5 

4.5 

25 

25 

175 

8.5 

50 

12.5 

182.5 

7 

0 

75 

237.5 

3 

12.5 

0 

37.5 

16 

0 

0 

0 

19 

37.5 

12.5 

112.5 

13.5 

50 

50 

250 

2 

50 

25 

175 

8.5 






kvy:i ; u . .V - , .'.s., . a; r &> y l .t;.. >i 

, - , 








FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM A 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

Never 

Seldom 

Occasion¬ 

ally 

Regular- 

ly 

W* ghted 
Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

0 % 

2 % 

2 % 

24 % 

72 7o 

266 

1 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

1 

33 

43 

18 

5 

94 

13 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

1 

7 

35 

47 

10 

159 

10 

In-service 

workshop 

6 

47 

21 

21 

5 

78 

16 

Department 

pamphlets 

2 

17 

24 

44 

13 

152 

11 

Teacher 

guide 

9 

66 

8 

10 

7 

49 

19 

Department 

bulletins 

1 

13 

20 

34 

32 

184 

5 

Professional 

publication 

6 

39 

18 

14 

23 

115 

12 

Principal 

demonstrates 

2 

74 

13 

11 

0 

35 

20 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

2 

57 

21 

20 

0 

61 

17 

Teachers 1 
help 

1 

13 

17 

50 

19 

174 

6 

A.T.A. 

local 

4 

19 

15 

16 

46 

185 

4 

Supervisory 

services 

5 

10 

18 

52 

15 

167 

9 

Teaching 

aids 

4 

47 

18 

24 

7 

87 

15 

Staff 

meetings 

1 

6 

19 

35 

39 

206 

3 

Board 

handbooks 

2 

5 

9 

20 

64 

241 

2 

Observe 

others 

2 

72 

6 

16 

4 

50 

18 

Orientation 

meetings 

4 

25 

15 

17 

39 

168 

7.5 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

4 

48 

18 

19 

11 

89 

14 

Principal* s 
conference 

1 

22 

15 

33 

29 

168 

7.5 







FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM B 


122 


Orientation No Occasion- Regular- W'ghted Rank 

Practices_Reply Never Seldom ally_Ly_Totals Order 


Board 


bulletins 
Group conf. 

1 % 

6 % 

6 

supervisor 
Indiv. conf. 

6 

55 

15 

supervisor 

In-service 

0 

9 

37 

workshop 

Department 

0 

88 

6 

pamphlets 

Teacher 

0 

21 

24 

guide 

Department 

0 

94 

6 

bulletins 

Professional 

3 

6 

49 

publication 

Principal 

0 

55 

6 

demonstrates 

Supervisor 

0 

100 

0 

demonstrates 
Teachers' 

0 

76 

9 

help 

A.T.A. 

0 

9 

21 

local 

Supervisory 

0 

3 

15 

services 

Teaching 

0 

3 

9 

aids 

Staff 

0 

58 

18 

meetings 

Board 

1 

3 

15 

handbooks 

Observe 

0 

58 

9 

others 

Orientation 

0 

91 

6 

meetings 

Pre-school 

0 

40 

15 

acquaintance 

Principals 

1 

36 

46 

conference 

1 

18 

27 


60 % 

27 1 

207 

4 

21 

3 

66 

15 

39 

15 

160 

7 

0 

6 

24 

17 

46 

9 

141 

9 

0 

0 

6 

19 

18 

24 

157 

8 

9 

30 

144 

11 

0 

0 

0 

20 

9 

6 

45 

16 

49 

21 

182 

5 

24 

58 

237 

2 

12 

76 

261 

1 

18 

6 

72 

14 

39 

42 

219 

3 

21 

12 

87 

12 

0 

3 

15 

18 

12 

33 

138 

10 

15 

3 

84 

13 

30 

24 

161 

6 










FREQUENCY OF USE OF SELECTED ORIENTATION PRACTICES AS REPORTED 
BY NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM C 


123 


Orientation No Occasion- Regular- W*ghted Rank 

Practices Reply Never Seldom ally_ly_Totals Order 


Board 


bulletins 
Group conf. 

0 % 

6 % 

25 

supervisor 
Indiv. conf. 

6 

69 

19 

supervisor 

In-service 

6 

50 

13 

workshop 

Department 

6 

56 

19 

pamphlets 

Teacher 

0 

19 

25 

guide 

Department 

0 

88 

6 

bulletins 

Professional 

0 

6 

6 

publication 

Principal 

0 

75 

13 

demonstrates 

Supervisor 

0 

81 

0 

demonstrates 
Teachers * 

0 

94 

6 

help 

A.T.A. 

0 

13 

25 

local 

Supervisory 

0 

31 

13 

services 

Teaching 

0 

75 

6 

aids 

Staff 

0 

69 

19 

meetings 

Board 

0 

0 

31 

handbooks 

Observe 

0 

56 

31 

others 

Orientation 

0 

94 

0 

meetings 

Pre-school 

6 

44 

25 

acquaintance 0 
Principal* s 

13 

25 

conference 

6 

38 

19 


38 % 

31 % 

194 

4 

6 

0 

31 

17 

31 

0 

75 

10 

13 

6 

63 

11 

4 

19 

156 

5.5 

6 

0 

19 

18 

44 

44 

225 

1 

6 

6 

44 

14.5 

19 

0 

38 

16 

0 

0 

6 

20 

56 

6 

156 

5.5 

31 

25 

150 

7 

13 

6 

50 

13 

13 

0 

44 

14.5 

19 

50 

219 

2 

13 

0 

56 

12 

6 

0 

13 

19 

12.5 

12.5 

88 

9 

6 

56 

206 

3 

31 

6 

100 

8 









HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM A 


124 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

9 % 

0 % 

0 % 

49 % 

42 % 

224 

3 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

18 

0 

3 

33 

36 

178 

9 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

18 

6 

6 

30 

39 

185 

7 

In-service 

workshop 

21 

6 

15 

39 

18 

148 

11 

Department 

pamphlets 

21 

3 

21 

43 

12 

142 

13 

Teacher 

guide 

27 

15 

3 

18 

37 

147 

12 

Department 

bulletins 

21 

3 

9 

42 

24 

167 

10 

Professional 

publication 

21 

8 

15 

44 

12 

140 

15 

Principal 

demonstrates 

33 

21 

15 

12 

18 

105 

20 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

36 

12 

6 

12 

33 

130 

18 

Teachers 1 
help 

12 

0 

9 

42 

36 

203 

5 

A.T.A. 

local 

31 

0 

33 

27 

9 

115 

19 

Supervisory 

services 

9 

0 

3 

39 

48 

275 

1 

Teaching 

aids 

24 

0 

24 

36 

15 

141 

14 

Staff 

meetings 

3 

3 

0 

60 

33 

219 

4 

Board 

handbooks 

12 

0 

0 

39 

49 

225 

2 

Observe 

others 

18 

9 

21 

36 

15 

138 

16 

Orientation 

meetings 

15 

0 

0 

57 

27 

195 

6 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

31 

12 

6 

24 

27 

135 

17 

Principals 

conference 

21 

0 

6 

42 

30 

180 

8 











HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM B 


125 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

0 % 

0 % 

0 % 

45 % 

55 % 

255 

1 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

25 

10 

5 

25 

35 

160 

10.5 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

10 

5 

5 

55 

25 

190 

8 

In-service 

workshop 

20 

45 

5 

30 

0 

65 

15.5 

Department 

pamphlets 

5 

0 

20 

60 

15 

185 

9 

Teacher 

guide 

35 

45 

5 

5 

10 

45 

18 

Department 

bulletins 

0 

0 

10 

45 

45 

235 

2.5 

Professional 

publication 

15 

25 

10 

30 

20 

130 

13 

Principal 

demonstrates 

35 

60 

5 

0 

0 

5 

20 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

35 

35 

10 

20 

0 

50 

17 

Teachers * 
help 

5 

0 

10 

45 

40 

220 

5 

A.T.A. 

local 

5 

5 

30 

50 

10 

160 

10.5 

Supervisory 

services 

0 

0 

5 

45 

50 

195 

6.5 

Teaching 

aids 

20 

0 

25 

45 

10 

145 

12 

Staff 

meetings 

0 

5 

5 

40 

50 

235 

2.5 

Board 

handbooks 

20 

50 

5 

15 

10 

65 

15.5 

Observe 

others 

25 

65 

5 

5 

0 

15 

19 

Orientation 

meetings 

0 

5 

15 

30 

50 

225 

4 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

10 

25 

10 

50 

5 

125 

14 

Principal* s 
conference 

5 

0 

20 

50 

25 

175 

6.5 











HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
ADMINISTRATORS IN SYSTEM C 


126 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 
Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

0 Z 

0 Z 

0 Z 

75 Z 

25 Z 

225 

2.5 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

25 

50 

12.5 

12.5 

0 

37.5 

17 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

25 

37.5 

12.5 

12.5 

12.5 

75 

14 

In-service 

workshop 

12.5 

12.5 

0 

50 

25 

175 

6.5 

Department 

pamphlets 

0 

12.5 

0 

75 

12.5 

187.5 

5 

Teacher 

guide 

25 

37.5 

0 

25 

12.5 

87.5 

13 

Department 

bulletins 

0 

12.5 

0 

25 

62.5 

237.5 

1 

Professional 

publications 

12.5 

25 

0 

62.5 

0 

125 

9.5 

Principal 

demonstrates 

25 

62.5 

0 

12.5 

0 

25 

18 

Supervisor 

demonstrated 

25 

75 

0 

0 

0 

0 

19.5 

Teachers* 

help 

0 

0 

0 

75 

25 

225 

2.5 

A.T.A. 

local 

12.5 

12.5 

25 

50 

0 

125 

9.5 

Supervisory 

services 

12.5 

50 

12.5 

25 

0 

62.5 

15 

Teaching 

aids 

12.5 

12.5 

25 

50 

0 

125 

9.5 

Staff 

meetings 

25 

0 

0 

50 

25 

175 

6.5 

Board 

handbooks 

25 

50 

0 

25 

0 

50 

16 

Observe 

others 

25 

75 

0 

0 

0 

0 

19.5 

Orientation 

meetings 

12.5 

37.5 

0 

50 

0 

100 

12 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

Principal's 

conference 

0 

0 

0 

75 

25 

225 

2.5 

12.5 

12.5 

0 

75 

0 

150 

8 









. . 

_ 

Li 




. 




■ . . • 

...''J i.rto 

. 




# 1 . - 


■ 

... . : ■ ■ 

_ 

.. 

: - 









HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM A 


127 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

2 % 

2 % 

5 % 

54 % 

37 % 

224 

2 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

7 

29 

10 

37 

17 

95 

15 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

8 

7 

13 

42 

30 

187 

6 

In-service 

workshop 

14 

42 

13 

21 

10 

85 

17 

Department 

pamphlets 

7 

18 

24 

42 

9 

135 

10 

Teacher 

guide 

13 

56 

6 

12 

13 

69 

18 

Department 

bulletins 

5 

13 

14 

39 

29 

179 

8 

Professional 

publication 

12 

33 

15 

28 

12 

107 

12 

Principal 

demonstrates 

14 

58 

7 

12 

9 

58 

20 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

10 

46 

7 

22 

15 

96 

14 

Teachers 1 
help 

4 

11 

9 

41 

35 

196 

4 

A.T.A. 

local 

5 

22 

24 

37 

12 

134 

11 

Supervisory 

services 

7 

10 

13 

32 

38 

191 

15 

Teaching 

aids 

8 

44 

7 

28 

13 

102 

13 

Staff 

meetings 

3 

8 

13 

39 

37 

202 

3 

Board 

handbooks 

4 

4 

4 

41 

47 

227 

1 

Observe 

others 

11 

61 

5 

10 

13 

64 

19 

Orientation 

meetings 

8 

21 

4 

27 

40 

178 

9 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

10 

44 

16 

12 

18 

84 

16 

Principal's 

conference 

4 

20 

7 

28 

41 

186 

7 













HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM B 


128 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 
Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

0 % 

9 

9 % 

58 % 

24 % 

197 

5 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

9 

49 

15 

9 

18 

87 

15 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

0 

12 

0 

30 

58 

234 

1 

In-service 

workshop 

3 

79 

3 

6 

9 

42 

17 

Department 

pamphlets 

0 

21 

18 

52 

9 

149 

9 

Teacher 

guide 

3 

85 

0 

6 

6 

30 

18 

Department 

bulletins 

3 

9 

21 

43 

24 

179 

7 

Professional 

publication 

0 

52 

9 

24 

15 

102 

12 

Principal 

demonstrates 

0 

97 

3 

0 

0 

3 

20 

Supervisor 

demonstrates 

0 

76 

0 

12 

12 

60 

16 

Teachers' 
help 

0 

12 

12 

36 

40 

204 

4 

A.T.A. 

local 

0 

30 

24 

40 

6 

122 

10 

Supervisory 

services 

0 

3 

15 

33 

49 

228 

2 

Teaching 

aids 

0 

55 

15 

12 

18 

95 

14 

Staff 

meetings 

0 

6 

12 

42 

40 

216 

3 

Board 

handbooks 

0 

58 

0 

30 

12 

96 

13 

Observe 

others 

0 

91 

3 

6 

0 

15 

19 

Orientation 

meetings 

0 

34 

3 

21 

42 

171 

8 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

Principals' 

conference 

0 

37 

18 

33 

12 

120 

11 

0 

15 

18 

27 

40 

192 

6 




















. 









. 






Uu~ 

- 

1 

. . 







HELP GAINED FROM ORIENTATION PRACTICES INDICATED BY 
NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEM B 


129 


Orientation 

Practices 

No 

Reply 

None 

Little 

Some 

Much 

W'ghted 

Totals 

Rank 

Order 

Board 

bulletins 

6 °L 

19% 

19 % 

37 % 

19 % 

150 

3 

Group conf. 
supervisor 

19 

56 

13 

6 

6 

43 

16 

Indiv. conf. 
supervisor 

19 

36 

13 

13 

19 

96 

9 

In-service 

workshop 

13 

56 

0 

25 

6 

68 

11 

Department 

pamphlets 

13 

13 

37 

31 

6 

57 

13 

Teacher 

guide 

19 

75 

0 

6 

0 

12 

20 

Department 

bulletins 

6 

0 

6 

38 

50 

232 

1 

Professional 

publications 

19 

56 

6 

13 

6 

50 

14.5 

Principal 
demonstrates 

19 

69 

0 

12 

0 

24 

17.5 

Supervisor > 
demonstrates 

19 

69 

0 

12 

0 

24 

17.5 

Teachers 1 
help 

6 

12 

19 

44 

19 

164 

2 

A.T.A. 

local 

7 

25 

12 

44 

12 

124 

6 

Supervisory 

services 

19 

56 

6 

13 

6 

50 

14.5 

Teaching 

aids 

19 

50 

6 

19 

6 

62 

12 

Staff 

meetings 

6 

6 

38 

44 

6 

144 

4 

Board 

handbooks 

13 

44 

6 

25 

12 

92 

10 

Observe 

others 

19 

75 

0 

0 

6 

18 

19 

Orientation 

meetings 

6 

50 

6 

19 

19 

101 

8 

Pre-school 

acquaintance 

Principal's 

conference 

13 

19 

19 

37 

12 

129 

5 

6 

37 

19 

19 

19 

114 

7 








■ 



' : . jj . 












• i. iiu. • ■ ' 









. 

-•■j-:.. • i * iij . 




.... 1... ‘ .. V j 




..' .’"V .: <: - t.. ; . 

' . 

' 

*>tj i.'.'V 




uiy. , 






*;r;« -j c ,. 

. . . i ij ... i 







‘ 





.... . 


; 

. ■ 





■ 

. . . . i • 

t o. .. JL>. i i:; J "vU. 

■ : ....i V'/ O '. v 

.... 










TABLE XXVI 


130 


ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED IN SYSTEM A 


Severity 

Rank 

Average 

Adjustment Problems 

Per Cent 
Helped 

4 

3.3 

Being evaluated by supervisors 

37 7o 

2 

3.8 

Learning routine, records, reports 

64 

I 

4.1 

Obtaining books and supplies 

62 

5 

3.2 

Understanding clearly school policies 

55 

6 

3.1 

Finding time for personal recreation 

17 

9 

2.9 

Understanding the school philosophy 

36 

10 

2.8 

Learning about community traditions 

33 

7.5 

3.0 

Securing group meetings for problems 

18 

13 

2.6 

Getting help with discipline problems 

53 

11.5 

2.7 

Evaluating pupil progress 

45 

3 

3.8 

Obtaining teaching aids 

38 

15 

2.5 

Securing information about curriculum 

40 

17.5 

2.1 

Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

33 

14 

2.5 

Learning the extent of your authority 

39 

26.5 

1.5 

Securing good living accomodations 

8 

11.5 

2.7 

Organizing and planning classwork 

27 

37 

.8 

Getting support for modern methods 

9 

7.5 

3.0 

Too few grade-level meetings 

13 

24.5 

1.6 

Caring for extra-curricular activities 

14 

23 

1.7 

Getting teaching assignment early 

13 

32.5 

1.1 

Finding teachers your age 

3 

19.5 

2.1 

Getting access to supervisor 

17 

19.5 

2.1 

Teaching outside area of preparation 

11 

17.5 

2.1 

Having class visits by supervisor 

11 

21 

2.0 

Finding recreational facilities 

12 

29 

1.2 

Carrying heavier load than others 

12 

35.5 

.95 

Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

2 

26.5 

1.4 

Having poor classroom facilities 

9 

16 

2.3 

Getting conferences with supervisor 

11 

24.5 

1.6 

Having unrelated class preparations 

6 

34 

1.0 

Securing co-operation of teachers 

17 

22 

1.8 

Being accepted by faculty 

18 

38 

.7 

Finding social opportunities 

7 

30.5 

1.1 

Getting sympathy of supervisor 

3 

28 

1.4 

Having more problem pupils than others 

16 

30.5 

1.1 

Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

11 

32.5 

1.1 

Accepting restriction of personal life 

4 

35.5 

.95 

Teaching classes for which employed 

15 












.. 

v.l 





. 



. 





- 


2 ■ 


. > 


* 


.. . - • 

.. - i i 


. 

...... - - • • 

....... ' ■ ■. 


; . - ' ' . ...•• 

... - ■ 

... .. • 




. 






. 

. .... -. 

. . ■ ' ' 


_ ; ... . .. . .. . • . ... 

. 

. . 













TABLE XXVII 


131 


ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED IN SYSTEM B 


Severity 

Rank 

Average 

Adjustment Problems 

Per Cent 
Helped 

13.5 

1.8 

Being evaluated by supervisors 

39 % 

7.5 

2.7 

Learning routine, records, reports 

67 

1 

5.6 

Obtaining books and supplies 

61 

2 

4.2 

Understanding clearly school policies 

55 

17.5 

1.4 

Finding time for personal recreation 

24 

27.5 

.7 

Understanding the school philosophy 

30 

15 

1.7 

Learning about community traditions 

42 

9 

2.7 

Securing group meetings for problems 

30 

13.5 

1.8 

Getting help with discipline problems 

58 

11 

2.4 

Evaluating pupil progress 

61 

3 

3.8 

Obtaining teaching aids 

42 

5.5 

2.9 

Securing information about curriculum 

36 

17.5 

1.4 

Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

33 

7.5 

2.7 

Learning the extent of your authority 

36 

12 

2.1 

Securing good living accomodations 

21 

10 

2.6 

Organizing and planning classwork 

45 

16 

1.5 

Getting support for modern methods 

18 

4 

3.5 

Too few grade-level meetings 

18 

23.5 

.9 

Caring for extra-curricular activities 

18 

5.5 

2.9 

Getting teaching assignment early 

30 

30.5 

.6 

Finding teachers your age 

27 

30.5 

.6 

Getting access to supervisor 

30 

23.5 

.9 

Teaching outside area of preparation 

30 

21.5 

1.1 

Having class visits by supervisor 

21 

21.5 

1.1 

Finding recreational facilities 

27 

32.5 

.4 

Carrying heavier load than others 

15 

32.5 

.4 

Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

15 

34.5 

.3 

Having poor classroom facilities 

21 

27.5 

.7 

Getting conferences with supervisor 

27 

26 

.8 

Having unrelated class preparations 

21 

19.5 

1.2 

Securing co-operation of teachers 

24 

34.5 

.3 

Being accepted by faculty 

21 

23.5 

.9 

Finding social opportunities 

18 

27.5 

.7 

Getting sympathy of supervisor 

15 

19.5 

1.2 

Having more problem pupils than others 

24 

34.5 

.3 

Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

24 

38 

.0 

Accepting restriction on personal life 

9 

37 

.2 

Teaching classes for which employed 

15 











TABLE XXVIII 


132 


ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED IN SYSTEM C 


Severity 

Rank 

Average 

Adjustment Problems 

Per Cent 
Helped 

2 

5 

Being evaluated by supervisors 

13 % 

4.5 

3.8 

Learning routine, records, reports 

38 

9.5 

2.8 

Obtaining books and supplies 

44 

3 

4.7 

Understanding clearly school policies 

56 

6.5 

3.4 

Finding time for personal recreation 

13 

14 

2.5 

Understanding the school philosophy 

50 

9.5 

2.8 

Learning about community traditions 

19 

1 

5.6 

Securing group meetings for problems 

44 

19.5 

1.9 

Getting help with discipline problems 

44 

6.5 

3.4 

Evaluating pupil progress 

31 

8 

3.1 

Obtaining teaching aids 

38 

9.5 

2.8 

Securing information about curriculum 

31 

21.5 

1.6 

Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

13 

9.5 

2.8 

Learning the extent of your authority 

31 

24.5 

1.3 

Securing good living accomodations 

0 

15.5 

2.5 

Organizing and planning classwork 

0 

21.5 

1.6 

Getting support for modern methods 

13 

4.5 

3.8 

Too few grade-level meetings 

19 

15.5 

2.5 

Caring for extra-curricular activities 

19 

21.5 

1.6 

Getting teaching assignment early 

13 

28.5 

.6 

Finding teachers your age 

13 

24.5 

1.3 

Getting access to supervisor 

6 

19.5 

1.9 

Teaching outside area of preparation 

6 

27 

.9 

Having class visits by supervisor 

0 

28.5 

.6 

Finding recreational facilities 

6 

9.5 

2.8 

Carrying heavier load than others 

6 

28.5 

.6 

Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

0 

33.5 

.3 

Having poor classroom facilities 

0 

33.5 

.3 

Getting conferences with supervisor 

6 

17.5 

2.2 

Having unrelated class preparations 

6 

28.5 

.6 

Securing co-operation of teachers 

0 

37 

.0 

Being accepted by faculty 

6 

38 

.0 

Finding social opportunities 

6 

33.5 

.3 

Getting sympathy of supervisor 

0 

24.5 

1.3 

Having more problem pupils than others 

6 

33.5 

.3 

Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

6 

28.5 

.6 

Accepting restriction on personal life 

6 

17.5 

2.2 

Teaching classes for which employed 

13 




















TABLE XXIX 


133 


ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED BY FIRST-YEAR TEACHERS 


Severity 

Rank 

Average 

Adjustment Problems 

Per Cent 
Helped 

10 

3.7 

Being evaluated by supervisors 

23 7o 

4.5 

4.4 

Learning routine, records, reports 

73 

2 

5.2 

Obtaining books and supplies 

69 

6.5 

4.0 

Understanding clearly school policies 

62 

13 

3.3 

Finding time for personal recreation 

12 

15 

2.7 

Understanding the school philosophy 

27 

18 

1.9 

Learning about community traditions 

35 

11.5 

3.5 

Securing group meetings for problems 

23 

6.5 

4.0 

Getting help with discipline problems 

73 

11.5 

3.5 

Evaluating pupil progress 

62 

3 

4.8 

Obtaining teaching aids 

35 

14 

3.1 

Securing information about curriculum 

39 

8.5 

3.8 

Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

39 

1 

5.5 

Learning the extent of your authority 

58 

35 

1.0 

Securing good living accomodations 

12 

4.5 

4.4 

Organizing and planning classwork 

31 

32.5 

1.2 

Getting support for modern methods 

15 

8.5 

3.8 

Too few grade-level meetings 

12 

21.5 

1.5 

Caring for extra-curricular activities 

8 

16 

2.5 

Getting teaching assignment early 

27 

19 

1.7 

Finding teachers your age 

23 

21.5 

1.5 

Getting access to supervisor 

23 

21.5 

1.5 

Teaching outside area of preparation 

19 

31 

1.2 

Having class visits by supervisor 

15 

21.5 

1.5 

Finding recreational facilities 

23 

21.5 

1.5 

Carrying heavier load than others 

19 

27.5 

1.3 

Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

8 

36.5 

.8 

Having poor classroom facilities 

12 

17 

2.3 

Getting conferences with supervisor 

15 

27.5 

1.3 

Having unrelated class preparations 

19 

27.5 

1.3 

Securing co-operation of teachers 

23 

20 

1.6 

Being accepted by faculty 

23 

32.5 

1.2 

Finding social opportunities 

19 

36.5 

.8 

Getting sympathy of supervisor 

27 

21.5 

1.5 

Having more problem pupils than others 

39 

38 

.4 

Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

15 

27.5 

1.3 

Accepting restriction on personal life 

8 

32.5 

1.2 

Teaching classes for which employed 

23 










Rank 

7 

3 

1 

2 

9 

12 

8 

5 

15 

10 

4 

11 

16.5 

14 

20 

13 

30.5 

6 

23 

28 

35 

21 

16.5 

16.5 

16.5 

29 

36 

26 

22 

24 

32.5 

27 

38 

30.5 

25 

32.5 

37 

34 


TABLE XXX 


134 


ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED BY EXPERIENCED NEW TEACHERS 


Average Adjustment Problems 


Percent 

Helped 


3.0 Being evaluated by supervisors 37 % 

3.4 Learning routine, records, reports 62 

4.1 Obtaining books and supplies 60 

3.5 Understanding clearly school policies 55 

2.7 Finding time for personal recreation 11 

2.3 Understanding the school philosophy 30 

2.8 Learning about community traditions 36 

3.2 Securing group meetings for problems 24 

2.0 Getting help with discipline problems 50 

2.5 Evaluating pupil progress 41 

3.3 Obtaining teaching aids 42 

2.5 Securing information about curriculum 40 

1.8 Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 29 

2.2 Learning the extent of your authority 34 

1.7 Securing good living accommodations 12 

2.3 Organizing and planning classwork 29 

.97 Getting support for modern methods 11 

3.1 Too few grade-level meetings 15 

1.5 Caring for extra-curricular activities 17 

1.1 Getting teaching assignment early 15 

.7 Finding teachers your age 7 

1.7 Getting access to supervisor 18 

1.8 Teaching outside area of preparation 13 

1.8 Having class visits by supervisor 12 

1.8 Finding recreational facilities 13 

1.0 Carrying heavier load than others 11 

.7 Tolerating cliques of other teachers 6 

1.2 Having poor classroom facilities 11 

1.6 Getting conferences with supervisor 13 

1.5 Having unrelated class preparations 5 

.9 Securing co-operation of teachers 15 

1.1 Being accepted by faculty 15 

.5 Finding social opportunities 8 

.97 Getting sympathy of supervisor 11 

1.4 Having more problem pupils than others 15 

.9 Obtaining friendly attitude of community 13 

.65 Accepting restriction on personal life 5 

.85 Teaching classes for which employed 14 












. ANALYSIS RE: SERIOUSNESS OF ADJUSTMENT PROBLEMS AND HELP 
RECEIVED BY ALL NEW TEACHERS IN SYSTEMS A, B, C 


135 


Severity 

Rank 

Average 

Adjustment Problems 

Per Cent 
Helped 

7 

3.2 

Being evaluated by supervisors 

35 % 

4 

3.6 

Learning routine, records, reports 

64 

1 

4.4 

Obtaining books and supplies 

62 

3 

3.6 

Understanding clearly school policies 

55 

8 

2.8 

Finding time for personal recreation 

18 

15 

2.4 

Understanding the school philosophy 

36 

10.5 

2.7 

Learning about community traditions 

36 

6 

3.2 

Securing group meetings for problems 

24 

16 

2.3 

Getting help with discipline problems 

54 

9 

2.7 

Evaluating pupil progress 

44 

2 

4.3 

Obtaining teaching aids 

40 

13 

2.6 

Securing information about curriculum 

40 

17 

2.1 

Overcoming poor attitudes of pupils 

31 

12 

2.6 

Learning the extent of your authority 

38 

23 

1.6 

Securing good living accomodations 

12 

10.5 

2.7 

Organizing and planning classwork 

30 

29.5 

1.0 

Getting support for modern methods 

11 

5 

3.3 

Too few grade-level meetings 

15 

24 

1.5 

Caring for extra-curricular activities 

15 

18 

.2.0 

Getting teaching assignment early 

17 

33.5 

.9 

Finding teachers your age 

9 

22 

1.6 

Getting access to supervisor 

19 

19 

1.8 

Teaching outside area of preparation 

14 

14 

2.4 

Having class visits by supervisor 

13 

25 

1.5 

Finding recreational facilities 

15 

28 

1.1 

Carrying heavier load than others 

12 

20 

1.7 

Tolerating cliques of other teachers 

6 

29.5 

1.0 

Having poor classroom facilities 

11 

21 

1.7 

Getting conferences with supervisor 

13 

36 

.8 

Having unrelated class preparations 

7 

29.5 

1.0 

Securing co-operation of teachers 

17 

27 

1.2 

Being accepted by faculty 

17 

38 

.6 

Finding social opportunities 

10 

32 

.9 

Getting sympathy of supervisor 

14 

26 

1.4 

Having more problem pupils than others 

20 

35 

.83 

Obtaining friendly attitude of community 

13 

37 

.77 

Accepting restriction on personal life 

5 

33.5 

.9 

Teaching classes for which employed 

15 



























