For Reference 

NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


1 

STUDIES OH INTERMEDIATE PRODUCTS I 
OP SUAHIHB HYDE01YSIS 

uy 

IS YD ORE HIYNKA 











0.X MBBW 

rawiasnaas 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studiesonintermeOOisyd 



STUDIES 035T 


IUTERMEDI ATE PRODUCTS OF GUAUIUE HYDROLYSIS 


Isydore Hlynka B. Sc, 


A thesis submitted from the Department of Biochemistry 
in large part fulfilment of the requirements for the 
degree of Master of Science at the University of Alberta. 


1937 








.OKNOWLEDfiEMENT 


The writer gratefully acknowledges his indentedness 
to Prof. Hunter for his invaluable guidance and 
assistance throughout the progress of the investigation. 









TABLE OF C OUT MTS 


Page 

Introduction... 1 

Part I. 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-}CarLamidoglyoxaline..5 

Reagents.. 7 

Method. 10 

Part II. 

Subsequent Intermediates of Hydrolysis.14 

4- (or 5- jAminoglyoxaline.. .15 

Methods of Preparation of 4-(or 5-)toino- 

glyoxaline.. 18 

Preparation of a Relatively Pure and Concentrated 

Solution of 4-(or 5-jAminoglyoxaline..20 

Attempts at Isolation of 4-(or 5-)amino- 

glyoxaline. 21 

4-glyoxalone and Indigoid Formation.... .....25 

Preparation of 4^4 T *~ Hydroxydiglyoxaline 5. ....29 

Preparation of ^ 4,4*-diglyoxalone 5... 31 

Conclusion... 33 

Summary .. •••••34 

















J 














APPENDIX 


Action of KgFefc^on 4-(or 5-)guanidinoglyosaline...36 
Blue Reduction Pigment from 4-(or 5-)nitro- 

glyoxaline. ••••*.«•.. ...36 

A Rote on the Preparation of Purines and 

Pyrimidines from Nucleic Acid........ ..37 

Purines ......... 37 

Pyrimidines. . .... •••• ..40 

Bibliography. ......42 












INTRODUCTION 


Present knowledge of the intermediate compounds formed 
during the course of hydrolysis of guanine is incomplete. 
The early workers studied the end products as well as 
the more stable intermediates. The study of unstable 
intermediates, however, has been deferred to our day. 

In 1893 Wulff decomposed guanine by heating it 

with concentrated HC1 in a sealed bomb. The reaction 

is represented by the equation 

C 5 H 5 N 5 0 + 7H 2 0—”> 4NHg H- OgHglOg -r 2CQ2 -I- CH £ 0 2 
guanine glycine formic acid 

Wheeler [1907] showed that when guanine, mixed 
with carbohydrate, is heated with 30-405? sulphuric acid, 
hydrolysis and reduction take place at the same time; 
the glyoxaline nucleus is broken and isocytosine and 
uracil result, 



isocytosine uracil 

























. 










■ 

. 


' 





























Fischer [191(3 hydrolysed guanine hy refluxing it 
with 20$ hydrochloric acid for 30 hours with a 50$ 
conversion into xanthine; the remainder was unaccounted 
for. 

Xanthine, an intermediate hydrolytic product, is 
itself broken down by HC1 to ammonia, carbon dioxide, 
formic acid and glycine as ultimate products. Only 
partial decomposition takes place at 180° ; for 
complete hydrolysis the heating must be carried on for 
some hours at 220-23(f |e. Schmidt, 1883 j. 

The problem of hydrolysis of guanine and its 
decomposition products was further studied in this 
laboratory by Hunter jl936j. It was shown that 
when guanine is autoclaved with 3.4N HC1 at 158° for 
1.5 hours the main reaction is, 


n° 




j>CH +-H 2 0 


guanine 


xanthine 


Proceeding alongside this reaction is the cleavage 
of the pyrimidine ring with the production of 4-(or 5-) 
guanidinoglyoxaline through the elimination of C-atom 
in position 6 as CGg. 



















. 

- 

- 

' . 



, 


















- 

- 

* 


. 










I 





































N—CO 


NHoC 


-m 





m 

HHg-i 

i 

1IH— 


CH—'HH 

| ">CH +- CO 

b— 


2 


guanine 4-(or 5-} guanidinoglyoxaline 

Hunter accounted quantitatively for all the guanine 
Hydrolysed in terms of its decomposition products and 
in addition to xanthine and 4-(or 5-)guanidino- 
glyoxaline He also isolated small amounts of 


ch 2 -hh 2 

ioOH 

glycine. 


C'=-Nn 

hh 2 


Nr 


o-m 

^IH-CHg-COOH 
glycocy amine, 


guanidine, 

Further study of the new "base 4-(or 5-)guanidino- 
glyoxaline showed that on alkaline hydrolysis with 
Ba(0H) 2 it yielded the corresponding earhamido 
derivative. 


m 2 |h 2 

b=OT CH— HH C=0 

j || >CH + HgO —> I 

m— c —Ah- 

4-(or 5-}guanidino- 4-(or 5-)earhamido 

glyoxaline glyoxaline. 


H—NH 

"ECE -+ KH- 
—' 


Glycine was obtained as the end-product of hydrolysis 
of both these compounds. Changes between them and 
glycine are obscure and further references to work on 
this problem are few. 

Certain observations have been noted by Hunter. 

The Ba(OH) 2 hydrolysates of 4-(or 5-)guanidino- 















and carbamido- glyoxalines give a positive nitro- 
prusside test; produce a "brown colour with nitrous 
acid and alkaline #naphthol; and acquire a blue colour 
on exposure to air or on addition of alkali. 

Fargher and Pyman £1919J in their preparation of 
4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxalines made similar observations which 
they attributed to the aminoglyozalines. Fargher JL920J 
postulated an unstable glyoxalone as an intermediate in 
genesis of glycine from 4-(or 5-)aminoglyosaline. 


ch- m 


fH 

» >CH -> „ 

K0 $ - G— HHg-C — 

4-(or 5-}nitro- 4-(or 5-} 
glyosaline aminoglyoxaline 


CH—I!H CHo—HH CHoHHo 

>CH ->| >CH ->l 

r r 


CO—KRT COOH 

4-glyoxalone glycine 


However, owing to the instability of these intermediates 
and the attendant difficulties, no further work has 
been done. 

The problem which forms the subject of this thesis 


is an attempt to establish more definitely the 
chemistry of the intermediates of guanine hydrolysis 









, 










■ 






, 












- 




« 







X. 


SYNTHESIS OF 4-(or 5-)CARBAMIDOO LYQXALIKE 
Although 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline and the 
corresponding guanidine compound had been prepared and 
structural formulae assigned to them on the basis of 
their chemical properties, ultimate proof of their 
constitution remained to be established by synthesis* 

On this depended not only the accuracy of formulations but 
also the validity of interpretation of the course of guan¬ 
ine hydrolysis as advanced by Hunter. Synthesis of either 
of these compounds was, therefore, necessary. 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline has been 
successfully accomplished by reducing 4-(or 5-}nitro- 
glyoxaline to the corresponding aminoglyoxaline, and 
by condensing the latter with C3^anic acid according 
to the following scheme. 



4-(or 5-)nitro- 
glyoxaline 


reduction, 


4-(or 5-}amino- 


mcrC— 


CH—KH 

|l >CH 


glyoxaline 


HOCHUGO v 

"> 


C=0 OH—NH 

CH 



4-(or 5-)carbarnidoglyoxaline. 










4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline, intermediate in this 
synthesis, is unstable and our attempts to isolate it 
(see below] were unsuccessful. It was, therefore, 
decided to attempt the synthesis without isolating the 
intermediate. After reducing 4-(or 5-Jnitroglyoxaline 
with sodium amalgam, the aminoglyoxaline in the reaction 
mixture was condensed directly with cyanic acid to yield 
4-{or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline. 

Since the decomposition of aminoglyoxaline is con¬ 
sidered to be a hydrolytic process according to Fargher 
jloc. cit^j precautions were taken to minimize hydrolysis. 
The solvent medium was anhydrous methanol; a weak acid, 
being only a mild hydrolytic catalyst, was used. The 
acid also served to convert KOCH to cyanic acid. 

The course of synthesis is readily followed by 
the application of the Koessler and Hanke diazo test 
[1919] . 4-(or 5)aminoglyoxaline yields a blue colour 

when coupled with sodium diazobenzene-p-sulphonate, 

|see page 16^. Carbamidoglyoxaline, on the other hand, 
gives a brilliant red colour, •Hunter*loc. cit] . As the 
condensation progresses the blue diazo test is gradually 
replaced by the red. 

When the reaction was considered complete the 
carbamidoglyoxaline was obtained as a silver salt 



















$ 









4 


' 


, 










* 

- 














insoluble in a slight excess of BafQHlg. Glyoxalines 
as a general rule form such silver salts by virtue 
of the acidic H on the imino group. This property is 
of considerable importance in the separation and 
purification of such compounds, especially purines. 

It has also been of importance in the isolation of 
4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline. When the solution, 
obtained by freeing the silver with H Q S and removing 
HgS by distillation in vacuo, was heated with excess 
picric acid, a beautifully crystalline pierate was 
obtained on cooling. Pure 4-(or 5-)earbamidoglyoxaline 
hydrochloride was obtained as large flat plates and 
spars by the usual procedures from the pierate. 

This salt was used for analysis and identification. 
REAGENTS 

1. 4-(or 5-)nitroglyoxaline was prepared according to 

the method of Fargher and Pyinan loc. cit J . This 
necessitated the preparation of glyoxaline 4;5 
diearboxylic acid, which was subsequently nitrated. 

Glyoxaline 4:5 diearboxylic acid was made as 
follows: Mtrotartarie acid, prepared by nitrating 

tartaric acid with a mixture of concentrated H0SO4 







* 


' i 







■ 





, 


. 

















■ 

■ 


* 















and fuming HNOg, was treated in aqueous solution with 
concentrated followed by 40$ formaldehyde* The 

reaction proceecb best at a low temperature and the 
mixture must be properly cooled in an ice bath. The 
actual mechanism of this synthesis of the glyoxaline ring 
has not yet been fully explained although it is known to 
involve hexamethylenetetramine as an intermediate. 

After 12-24 hours the mixture was acidified and glyoxaline 
4:5 dicarboxylic acid was obtained as an insoluble 
precipitate* 

Glyoxaline 4:5 dicarboxylic acid is readily 
decarboxylated by heating it above its melting point 
288°) * This was carried out in an ordinary distilling 
apparatus fitted with a long, wide condenser in which 
glyoxaline was caught as a solid. Careful heating and 
vacuum distillation were found to minimise loss due to 
charring and decomposition at the high temperature used. 

Glyoxaline so obtained was nitrated by boiling it 
for 2 hours with a mixture of concentrated OTO,? and 
HgSOq. The cooled reaction mixture was slowly poured 
into a large volume of water. 4-(or 5-)nitroglyoxaline 
precipitates out as an insoluble yellow granular substance, 

The reactions in the various stages of this pre¬ 
paration may be summarized, 










- 










- 




























■ 


r 



r 












- 









































COOH 

| 

(jJOQH 


COOH 

1 

C^H 

P 

i 

HO—C—H 

1 

ho-c-ho 2 

Nitration s | 

' HO-C-HOo 

ih 4 qh 

1 

HO—C-H 

HCHO 

j 

COOH 

COOH 


COOH 


tartaric acid 

. CH—TO 

*** !s-> B 


nitrotartaric 

acid 


glyosaline 4:5 di- 
carbosylic acid 


nitration 


GH —¥.E 

II N 


>pH 


~ 7 NOgC- 

4-(or 5-)nitroglyo:saline 


glyoimline 

2. Potassium Gyanate was prepared by the decomposition 
of urethane with KOH in alcoholic solution hy Werner's 
method [19Zgj, 


0=0 


-H KOH-> KOCH h CgHgOH |-H 2 0 


\dc 2 h 5 

Urethane was dissolved in a minimum amount of 
absolute alcohol and decomposed with the theoretical 
amount of EQH in 90^ alcohol. At the end of 24 hours a 
large precipitate of KOCH crystals had separated. This 
was filtered off, dried, and stored for later use. 

3. Sodium Amalgam was prepared according to the method 
in Lassar-Cohn j.895 . 3 grams of clean metallic 

sodium were submerged in 100 grams of mercury in a small 
beaker. Sodium was held in place by a pair of tongs. 

The operation was carried out in a ftime chamber on ac¬ 
count of the poisonous nature of mercury fumes evolved. 
The reaction is violent and after about a minute bursts 


































































. 




- 

. 

’ 






















into an open flame. Care is necessary to avoid burns or 
fire. While still hot the amalgam is stirred with a 
spatula until it solidifies. If agitation is vigorous 
and of sufficient duration the amalgam obtained will 
be crystalline—otherYfise it rapidly sets to an ex¬ 
tremely hard mass which must be pulverized. 

METHOD 

Experiments were made with small quantities of 
reactants to determine the effect of acid, temperature, 
shaking, time, etc. The conditions finally adopted were 
as follows. 

1 gm. 4-(or 5-)nitroglyoxaline was suspended in 
100 ml. of methanol and reduced by shaking in the dark at 
ordinary temperature with 50 gm. of 3 fo sodium amalgam. 

The reaction mixture acquired a dense blue colour,[see 
appendix) . Seduction was judged complete when a small 
aliquot of the mixture gave a maximum blue color with 
the diazo reagents. 

The solution was decanted from the mercury, made 
faintly acid to litmus by the addition of glacial acetic 
acid and 1.4 gm. of pulverized HOC! was added. It was 
kept in the dark at ordinary temperature with occasional 
shaking for 3 days. At the end of this time the original 
blue diazo test was entirely replaced by a brilliant red. 

The reaction mixture was centrifuged and filtered in 

































n 


order to remove the precipitate and the blue pigment 
which had "been formed. The dark "brown alcoholic filtrate 
was distilled in vacuo to dryness. The residue was 
taken up in about 20 ml. water, the solution was boiled 
with charcoal and again filtered. 

The filtrate and washings were made to a volume of 
about 500 ml. with water and the solution was definitely 
acidified with 5U fflQg. 10% silver nitrate was added 
to excess as shown by the appearance of brown Ag o 0 when 
a drop of the filtered solution was tested with 3a(0H) o . 
The large precipitate of unknown decomposition products 
carried with it nearly all of the pigment from the 
solution. After standing for some time in a refrigerator 
this precipitate was removed by centrifugation. A 
further small precipitate was obtained by bringing the 
solution back to faint acidity with 10 fo Ha OH* This was 
discarded. The ice-cooled filtrate obtained from the 
faintly acid solution was now treated with hot 3a(OE)^ 
to precipitate the silver salt o.f 4-(or 5-)carbamido- 
.glyoxaline. Just a slight excess of alkali is necessary 
for its complete precipitation. 

Care must be taken in the silver fractionation. 

The appreciable precipitate formed in the acid solution 
tends to adsorb some of the carbamidoglyoxaline. In 








* 




. 









































/ V 

order to minimize this occlusion the volume of the sol¬ 
ution was kept fairly large, the silver nitrate solution 
was added drop hy drop to the well agitated solution, and 
NaOH was used instead of Ba(OH) 2 to "bring the solution 
to faint acidity to litmus. 

The silver salt was well washed with cold, dilute 
Ba(QH)g, without delay suspended in water, and the mixture 
made just acid with EgSO^. The silver was removed with 
H 2 S in the usual manner. H^S was removed "by distillation 
in vacuo, the solution neutralized by the addition of 
Ba(0H) 2 and the BaSO^ removed. The solution was boiled 
with charcoal and the filtrate reduced in vacuo to a 
volume of about 2 ml, An excess of picric acid was added, 
the precipitate dissolved by heat and crystallization 
allowed to take place by slow cooling, long, robust 
needles of the picrate were obtained. 

The crystals were collected on a sintered glass 
funnel and well washed with alcohol. Yield .25 grn. 

M.P* 200° of crystals contaminated with brown pigment. 

The impurity is not readily removed by recrystallization 
and no attempt was made to obtain the pure picrate at this 
stage. On the basis of this picrate the yield is about 
8% of the theoretical. 

1.25 gms. of picrate collected from various batches 









- 




* 





- 










• . 






- 


■ 




* 







~ 









, 











'3 


as above, was suspended in about 30 ml* water, HOI added 
and picric acid removed by shaking with ether. The 
resulting solution was evaporated in vacuo to a small 
volume boiled with charcoal and recrystallized as above. 
.20 gms. of pure 4-(or 5-)carhamidoglyoxaline hydro¬ 
chloride with characteristic faint pink tinge was obtained 
M.P. 210 d . 

Hitrogen and chloride determinations on the substance 
gave the following results: 34.24 and 34.49$ 1 and 21.97 
and 21.87/3 01. (C 4 H 6 H 4 0. HC1 requires 34.46$ IT and 21.80$ 

01). Mixed melting point of synthetic carbamido-glyoxaline 
and that prepared from guanidinoglyoxaline was 210°. 

These analyses together with the various character¬ 
istic tests for 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline showed that 
the two samples were identical. 















. 






. 

. . 


It* r - : ■" 

■ 

. 

- 
















































II 


SUBSEQUENT INTERMEDIATES OE HYDROLYSIS 
Hunter loc. cit*| Has shown that, concurrently with 
hydrolysis to xanthine, a certain portion of guanine is 
hydrolysed through the intermediates of guanidino- and 
carbamido- glyoxalines with glycine as the end-product* 
This has been corroborated by the synthesis of carbamido- 
glyoxaline* It is proposed to follow this course of 
hydrolysis further, with especial reference to changes 
taking place between carbaraido-glyosaline and glycine 
which may be represented as, 


i 

c=o 

I 

NH— 

4- (or 
glyoxaline 


CH—NH 

Ndh 

6 — 

»-) carbamido- 




CH —NH 


II 


-N 




CH 




4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline 


QH— 

HO-I —„ 

4-(or 5-) hydroxy- 
glyoxaline 


NH 

>H 


Q h 2 

CO- 


'NH 

>£E 

-r- 


-> 


4-(or 5-)glyoxalone 


CHgNHg 

COOH 

glycine 


A certain amount of oxidation occurs at the same 
time with the production of condensed double molecules of 


indigo type, which will be discussed in a subsequent 
section. 

Evidence will be submitted for the presence of small 
amounts of 4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline, and 4-glyoxalone 







in the Ba(OHhydrolysates of guanidino- and carbamido- 
glyoxalines. Such hydrolysates are characterized by 
a number of tests which are, again, a positive nitroprus- 
side test, brown colour with nitrous acid followed by 
alhali, gradual blue colour on addition of sodium hydroxide 
or on prolonged exposure to the atmosphere, and a grass- 
green ninhydrin test. Hone of these tests has been 
satisfactorily explained. An attempt will be made to 
correlate each test with the substance responsible for it. 
To do this it is necessary to prepare the various inter¬ 
mediates from independent sources and to reproduce the 
tests by which they are characterized. In this manner it 
is possible to follow step by step the course of hydr¬ 
olysis of carbamidoglyoxaline. 

A systematic study of the intermediates namely 
4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline, 4-glyoxalone, and glyoxaline 
indigoids follows, 
r. 4- (or 5-) AM IN OG-LY OXALI HE 

Attempts of Fargher and Pyman [loc. cit.J and of 
Balaban 1930, 1932 t to prepare 4-(or 5-)amino- 
glyoxaline were unsuccessful, although Fargher loc. eiti] 
reported the isolation of a dipicrate but in an amount 
too small to permit study of its properties. Our own 












I l* 

attempts have likewise been unsuccessful. It has been 
possible, however, by the reduction of 4-(or 5-)nitro- 
glyoxaline to prepare solutions known to contain 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline. That solutions prepared, as described 
below contain 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline is expected from 
the nature of the reduction, and is further supported by 
the fact that the 4-(or 5-)earbamido derivative has 
been isolated. 

Two tests are associated with solutions of 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline—a blue diazo test with the Koessler and 
Hanke reagent, and a permanganate colored nitroprusside 
test (Rothera, 1908 , The blue diazo test is also 
given by 4-(or 5-)guanidinoglyoxaline, The blue colour, 
being unique among known glyoxalines, has been attributed 
to the effect of the guanidine side chain, '^Hunter, loc, cit. 
It appears likely that the amino group has a similar effect 
and that the blue diazo test given by solutions of 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline is attributable to the aminoglyoxaline. 
Similarly the nitroprusside test is also associated 
with 4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline in solution. It has been 
attributed to substituted aminoglyoxalines by Fargher 
Doc, cit.J and our attempts to dissociate it from the 
diazo test have proved futile. It is, therefore, at¬ 
tributed to 4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline and in conjunction 



















, 






, 

. 










- 








. 


< 






* 






. 













7 


with the diazo test has been used to detect 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline in solution, in absence of interfering 
substances. 

It is on the basis of the diazo and the nitro- 
prusside tests that the identification of 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline in 3a(QH)g hydrolysates of guanidino 
and carbamido- glyoxalines rests. Such hydrolysates 
after the removal of guanidino and carbamidoglyoxalines 
as completely as possible with picric acid give a blue 
diazo and a characteristic permanganate colored nitro- 
prusside test. On the arginine analogy it was expected 
that some aminoglyoxaline should be produced. The nitro- 
prusside test indicates this. As further evidence 
4-(or 5-)earbaxnidoglyoxaline, which gives a red diazo 
test, was hydrolysed. After the removal of the carbamido- 
glyoxaline as picrate the resulting solution was demon¬ 
strated to give a blue diazo test. The obvious con¬ 
clusion is that aminoglyoxaline is produced from 
carbamidoglyoxaline by hydrolysis. 

An account of the methods of preparation and 
attempts at isolation of 4-(or 5-/aminoglyoxaline is 
detailed below. 




. 






- 

- 




* 




* 















f % 


METHODS OF PREPARATION OF 4-(or 5-) AMINOCIYOZA1INE 
1. Catalytic Hydro ge nat ion—Parr hydrogenating ap¬ 
paratus was used. The platinum catalyst was prepared 
according to Loew ! s process (Vavon, 1927 . 

.1 gm. 4-(or 5-)nitroglyoxaline in 100 ml, methanol 
with a small amount of platinum black catalyst was 
placed in the reaction chamber and shaken with hydrogen 
under pressure of 40 lbs, per square inch. In about 
15 minutes the solution assumed a dense blue colour* 

The run was continued for hr. The alcoholic solution 
was then decanted from the catalyst, evaporated to 
dryness and extracted with water. The aqueous solution 
gave a fair diazo test indicating the presence of a small 
amount of aminoglyoxaline. 

Reduction in presence of 1 equivalent of HC1 
produced no blue colour in the reaction mixture and 
gave a weak diazo test, indicative of small yield of 
aminoglyoxaline. 

Using glacial acetic acid as solvent, blue pigment 
was formed very rapidly, but the blue diazo test was weak. 

Catalytic hydrogenation is not a satisfactory method 
of reduction as the catalyst is rapidly inactivated 
and the reduction is arrested in the intermediate stages. 



















' 




. 




. 










. 

, 

- 

. 








i y 


2 • Reduction with Tin and H ydrochloric Acid —Tliis 
method was used by Fargher and Pyman JJLoe. cit. j. 

No blue colour is produced, and the yield of amino- 
glyoxaline as fudged by the diazo test is good. The 
reduction, however, is too drastic and most of the nitro- 
glyoxaline is not only reduced, but further hydrolysed 
to glycine as the end-product. 

5. Reduction with Zinc and Glacial Acetic Acid --Blue 
pigment is produced in the reaction mixture and the 
diazo test is good. The method, however, possessed 
no advantage. 

4. Reduction with Aluminium Amalgam —prepared according 
to Houben and Weyl 1912 , gave rapid reduction and an 
intense diazo reaction, but much blue pigment was also 
produced. 

5. Reduction with Sodium Amalgam gave the most satis¬ 
factory results. In dilute solutions no blue pigment 
was produced, reduction was rapid and the resulting 
solution gave an intense diazo test. This method 

was adopted and used for the production of 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline. The details of the method have 
already been given under Synthesis of Carbamidoglyoxaline. 
































* 

. 
















. 








- 









, 




, 

. 




* 

























PREPARATION OF A RELATIVELY PURE AND CONCENTRATED 
SOLUTION OF 4-(or 5-)AMINOGLY0XALINE 

Having reduced a convenient quantity of 4-(or 5-) 
nitroglyoxaline with sodium amalgam the methanol 
solution was neutralized with HNO^. Acetic acid as 

u 

used in the preparation of carbamidoglyoxaline is 
unsatisfactory because in later acidification it acts 
as a buffer and unnecessarily increases the amount of 
HNO^ to be used in the Ag fractionation. The pigment which 
had precipitated together with NaNOg was removed by centri¬ 
fugation, the supernatant decanted into a r.b. flask and 
evaporated to dryness in vacuo. The residue was taken up in 
£0 ml. water and made acid to Congo red with HNO^. 10$ 
AgNOg was added in excess. A certain amount of precipitate 
is formed at this stage. The solution was then made 
just alkaline to Congo red with NaOH, and the whole 
precipitate removed by centrifugation and discarded. 

A large precipitate of the silver salt of aminoglyoxaline 
was obtained by the addition of BafOH)^ until the 
solution was just neutral to litmus. This precipitate 
was removed by centrifugation, washed, and without 
delay suspended in water. It was then acidified with 
a few drops of HgSO^, and the solution was freed from 

silver with HgS, and from H2S by distillation in vacuo. 




' 















7 












- 






* 














- 




, 





, 







Excess H 2 SO 4 may be removed with Ba(OH)g when a solution 
of the free base of aminoglyoxaline is required, other¬ 
wise the solution is left acid, as it is readily 
oxidized in neutral or alkaline medium in contact with air. 

Such a solution is relatively free from impurities 
and may be reduced to a small volume if higher con¬ 
centration of aminoglyoxaline is required. Since our 
attempts at isolating; aminoglyoxaline have been un¬ 
successful these solutions were used for studying 
its properties. 

ATTEMPTS AT ISOLATION OP 4-(or 5-)AMINOGLYOZALINE 
1. Picrate.—To a concentrated aqueous solution of 
aminoglyoxaline, prepared as described above, 5 volumes 
of saturated aqueous picric acid were added. A very 
fine precipitate of picrate is formed which first 
appears only as cloudiness, but later coagulates. It 
readily decomposes to a dark oil when heated much below 
100 and is not the picrate of aminoglyoxaline. 

On the assumption that a soluble picrate is formed, 
a solution of picric acid and aminoglyoxaline was 
allowed to evaporate in a vacuum desiccator. No 
evidence was obtained that such a picrate is formed. 



























, 



- 

, 




- 













- 




















2. Acetate —Another portion of the aminoglyoxaline 
solution was "brought to dryness and the residue was 
extracted with glacial acetic acid* Although extraction 
can be effected in this manner, it is accompanied by 
much destruction* No acetate could be obtained* 

3. Free Base* When ether was added to a concentrated 
alcoholic solution of aminoglyoxaline it first became 
cloudy, then an emulsion and finally an oil separated out* 
This gummy oil contained much aminoglyoxaline, but 
rapidly decomposed, especially when it was again 
redissolved in alcohol and repreeipitated with ether. 

Evaporating alcoholic extracts of aminoglyoxaline 
yielded a glassy residue which contained some amino¬ 
glyoxaline but no crystalline material could be obtained. 
The aminoglyoxaline decomposed in the process forming 
glycine* 

4. Hydrochlo r ide* When a solution of aminoglyoxaline 
was acidified with HC1 and evaporated to dryness, no 
crystals of the hydrochloride could be obtained, but 
again the aminoglyoxaline decomposed. 

Into another portion of aminoglyoxaline in 
alcoholic solution dry HC1 was passed until saturation, 
when a precipitate was formed* This gelatinous pre- 

























4 














, 

. 









, 


. 











- 






4 

. 

















2 " 0 


cipitate gave a blue colour with the diazo reagent, hut 
soon decomposed into an amorphous mass. Most of the 
aminoglyoxaline, however, remained in the mother liquor. 

5. Extraction wit h S olvents The effect of various 
solvents such as methyl, ethyl, amyl alcohol, acetone 
and ethyl acetate was determined. When a solution of 
freshly prepared aminoglyoxaline was brought to dryness 
and then extracted with absolute ethyl alcohol an 
insoluble residue giving no diazo test remained. When 
the alcoholic solution was evaporated to dryness and 
the residue again extracted more insoluble precipitate 
was formed, until on repeated extraction all the amino¬ 
glyoxaline had decomposed. The effect of other solvents 
was much the same. 

6 . Salts with Silver, Copper, and Phosphotungstic Acid. 
4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline forms insoluble salts with 
silver, copper, and phosphotungstic acid. None of 
these salts, however, is crystallizable and no attempt 
was made to obtain them pure. They also decompose 

in solution on standing. 

7. 4-(or 5-)Oarbamidoglyoxaline —The preparation of 

4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyosaline has already been reported. 
Although it definitely establishes the presence of 























i- i 


aminoglyoxaline in solution it is of no direct value 
in studying the properties of aminoglyoxaline itself. 




II 


4-GLY0ZA.L0NE A39D IHDIGOID FORMATION 


The next in the series of hydrolytic decomposition 
products under investigation is 4-glyoxalone. It lias not 
“been isolated and no direct method for its detection 
in solution is available. 

Evidence for the existence of 4-glyoxalone in 
solution as a hydrolytic product, intermediate between 
4-(or 5-}aminoglyoxaline and glycine, is based on two 
considerations. The first is that of Fargher floe, eitfj 
who found it necessary to postulate 4-glyoxalone in 
order to explain the mechanism by which glycine is 
formed, in the reduction of 4-(or 5-}nitroglyoxaline. 

The second consideration is based on the peculiar 
property of 4-glyoxalone of being readily oxidized to 
an indigoid, which will now be discussed. 

It may be postulated on the indigo analogy that 
2 molecules of 4-glyoxalone in presence of a mild 
oxidizing agent in an alkaline medium condense to 
form a conjugated double molecule of the indigo type 
as follows: 


HO-C —WR 



— 


— ^ 


CO—IH 

2 [ NDH 


4-(or B-lfcydroxyglyoxaline 


4-glyoxalone. 









■ 

- 














« 




, 













, 











































O 


/HH- 

HC 

- 


j-OH 


HOC—HH 

' ;> 


•C—H' 


44 1 hydroxy diglyoxaline 5 fleueo form 


0 C“0 

—> HC. 


0=C~IH 
. '^CH 


%-C= "— 

/X44 f diglyoxalone 5 ('blue). 

The evidence for the above formulation is now 
presented. 

The formation of a blue pigment was first noticed 
during anaerobic Ba(0H)£ hydrolysis of 4-(or 5-)guanidino- 
glyoxaline. When a drop of 10^ HaOH was added to a test 
portion of the acidified hydrolysate exposed to air a blue 
colour slowly developed. The same test was also obtained 
from hydrolysates of 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline. 

Further study showed that the pigment was produced 
in much larger amounts by boiling guanidinoglyoxaline 
on a water bath with alkaline Cu(0H)£. Cof^was removed 
with HoS and the resulting solution freed from HgS* 

Test portions of such a solution gave an immediate blue 
colour with a drop of HaOH. Similar results were also ob¬ 
tained when carbamido- or a solution of aminoglyoxaline 

a ■ 


waso hydrolysed with Ba(OH)£ in presence of Hg.^ 

If was thus shown that the formation of the blue 


pigment was due to the glyoxaline nucleus, and that 
the guanidino, carbamido, or amino group appeared to have 
no part in its production. 


















. 























. 











1 ~] 

Other tests were devised in order to obtain more 
information regarding the probable chemical structure of 
the blue pigment. 7/hen a drop of bromine water was 
added to an alkaline solution of guanidinoglyoxaline 
a transient blue colour was obtained. Bromine oxidation, 
however, had been previously shown by Hunter loc. cit. 
to cause cleavage of the guanidine side chain and the 
oxidation of C-atoms 4 and 5 to oxalic acid. It thus 
appears that the blue pigment is an oxidation product 
intermediate between the glyoxaline nucleus and 
oxalic acid. 

The work of Baudiseh 1925 on urindigo, the 
first member of a new class of indigoids derived from 
pyrimidines, suggested that the blue pigment we were 
studying might be an indigoid derived from 4-glyoxalone. 
All the evidence thus far is in agreement with such a 
postulation. On treating a solution of 4-(or 5-) 
arninoglyoxaline with nitrous acid it was expected 
that a glyoxalone should be formed. The behaviour of 
such a solution of glyoxalone would indicate whether 
an indigoid was formed by further oxidation. It was 
found that when a drop of HalTOo was added to an 
acidified solution of 4-(or 5-)arninoglyoxaline, 
followed by a drop of UaOH, a reddish brown colour 

















- 















































was obtained. This test had been previously noted 
by Hunter when an attempt was made to diazotize 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline and couple it with alkaline ^naphthol. 
The pigment produced by nitrous acid was not typical. 

The sensitivity of the glyoxaline ring to nitrous 
acid, however, had been previously noticed in an attempt 
to estimate the amino N in guanidinoglyoxaline by the 
Van Slyke method. It is not surprizing, therefore, 
that the test with nitrous acid is inconclusive. The 
formation of a reddish brown pigment, however, indicates 
that the glyoxalone does give rise to pigment formation. 

Small amounts of the leuco and the blue form of 
the pigment have been prepared by the methods described 
below. N-determination on the latter agrees with 
the indigoid formulation for the pigment. In all 
probability, therefore, the pigment is Ad4’ diglyoxalone. 

The blue colour produced by oxidation may then 
be regarded as an indirect test for 4-glyoxalone in 
solution. Hence the production of a blue colour with 
alkali after Ba(OH)^ hydrolysis in absence of Go, 
of 4-(or 5-)guanidino- and carbamido- glyoxaline is 
evidence for the formation of 4-glyoxalone as an 
intermediate in the hydrolysis of 4-(or 5-)amino¬ 
glyoxaline. 






















- 


















- 


. . 


































PREPARATION OF 44' HYDB 02YDIGLYOXALINE 5 

.5 gms. of guanidinoglyoxaline dihydrochloride 
was heated on a water hath for 7 minutes with 2 
equivalents of freshly prepared OufOH)^ suspended in 
45 ml, of l.ljt sodium carbonate. The dark blue 
precipitate of (hy salts which formed, was separated by 
centrifugation and the supernatant fluid discarded. The 
Ou salt washed once, was suspended in water, acidified 
with glacial acetic acid and freed from Cu** with HgS 
in the usual way. The resulting solution was freed 
from HoS by bubbling COg rapidly through it. 

The solution so obtained was lemon yellow in 
colour and contained about 509 of the original guanidino¬ 
glyoxaline together with the oxidation product. On 
addition of a drop of alkali to a test portion of the 
solution an immediate blue colour was produced. 

The lemon yellow solution was made definitely acid 
to Congo red with glacial acetic acid, and an excess 
(about 3 ml.) of 10$ silver nitrate was added. The 
yellow precipitate formed in acid solution was 
removed by centrifugation and washed with a small amount 
of l/lO acetic acid. It was then suspended in 5 ml. 
of N/lO acetic acid and Ag ' was removed with HgS. 

The resulting solution, freed from HgS, was reduced to 











. 

' 

- 

. 


















. 






















a small volume in vacuo and glacial acetic acid was 
added. It was then further evaporated to a volume of 
.5 ml. A lemon yellow precipitate was obtained by further 
addition of 5 ml. glacial acetic acid. The solution 
and the precipitate were quickly transferred to a small 
test tube, avoiding oxidation as much as possible, the 
test tube stoppered and centrifuged. The supernatant 
was decanted and the precipitate washed twice with 
glacial acetic acid. The final precipitate was dried 
in a vacuum desiccator. 

If care is not taken to avoid oxidation the substance 
may turn red or blue, or may decompose, at any stage. 

The yield is very small, about 16 mg. 

This is a crude preparation of what we regard as 
44’ hydroxydiglyoxaline 5. It gives a number of 
colour reactions, already described. With laOH, 

BafOEOg, HH 4 OH, and any alkaline reagent a blue colour 
is produced. With TeClg, or bromine water a blue colour 
is also obtained. With nitrous acid, however, the 
colour is a reddish brown. The substance is very 
unstable in solution but may be kept for long periods 
of time if dry. 




















. 

. 














- 






. 












- 

- 





















PREPARATION 0FA44' PIGIYOXALONE 5 


It is possible to prepare the blue pigment, which 
we formulate as A44 1 diglyoxalone 5, from guanidino- 
or carbamido glyoxaline by the procedure just described, 
and by converting the leuco form to the blue pigment. 

The following alternative and more economical method 
has been used. 

1 gm. of nitroglyoxaline suspended in 100 ml. 
of methanol was reduced with 50 gm. of Zi sodium 
amalgam in the usual manner. The alcoholic mixture 
was then acidified with HNOg and the insoluble pigment 
was removed by centrifugation. The supernatant fluid 
was evaporated to dryness, the residue taken up in 
25 ml. water and a second insoluble residue was re¬ 
moved by centrifugation. The supernatant was made 
just neutral with NaOH and boiled on a water bath for 
3 minutes with 2 equivalents of Cu(0H)£ in 45 ml. 
of 1.1$ sodium carbonate. It was then centrifuged 
and the supernatant and washings were discarded. The 
precipitate was suspended in 15 ml. water, acidified 
with HgSQq and Cu*" 1 " removed with HgS. The clear lemon 
yellow supernatant and washings from CuS was freed 
from HgS by bubbling through it GOg and excess solid 
3a(OH)£ was added. The solution acquired a deep 








. 




- 




. 








* 




- 




« 










- 



, 




. 

. 

f 






. 





blue colour on being shaken with air. After a half 
hour it was neutralized with HgSO^ and the BaSO^ 
precipitate washed until the extraneous pigment was 
removed. The blue pigment was then extracted from the 
BaSO^ precipitate with small portions of water to 
which a drop of 10% laOH was added. The extraction was 
continued until all of the pigment was removed. It 
was then precipitated by the addition of a slight 
excess of Hr>S0 A . The pigment so obtained is con¬ 
taminated with a large amount of BaS0 4 which is very 
difficult to remove completely. It was redissolved 
in water containing a minimum amount of 10% HaOH, the 
solution centrifuged- at high speed to remove, as much 
of the BaS0 4 as possible, and the pigment again 
reprecipitated with H 0 SO 4 . This procedure is repeated 
until the BaS 04 is removed. The pigment was finally 
washed with water, then alcohol, and dried in vacuo. 

The particles are too fine to be caught on a filter, 
and are removed by centrifugation. Yield 7 mg. 

Analysis on the pigment gave 35.65%, 34.32%, and 
34.21% II. Theoretical for A44' diglyoxalone-5 is 
34.15% II . On the evidence of the 1 determination, and 
previous considerations as already given it is formul¬ 
ated as Bs44' diglyoxalone 5. 




















- 

. 











. 










- 














- 







„ 








. 











, 

- 














CONCLUSION 


The problem lias been to establish more definitely 
the chemistry of the intermediates of guanine hydrolysis. 
A series of hydrolytic products and related substances 
has been studied. 

On hydrolysis that portion of guanine which is 
not converted to xanthine, goes through the following 
intermediates: (1) 4-(or 5-)guanidinoglyoxaline 

(2) 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyoxaline (3) 4-(or 5-) 

aminoglyoxaline (4) 4-glyoxalone, and finally 
(5) glycine, ammonia, and carbon dioxide. 

Concurrent with the hydrolysis is a small amount 
of oxidation. The glyoxaline nucleus is oxidized to 
44’ hydroxydiglyoxaline 5, andfM4’ diglyoxalone 5, the 
leuco and the blue form of a new class of indigoids 
derived from glyoxaline. 

The experimental findings submitted in this thesis 
substantiate our conclusions. 




SUMMARY 


1. 4-(or 5-)carbamidoglyomline has been synthesized. 

2. A method for isolation of 4-(or 5-)carbamido- 
glyoxaline has been developed. 

3. The identity of synthetic 4-(or 5-)carbamido- 
glyoxaline with that prepared from guanidinoglyoxaline 
has been established. 

4. The correctness of formulation of the 2 new bases 
isolated by Hunter has been corroborated. 

5. The relative merits of catalytic hydrogenation, 

tin and hydrochloric acid, zinc and glacial acetic acid, 
aluminium amalgam, and sodium amalgam for the reduction 
of 4-(or 5-}nitroglyoxaline have been noted. 

6. A method for the preparation of a relatively 
pure and concentrated solution of 4-(or 5-)amino- 
glyoxaline has been developed. 

7. Attempts at isolation of 4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline 
have been discussed. 

8. Two tests have been attributed to 4-(or 5-)amino- 
glyoxaline. These are the diazo test with XCoessler 
and Hanke reagent, and the nitroprusside test. 

9. The formation of an indigoid from 4-glyoxalone 
has been indicated on the basis of the behaviour of 
guanidino, earbamido-, and aminoglyoxaline towards 




mild oxidizing agents. 

t 

10. Small amount of a substance formulated as 44’ hydroxy' 
diglyoxaline 5 has been prepared from guanidinoglyoxaline. 

11. A substance regarded asA44' diglyoxalone 5 has 
been prepared from solutions of 4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline. 
IE. Evidence for the formulation of the 2 above 
substances as 44 1 hydroxydiglyoxaline 5, andA44’ 
diglyoxalone 5 on the basis of their mode of formation, 
chemical properties, and £T content has been given. 

13. Evidence for the presence of 4-(or 5-)amino- 
glyoxaline, 4-glyoxalone, 44’ hydroxydiglyoxaline 5 
and A44 T diglyoxalone 5 in the Ba(OH)^ hydrolysates 
of guanidino, and carbamido-glyoxaline has been 
submitted. 





APPENDIX 


The following topics, arising from the work, 
though not directly related to the main problem of the 
thesis are here appended. 

I. ACTION OF KgFe(CN) 6 ON 4-(or 5-)GUANIDISOGLYOXALISS 

50 mg. of 4-(or 5-)guanidinoglyoxaline dihydro¬ 
chloride was treated with 1 equivalent of potassium 
ferricyanide in a volume of 2 ml. and 5% EOH was added 
until no further precipitate was formed. The mixture 
was centrifuged, and the supernatant decanted. The 
precipitate was then washed several times with water. 
Yield about 12 mg. 

The blue amorphous substance so obtained does 
not melt, is insoluble in alkali and all ordinary 
| solvents, but slightly solube in acids. A preliminary 
analysis gave 47.55^ N and 1.50$ Fe. This compound 
has not been further studied. 

II. BLUE REDUCTION PIGMENT FROM 4-(or 5-)NITROGLY02ALINE 

When 4-(or 5-)nitroglyoxaline was reduced by 
sodium or aluminium amalgam, or catalytic hydro¬ 
genation a dark blue pigment was formed. It was 
obtained as a precipitate by centrifuging the neutra¬ 
lised reduction mixtures. This pigment is formed in 
a reducing atmosphere and is likely a reduction product 
of nitroglyoxaline, intermediate between it and the 





p 

aminoglyoxaline. On further reduction with tin and 
hydrochloric acid it produces aminoglyoxaline. 

However, it is very similar in solubility to nitro- 
glyoxaline and has not been purified. There is a 
likelihood of it being contaminated with unchanged 
nitroglyoxaline, and the information is insufficient 
to suggest a formula for it. 

111. NOTE OH THE PREPARATIOH OF PURINES AED PYRIMIDINES 
FROM NUCLEIC ACID. 

The present methods according to Jones [1920 and 
Levene 1922 for the preparation of purines and 
pyrimidines from yeast nucleic acid can be shortened 
considerably. Advantage is taken of the difference in 
solubilities of the hydrochlorides of guanine and 
adenine in one instance, and cytosine hydrochloride and 
uracil in another. Separation and purification can 
thereby be effected simply without the intermediates 
of Cu or Ag salts, or pierate at any stage. Moreover, 
all four substances can be obtained from the same 
sample of nucleic acid. 

The following method was adopted: 

PURINES. 100 gm. nucleic acid are suspended in 500 ml. 
of 95fS methyl alcohol. HC1 is bubbled vigorously 
through the suspension until saturation. Heat is 






6 


generated, during the reaction and a reflux condenser is 
fitted in order to prevent loss of alcohol. The 
saturation and hydrolysis require about 3 hr., during 
which time the solution is maintained hot he the rapid 
bubbling of HC1. The solution becomes dark, and the 
original nucleic acid in suspension is replaced by 
a precipitate of guanine and. adenine hydrochlorides. 

The reaction mixture is set aside overnight. 

The precipitate is collected, washed with methyl 
alcohol, and dried. The conditions of hydrolysis are 
such that the precipitate at this stage weighs 28-30 gin. 
If double the volume of alcohol is used Levene T s 
conditions and hydrolysis is allowed to proceed for 
2 hr. a much larger precipitate is obtained. From 
the methyl alcohol filtrate a further small pre- 
| cipitate is obtained on concentrating it to 250 ml. 

The final methyl alcohol filtrate and washings are 
reserved for pyrimidine recovery. 

The combined precipitate is now dissolved in 350 ml. 
hot water, boiled with charcoal and filtered hot. !o 
acid is introduced at this stage so that maximum 
decolonization may take place. Ouanine can be readily 
crystallized as the hydrochloride by adding sufficient 
concentrated HC1 to the decolorized aqueous filtrate, 





to make it 2 I with respect to the acid, redissolving any 
precipitate by heat, and allowing the guanine hydrochloride 
to crystallize slowly. It is very insoluble and precipit¬ 
ates almost quantitatively. A few crystals of adenine 
hydrochloride, appearing as sago-like clusters, may 
also appear at this stage, hut remain in the mother 
liquor on recrystallization. 

The guanine hydrochloride crystals are collected and, 
if washed with dilute HC1 and air dried, the dihydrate is 
obtained, but if washed with alcohol and oven dried, 
the crystals lose their lustre and. anhydrous guanine 
hydrochloride is obtained. 

Pure guanine hydrochloride is obtained by re¬ 
crystallizing from 200 ml. 21 HC1. Yield 9.8 gm. 

(oven dried) . 

The filtrates from guanine are now combined and 
filtered from any precipitate that may have formed 
on standing. The solution is reduced in vacuo to 
a small volume until crystallization begins. Adenine 
hydrochloride precipitates quickly. It is purified by 
recrystallizing from a small amount of water. Yield 
8 gm. 




PYRIMIDINES. Although synthetic methods of obtaining 
pyrimidines are simpler, their preparation as by¬ 
products of nucleic acid hydrolysis deserves con¬ 
sideration. 

Prom the fraction reserved above for pyrimidine 
preparation, alcohol is removed by distillation. The 
dark, syrupy residue is taken up in 400 ml. 20$ 
hydrochloric acid and autoclaved at 175 s "for 2 hr. 

The carbonized mass obtained on autoclaving is 
leached with hot water. The solution is then evap¬ 
orated to dryness in vacuo to remove excess HG 1 and the 
residue taken up in 500 ml. water. The amount of 
H 3 PO 4 present is roughly calculated from the quantity 
of nucleic acid used, and Ba(QH)g is added in excess. 
HHg is removed by distillation in vacuo. Ba^fPO^Jg 
is then removed by centrifugation and the excess Ba 
is removed precisely from the supernatant fluid with 
HgSO,!. The resulting solution is reduced in vacuo 
until crystallization begins. It is then boiled 
with charcoal, filtered, and set aside. Crusty, 
granular crystals of uracil are deposited on the 
sides of the flask. A second crop is obtained by 
further concentrating the filtrate. Uracil is re¬ 
crystallized in the usual way. Yield about 5 gm. 




The filtrates from the above are combined, reduced 
to 5-10 ml * and several volumes of absolute ethyl 
alcohol are added. Cytosine hydrochloride, which 
is very soluble in water but insoluble in alcohol, is 
precipitated readily. It is recrystallized in the 
same way from water and alcohol. Yield about 2 gm. 

The yields of uracil and cytosine are only 
roughly quantitative and are considered low. 

The method oiitlined has been used successfully in 
preparing large amounts of guanine, and recovering 
adenine, uracil and cytosine as valuable by-products. 

It is simpler and shorter than methods previously 
employed. 






V 


REFERENCES 


Balahan 

[1930] . 

J. Chem. 

Soc. 

113, 

269. 


[1932] . 

J. Chem. 

Soc. 

135, 

2423. 

Baudisch 

QL925] . 

J. Biol. 

Chem. 

64, 

619. 

Fargher 

[19201 . 

J. Chem. 

Soc. 

UL. 

668 . 

—--and Lyman 

[19191 J. Chem. Soc 

• 115, 

217 

Fischer 

0-910]. 

Ber. 


43, 

805. 


Houben-Weyl [1922] Die Metho&en der Organisehe Chemi 
Leipzig 11 p. 216. 

Hunter Q.936] . Biochem J. 30^ 1183, 1201. 

Jones IJ.920] , Nucleic Acids, Longmans, pp. 106-7. 
Koessler and Hanke [1919] . J. Biol. Chem. 39 , 497 

Lassar-Cohn [1895] . Manual of Organic Chemistry, 
Macmillan p. 308. 

Levene [1922], J. Biol. Chem. 53^ 441. 

Rothera [1908] J. physiol. 115, 217. 

Schmidt [1883] Ann. 217, 308. 

Yavon CL 9 27l . Bull de la Soc. Oh Unique 41, 1253. 

Werner [1923], Chemistry of Urea, Longmans p. 182. 
Wheeler [1907] . J. Biol. Chem, 3j_ 285. 

Wulff [1893J. 3 Physiol. Chem. 17^, 473. 


























































