


For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


STUDY OF UTOPIAS IN ENGLISH LITERATURE 


JOHN 


HARLES GARRETT 






©x Mimas 
isirawifiaais 
















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studyofutopiasinOOjcjo 


A STUDY OP UTOPIAS IN' 


ENGLISH LITERATURE 


3Y 


JOHN CHARLES GARRETT, B.A. , 
DEPART!-ENT OP ENGLISH 
UlflYERSTTY OP ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE 
UNITERSITY OP _ ALBERTA 
IN COMPLETE PULPIIIENT OP TEE REQUIREMENTS 
POR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OP ARTS. 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OP DR. R. H. GORDON 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1937 






A C KIT OWLEDGMENTS 


I wish to take this opportunity to thank 
Professor R. K. Gordon, under whose direction 
this work was carried out, for his valuable 
criticisms and suggestions, and also Professor 
G. M. Smith for his kind assistance and advice 


I am also greatly indebted to the Robert 
Tegler Trust Fund, by which this study was made 
possible for me. 













TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

Preface....... i 

Introduction. .... 1 

I. More T s Utopia and the 

End of the Middle Ages............... 9 

II# Bacon’s New Atlantis and the 

Renaissance, 34 

III. Utopias of the Puritan Revolution..,. 47 

IV. Utopia in the Eighteenth Century.,,,, 87 

V. Utopia in the Romantic Period,....... 108 

VI. Two Mid-Century Protests. . 129 

VII. The Influence of Socialism.,,....,.,. 153 

VIII. A Romantic Interlude,,..,,,.,,,,.,.#. 179 

IX. Utopia in the Twentieth Century.....# 188 

X. Conclusion##,,,.., . 211 

Bibliography#..... # # 219 

































PREFACE 


The word "Utopia” was first used by Sir Thomas More 
a S' a name for his ideal commonwealth, and of such com¬ 
manding significance was his hook that similar works and 
ideas have been labelled Utopian. The word Utopia means 
"nowhere”, and accordingly it is the object of this thesis 
to make a survey of the imaginary ideal states which have 
been described by English authors. The study does not 
include, except in passing, "Utopian" works, that is, works 
that have merely a Utopian flavor, but is limited to com¬ 
plete pictures of ideal states. Thus., Godwin* s Political 
Jus ties is only referred to, whereas an obscure work like 
the Nova Solyma is described in some detail. Again, pol¬ 
itical movements, Utopian in character, receive only 
casual mention for two reasons: first, they are beyond the 
limits of literature, and second, formal "Utopias" were 
not produced by every radical movement by any means. 

Such a limitation is, of course, exceedingly arti¬ 
ficial, and tends to vitiate the study at the outset# A 
treatment of Utopianism in England would necessitate the 
examination of a multitude of pamphlets, sermons, politi¬ 
cal treatises and political experiments, and would demand 
a minute knowledge of English social history to which the 
writer makes not the slightest pretence. It has been the 
aim of this study to indicate certain general aspects of 













of the Utopias and their relation to contemporary society, 
and is therefore only an attempt at a sketch, where a 
treatise is required# Such a subject, which is the property, 

i 

as much of literature as it is of history and sociology, 
would require, to be adequately treated, a minute analysis 
of the intricate forces of social history, and to the nec¬ 
essary knowledge the writer makes no claim# This study is 
an essay in literature rather than in social history, > 
although some attempt has been made to lessen the strictness 


of a classification which is admittedly artificial# 












(1 


Introduction 

The idea of Utopia is as old as the human race. 

Whenever men have found the circumstances of life too in¬ 
tolerable to be borne with patience, they have dreamed of 
a newer and better world in which sorrow and sin and 
disease are swept away. All Utopian thought is a part of 
the great body of escapist literature which has been written 
since antiquity and which persists in almost unbroken 
continuity down to the present day. Pictures of the 
Elysian fields, Atlantis, the garden of Hesperides, El 
Dorado, and the land of Cockayne all originate in a wish 
to have done with the contemporary social order. Pastoral | 
poetry and drama belong to the same class of writings as 
do dreams of a former golden age, and visions of a future 
paradise. And Utopias, which are attempts to find some 
alternative arrangement for human society, are inspired by 
the same desire to escape "the weariness, the fever, and the 

fret" of this imperfect world. 

■ 

Because the human imagination changes very slowly, 
utopian ideas tend to fall into certain well defined 
patterns, utopianism is closely bound up with primitiv¬ 


istic thought, inasmuch as both are attempts to escape the 
present by an effort of the imagination, and religious 
ideas of escape into heaven are intimately connected with 































(2 




Utopia. Thus the pagan conception of the Golden Age hears 
the same relation to the Garden of Eden, as do the Isles 
of the Blest to the Hebrew Heaven. Again, the pagan theory 
that mankind had deteriorated from a state of bliss^ cor¬ 
responds roughly to the Christian theory of original sin. 

So also, the happy life of heroes "translated" to the Isles 
of the Blest may he compared to the Joys of the righteous 
in Heaven. 

Although it was commonly believed that mankind had 
degenerated, there was another very widespread belief which 
we must pause over: the theorj/ that although civilisation 
had corrupted men, there still lived in remote parts of the 
world an unspoiled primitive people. The Scythians are an 
example of such "noble savages" , Plato’s Atlanteans^ 
another, and the Germans in Tacitus another. It is well 
known how great a part this idea of primitive perfection 
played in Eighteenth Century writings; it persisted with 
great vigour until exploration finally proved that no such 
perfection existed. The idea does linger however in rebels 
like P. H. Lawrence, and is held by some enthusiasts who 
try to prove on pseudo-anthropological evidence, that the 

(1) How widespread were these ideas is amply shown in 
Primitivism and Belated Ideas in Antiquity by Professors 
Love joy and Boas, f 19351 

(2) Ibid. Chapter XI 

(3) Critias and Timaeus 














( 3 . 






sexual morality of savages is far “better than ours. 

While the ancients often held such primitivistic con¬ 
ceptions, there were also ideas of perfectibility in exist¬ 
ence; indeed, pagan philosophy as much as Hebrew doctrine 
preached the renewal of man’s nature. Whether it was a 
return to virtuous simplicity, as in the Stoics, or the 
attainment of a religious ideal, as in the Hebrew prophets, 
the urge is similar. It is very true that the Hebrew rule 
is more severe, but the will to become perfect (which is 
all that Puritanism in the best sense really means) was 
the same. The Hebrew prophets, as Professor J. 0. Hertzler 
points out 1 , often described the Utopia which would follow 
moral regeneration, and the conception of Utopia, even if 
n not of this world", is implicit in Christian teaching. 

In the vision of St. John, the Utopian dream is also dis¬ 
cernible. And, it must not be forgotten that Plato had 
described the greatest of all Utopias , the Republic , in 
which ideal justice reigned, where all men were completely 
adjusted to their environment and to their fellow creatures. 
It is not strange then, with this religious and intellect¬ 
ual heritage, that Western civilization should have produced 
many Utopias . Our purpose is to examine only those In 

(1) The History of Utopian Thought Chap. I. 

















(4 

English, but many have appeared on the Continent as well. 


To bring together the ideas of original deterioration 
and possible perfectibility the ancients supplied various 
cyclic theories of history-**, and these theories have in 
ancient and modern times given considerable stimulus to 
Utopian thought. It was believed by some ancient writers 
that what man had been he might be again: the Golden Age 
might be brought back. The young Romantic enthusiasts 
proposed to establish Utopia In a virgin land, and their 
enthusiasm is partly explained by a tacit hope that cyclic 
ideas could be turned to use. Again it is instructive to 
note that H* G. Wells, while discarding the primitivistic 
idea, does adopt to a certain extent the cyclic implications 
of Spengler. In The Shape of Things to Come he departs 
from Spengler in tacking on a Utopian picture, but the 
influence is obvious. 

But let us return to Utopia itself. Throughout the 
middle ages, says E. E. Fairchild, there persisted ,T legends 
concerning an island of peace and plenty hidden far away 
in the western seas....Wits might call it the ’land of 
cookery* but to most men of the Middle Ages it was the Land ij 


of the Blest. Indeed this locality, originally pagan, be¬ 
came confused with the Earthly Paradise rf . % The Earthly 
Paradise is described in some detail in the Old English 

(1) Vide: Lovejoy and Boas. op. cit. Chap. I. 

(2) The Noble Savage p. 6. 














( 5 . 

Poem called the Phoenix x , its location in that poem being 
fixed in Asia. Usually, however, the popular mind placed 
it far off in the Western seas. There is a description of 
it in Dante, and later the fortunate isles are described in 
digressions in Tasso's Jerusalem delivered and Ariosto’s 
Orlando Furioso . But we must not believe that the idea was 
merely toyed with: ”1 am convinced”, wrote Columbus, TT that 
there is the Terrestrial Paradise”. It is not strange 
therefore that early explorers actually believed they had 
discovered Atlantis, and that savages were described in 
their accounts as unspoiled beings. Neither is it strange 
that most writers from More onwards placed Utopia in the 
western seas.' - ' 

The conception of a happy state from which man had 
fallen persisted not only in religious teaching but.in 
common everyday thought. Chaucer in his The Former Age , 
pictures a blissful life of peace and plenty, and as Pair- 
child shows, this picture he had taken from Boethius 1 2 3 
Consolations of Philosophy and the Homan de la Hose . The 
theory of deterioration was intertwined with dreams of the 
Earthly Paradise. It is not difficult to show, I think, 
that in as late a poem as Milton’s Paradise lost , which is 
essentially Christian, the same ideas are at work. Adam 

(1) In Anglo-Saxon Poetry , trans. H. K. Cordon 

(2) Quoted by Fairchild, op. cit. p. 6. 

(3) Plato's Atlanteans lived beyond the pillars of Hercules 
in the Western Seas. Vide critias and Timaeus 



























. 







( 6 - 

and Eve, "before the fall, were possessed of "right reason", 
and had a pure and undefiled sense of "truth, wisdom, 
sanetitude severe and pure"l. It is significant that these 
are the qualities usually attributed to the noble savage 
or the creature of a Golden Age. Primitivism is so en¬ 
meshed with Christian belief that where one ends and the 
other begins is often difficult to discern. 

Another idea, which is closely associated with the 
foregoing, is that of ius naturale , with its usual coroll¬ 
ary, the equality, in a natural state of all human beings. 
"To the teachers of primitive and medieval Christianity", 
says Professor Max Beer, " ius naturale must have been 
particularly congenial ".^ For in the primitive church, as 
in the monasteries of the Middle Ages, and the later relig¬ 
ious orders, the rule of poverty had dictated community of 
possessions. The various twistings of the doctrine of ius 
naturale by the Schoolmen, to Justify the existence of 
private property, it is not my purpose to discuss. But one 
thing is essential: the open field system and the example 
of the monasteries had accustomed the medieval mind to the 
idea of communism. The rallying cries of men like John 
Ball show that community of goods and the equality of men 
in a natural state were common beliefs. In the light of 

(1) P.L. IV- 1.293. Cf. also Tractate on Education: "The end 
of all learning is to repair the ruins or our first 
parents by regaining to know God aright". Selected Essays 
of John Milton p.4. 

(2) of British Socialism Voll , p. 8. 














', -n 

y 



jt*ora 
















these facts the "Utopia" of Sir Thomas More is not sur¬ 
prising. 

While recognizing these general characteristics of 
Utopian writing it is well to point out that hy no means 
all Utopias are outlined as proposed constitutions for the 
human race, however complete the plans may he. Plato 

admits that his city "is confined to the region of specu¬ 
lation", for it is "/not/ to he found anywhere on earth.,. 

And the question of its present or future existence on earth!' 

1 

is quite unimportant". The Republic is rather a standard 
of comparison than a political proposal. Aid that is 
essentially the spirit in which More, Bacon, Swift and Hume jj 
outlined their ideal commonwealths. Tt is only in times of 
great stress, as in the Puritan Revolution, and in the mod- 1 
ern industrial era that Utopias have been pressed forward 
as practical schemes for reform. 

By and large it is periods of strain which 

produce-Utopias: when current ideology becomes glaringly 

inadequate to justify existing institutions, Utopian ideas 

appear as a corrective. But, since no thinker can transcend 

his times, every Utopia hears upon it the imprint of its 

age: the picture of desired change is as much a reflection 

of current ideology as it is a symptom of the diseased 

conditions in society. As times change, so do human desired 

(l) Republic IX p. 554, traris. Davies "and Vaughan. 






















( 8 . 

and utopias accordingly are often a moving photograph of 
the changing ideals of mankind. So it is their fate to he 
a register of the forgotten hopes of man, as well as a 
record of man*s noblest aspirations. The inexorable 
march of human events may trample those dreams, but the 
impulse that gave them shape, the generous impulse to 
alleviate the ills and sufferings of the weak and downtrod¬ 
den, will ever remain one of the great creative forces in 
history. 







CHAPTER I 


(9 


More r s Utopia and the End of the Kiddle Age s. 

The Utopia of Sir Thomas More is, next to the Republic 
of Plato, probably the greatest work of its kind in exist¬ 
ence, and it is no small indication of its importance that 
its title has given a name to all pictures of ideal states 
since the Sixteenth Century. More’s work has been the 
starting point for all subsequent ideal commonwealths. It 
is very strange then, that, in spite of the practical effect 
of the Utopia , such bitter controversy should have raged 
about its real meaning. So intermixed are More T s humour, 
satire, and sincere writing, that the real purport is 
clouded: apologists have found in it what they sought to ' 1 
defend, critics have found in it what they wished to berate. 
That Communists look upon More as the founder of their 
movement, and that the Roman Catholic Church has recently 
canonized him, are sufficient indications of the wide 
divergence of opinion about his work. In Catholic quarters, 
at the present day, emphasis is laid chiefly on his satire, j 
"Throughout his whole life", says John B. O’Reilly, "St. 
Thomas More was a practical joker. His renowned Utopia is 
perhaps his greatest joke'." To many readers of the 
Utopia this seems much too extreme, but hardly less ex¬ 
treme seems the judgment of Professor Max Beer when he 


(1) The Utopia of St. Thomas More by J. B. O’Reilly, p.8 
















































(10 


calls More, "one of the greatest figures in the history of 
Communism* 3 -." The course of social movements and radical 
thought since the Sixteenth Century has done a great deal 
to put More in a false perspective, hut in spite of the 
effort of recent scholars to readjust the picture, the 
reader still finds much that is inharmonious and puzzling* 
The reason for this is not hard to discover. More 
lived at a time when economic relationships were undergoing 
a profound change, and when secular thinking was making its 
first faltering and groping footsteps. Men's ideas were 
turned both backward and forward and More was no exception. 
"Thomas More", says Professor R. W. Chambers in his very 
convincing study, "belongs...not to the modern period, but 

. o 

to the last transitional era of the Middle Age s~." His 
communism, far from anticipating the "scientific utopianism" 
of the nineteenth Century, is rather an idealization of the j! 
community of goods exemplified in the monastic rule and in 
the Primitive Church. The advance of industrialism and the 
contemporaneous rise of revolutionary labor movements have 
made More the "accidental" prophet of modern reform, but 
he would have had no sympathy with the revolutionary over¬ 
throw of institutions. Luther and Calvin had no clearcut 
realization of the political results of their individual- 


(l) History of British Socialism , Mol. I p. 32. 
( 2) /Thomas Mor e , pi 3'? 0. 


















(11. 


istic opinions in religion" 1 2 3 ; similarly More could not have 
dreamed that his teachings might someday become a weapon 

against the Church, (which in the course of a couple of 

a 

hundred years accomodated itself to Capitalism ). 

The Utopia is composed of two books* The first of 
these outlines the existing social evils in England, and 
the second (which was written first) describes an imaginary 
commonwealth in which all these wrongs are righted. More, 
as J. H. Lupton has pointed out, drew directly, for his 
details, on Amerigo Vespucci's TT Voyages’ T in one of which 
an ideal state, somewhere beyond the Canary Islands, is 
described . The first book is arranged as a dialogue be¬ 
tween Thomas More, then on a diplomatic mission to the how 
Countries, Peter Giles, a good and prosperous citizen of 
Antwerp, and one Raphael Hytfcloday, a scholar who had 
travelled the seven seas and kept his eyes open. It is 
Raphael who later tells the story of Utopia. In the dial¬ 
ogue More presents Hythloday as a thorough-going communist 
who believes that the only remedy for social evils is cat¬ 
astrophic overthrow. Peter Giles is presented as a comfort¬ 
able but very intelligent middle class citizen who is fairlyj 
content with the status quo . The author himself stands be- 

(1) Vide Gooch, G.P. English Democratic Ideas in the XVII , 

Century, Chapter Tr -”- 

(2) Vide Religion and the Rise of Capitalism by R. U.Tawney. 

(3) The Utopia of Sir Thomas More , ed. J.H. lupton, Pp. 
xxxvii-xl. 



























(12. 


tween the two, as one who recognizes the burdens of the 
poor, hut who believes that their troubles can be gradually 
alleviated. He does not believe that the communist state 
would be entirely ideal: ,T ...Manye thinges came to my mind 
which in the manners and lawes of that people seemed to be 
instituted and founded of no good reason....I can not agree 
and consent to all thinges that he said...so must I nedes 
confesse and graunt, that many thinges be in the Utopian 
weal publique, which in our cities I may rather wisshe for 
then hoope afteA" Many critics have pointed to this 
passage triumphantly but caution should be exercised. Marie 
Del court r s edition contains a very significant note bearing 
on the whole problem: 

"More desavoue sa propre creation: cette precaution 
figure dans presque toutes les Utopies anciennes. 

Les Utopies francaises du XYII e si&cle, qui appar- 
tiennent en general 4 la litterature libertine et 
frondeuse, se terminent par des formules de blame 
oft. l f on ne sent, bien entendu, non plus qu r ici, 
aucune conviction reelle." (l) 2 3 

This makes the problem more difficult, especially as 
all views on social, political and religious questions are 
put in Hyt Kb day's mouth. "That these views," says Lupton, 
"are all alike seriously propounded by himself /More/, it 

3 

would be preposterous to maintain." But the problem of 

(l) Utopia, ed. Lupton p. J307-9 

( 2 ) L * l; to pie , on le trait e de la meilleure forme de gouvern - 

ement. ed. Marie Delcourt, p. 207. 

(3) Lisbon, op. cit. p. xli. 

















discovering More T s 7 !real convictions 7 ’ is made no simpler by 
this observation; we must approach the Utopia , constantly 
aware that seriousness and satire are all commingled in 
the work. 

The first hook is a hitter outcry against the glar- 

r 

ing inequalities of English society. The rich profit un¬ 
justly hy the unremitting toil of the poor and make laws in 
their own interest. Their accumulated wealth, which leads 
only to extravagance, display, immorality and sloth, is the 
curse of England; could money hut he abolished all crime 
would disappear. The enclosing of the commons hy predatory 
landlords was making the lot of the poor intolerable, for 
there was insufficient land left for tillage and the rise 
in prices was driving the poor to crime and fraud 1 . The 
eviction of tenants and the dispersal of the retinues of 
I nobles had created a class of sturdy beggars who had turned 
to theft and vagabondage. Thus, many, through no fault of 
their own, were forced into the growing class of unemployed 
and these unfortunates suffered punishment for crimes not 
of their own causing. Was not capital punishment for theft 
then, the most iniquitous injustice? 

(1) Cf. R. H#- Tawney: The Agrarian Problem of the Sixteenth 
Century pp.167 and ff.. Tawney points out that greedy 
landords were not the sole enclosers of land. It was a 
practice also carried on to a large extent by progres¬ 
sively-minded farmers who wished to increase their 
holdings. 

























T 


! rj[ 

l 


f« 


' o . ‘ ;■ ’ ' i 1 '. 


■ ■ 































(14 


Following this presentation of current evils. More and 
Hythloday dispute about the best policy to be pursued, 
Hythloday arguing for a radical change in the economic and 
social order. More presenting a few stock arguments against 
communism, such as the disappearance of personal incentive, 
and the encouragement of laziness. At this Hythloday offers 
to describe an ideal communist commonwealth. 

The island of Utopia the author places far-off in the 
western seas, vaguely between Brazil and India. Its loca¬ 
tion as we have noticed is traditional. "I have ascertained 
wrote William Bud6 to Thomas Lupset, "that Utopia lies 
outside the bounds of the known world. It is in fact one 
of the Fortunate Isles, perhaps very close to the Elysian 
Fields". 1 2 Utopia had formerly been. More tells us, a fair¬ 
ly unproductive peninsula, which the philosopher king, 
Utopus, had managed to separate from the mainland by order¬ 
ing a deep channel to be dug. The island so formed was 
crescent shaped, and naturally defended by dangerous rocks 
"An therfore it seldome chaunceth that any straunger. 


■ 


oneles he be guided by a Vtopian, can come into this haven." 

S 

(p. 117) . Having made the island impregnable, Utopus pro- 

(1) The Utopia of Sir Thomas More ed Lupton p.lxxxix. This 
is, I think, an interesting example of the medieval 
tendency to make Utopia synonymous with the Islands of 
the Blest. 

(2) All subsequent citations will be from Robynson's trans¬ 
lation, in J. H. Lupton’s edition, 1895. 




































. 

. 

. 











. 










■ 




* 

. 




' 















. 

. 








1 ", 












(15. 

ceeded to reorganize the economic life of the country, whose 
people until that time had been poor, and divided hy civil 
strife. Under Utopus's guidance the island rose to a 
condition of perfect felicity in which it had ever since 
remained. 

"There he in the Ilande.liii.large and faire cities 
or shiere towns, agreying all together in one tongue, in 
lyke maners, institucions and lawes". (p. 119). All cities 
are built as nearly alike as possible, and on the plan of 
Amaurote, the capital city, which is square, surrounded on 
three sides by a wall and moat, and on the fourth by a 
river. Each city is divided intofour identical wards; each 
street has at its centre the Syphogrant's house and there 
are fifteen houses on each side of this house. In every 
city ward there is a well-equipped hospital where cases of 
contagious disease are isiated. 1 

The houses of the citizens are of extremely fine 

structure, and are all Joined together. No doors are locked 

"Everye man that wyll maye goo yn, for there is nothynge 

wythin the houses that is pryuate, or annye mannes owne." 

(p. 130). The building and repairing of houses, we learn 

later was one of the chief occupations of laborers not 

otherwise employed, for the Utopians took great pride in 

(1) Vide Lupton's note: The Royal College of Physicians was 
formed in 1518; More T s work appeared in 1516. 























( 16 . 

their dwelling houses. Behind the houses were beautiful 
gardens, in which were fruit trees, herbs and plants of 
many varieties. The houses lined broad clean streets; the 
city itself was kept free of filth: all slaughtering of 
beasts was done outside the city limits 1 by bondsmen. 

Outside the cities were the farms which were distributed 
all over the country. No farm household had less than 
forty members, and over every thirty farms or families 
there was a ruler, "which is called a Phylarche, being 
as it were a hed baylyffe". (p. 121). The soil is poor 
and the air not very wholesome, but by temperate diet and 
diligent work, they have brought it about "that in no 
eountrye ys greatter increase, and plenty of corne and 
cattell, nor mens bodies of longer life, and subiect or 
apt to fewer deseases." (p. 211). Out of every farm or 
family twenty persons go each year to the city, to be 
replaced by twenty urban dwellers. Thus it is that all 
Utopians acquire sooner or later a first-hand knowledge of 
agriculture, which is the basic industry. Every child is 
taught husbandry, both in school and in the fields, so that 
city and country village should have perfect understanding 
and act co-operatively. 

Utopia is a democratic federation of autonomous shires. 

(1) A thing much to be desired in 1516. 





















(17 


Each of the fifty-four cities sends yearly to Am&urote 
"three wise men" who deliberate on national questions. 

This central council settles national questions, such as 
the supply of commodities, but the cities are practically 
autonomous, and their system of government is, briefly, as 
follows: 

Every thirty families elect yearly a Syphogrant or 
Phylarch, and every ten Syphogrants "with all their three 
hundred families, bee under an offycer whyche was ones 
called the Tranibore, now the chiefe Phylarche." (p. 135). 
The Syphogrants (two hundred in all, in each shire of six 
thousand persons) elect a prince by secret ballot, out of 
four candidates named by the people of the four wards of 
the city. "The princes office contineweth for all his 
liffe time, oneles he be deposed or put downe for suspition 
of tirannye." (p. 136). Tranibores meet every three days 
with the prince to settle all disputes, and "it is deathe 
to have any consultatyon for the commonwealthe oute of the 
cownsell, or the place of the common electyon." (p. 137). 
This law was made to prevent conspiracy, or any attempt at 
setting up a dictatorship. 

In the Republic , Plato had decreed community of goods 
among the guardian class only, but More applies the principle 















of communism on a much wider scale. All things are owned 
in common and there is free exchange between the farms and 
cities; there are no rich or poor. Tf So the hole Ilande is 
asit were one famelie or householde. TT (p. 170). No money 
is used, for every man can get anything he desires; indeed 
precious metals are held in contempt and are used for mak¬ 
ing chamber pots and fetters. Jewels are given to children 
as toys, so that they will be later put away as childish 
things. This community of goods, which is based on co¬ 
operative and universal labor, ensures for the Utopians 
ample leisure time, and guarantees a perpetual abundance 
of goods. They always raise more corn than is necessary, 
and so it is with other commodities: they always keep a two 
years’ balance of goods ahead. 

Prom Plato More took the idea of communal dining halls, 
at which all citizens gathered to eat. At the head table 
sat the Syphogrant, the priest and other local dignitaries; 
at the other tables throughout the hall, young and old were 
intermixed so that the young might profit from the discourse 
of their elders while they ate. But although the elders 
always had priority (they were served first), children were 
encouraged to voice their own opinions so that they might 
become facile in conversation. 


Officials, as we have seen, direct the economic life 












(19 


of the country: "The chyefe and almost the onelye offyce 

of the Syphograuntes ys to see and take hede that no man 

sytt ydle.” (p. 141). .Agriculture is taught to all men 

alike, hut each person has a particular craft as well, 

which it is his duty to ply "wyth earnest delygence; and 

yet for all that not to he weryed from earlye in the 

mornynge to late in the evennynge wyth contynnuall woorke, 

like lahorynge and toolynge beastes." (p. 141). Thus, if 

everyone works*, none need work too long or too hard,— 

unceasing toil was the lot of all laborers in More’s time. 

In all Utopia there are only five hundred people who are 

permitted to he idle: the Syphogrants (who often work 

nevertheless), the learners or students, and those persons, 

such as mechanics, who in their spare time have made a 

contribution to learning or to technical processes. Out 

of this class of learned men are chosen ambassadors, priestq 

Tranihores and the prince himself. 

Because all men work in Utopia no more than six hours 

a day is demanded of anyone. And the Utopians’ spare time 

is their own to use, not, it is true, "in ryote, or slough- 

fulness", hut upon "some other good science, as shall please 
2 

them." (p. 143) . Their games are all of a morally harmless 

(1) Cf. H.G.Wells, A Modern Utopia Chap T ‘^3, where idleness 

is possible; also Bertrand Russell’s proposal of a vag¬ 
abond’s wage in Proposed Roads to Freedom . 

(2) Cf. also the Pantisocracy scheme. 



























kind, but there was no lack of merriment in Utopia, as 
More's account of the fun and music at mealtime attests. 
More wanted life to he gay, and when he vigorously defends 
the six hour day (p. 146 ff.) we cannot believe that he is 
merely joking. So also in his passionate argument for the 
adoption of communal ownership by European nations (pp 299- 
309) the tone is far too sincere for one to believe, as 
does Mr. Christopher Hollis, that the Utopia is a jeu 
d'^sprit . 1 2 It is true that More was later to defend private 

Q 

ownership , but it is hard not to feel that, theoretically 
at least. More believed in medieval communism in 1516. 

Throughout his whole life. More, who was keenly aware 
of man's spiritual destiny, hated all forms of luxury, ex¬ 
travagance and display. Personal possessions did not 
interest him, and therefore we are not surprised to learn 
that the Utopians dress with extreme simplicity. All 
garments are made in one fashion, there being a slight 
difference only for the married and unmarried. At their 
work men wear leather garments which are so well made that 
they last seven years; abroad, cloaks of the natural color 
of wool are worn. As for linen cloth, it is valued more 
for its whiteness than for the fineness of its texture. 

Since there is no variety in color, less clothes are needed 

(1) Sir Thomas More pp. 72 ff. 

(2) in the Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation, cited 


by Hollis, pp.89-92 













, 

T 

. 

* 

« 








- 

1 




c 















■ 

' 









, 

- 





■ 


. 






. 















. 








(21 




"For whie shoulde /anyone/ desyre moo?" More asks humour¬ 
ously, "seeing if he had them, he should not he the better 
hapte or covered from colde, nother in his apparell any 
whyt the cumlyer." (p.151). Evidently in Utopia, happiness 
consists partly in having few desires! Even the prince 
himself "is not knowen from the other by his apparel, nor 
by a crown or diademe or cappe of maintenaunce, but by a 
littell sheffe of corne carried before him* And so a taper 
of wax is borne befor the byshop, whereby onely he is 
knowen. " (pp. 233- 4 ]. 

The people of Utopia thus live sober and industrious 
lives, completely happy in their physical environment. We 
learn that they are happy and flourishing, "lyghte and 
quycke of boddy", nin&e, active and strong (p. 211), quick 
witted, and inquisitive "to heare what is done in everye 
land." (p. 220). In three years they mastered Greek, which 
Hythloday taught them; they are gentle and merry, "delytynge 
in quyetness, and, when nede requyreth, able to abyde and 
i suffre much bo delye laboure." (p. 212). Such a people 
would not be given to riotous living, nor are they, for 
there is no dicing or gambling in Utopia; there are no 
taverns, stews or unlawful assemblies. Living as they do, 
in a state of innocence, they have achieved, without 
"revealed religion", a state of pagan virtue. 














Not many laws are needed, "for to people so instructe 
and institute very few do suffice." (p. 234J 1 . And what 
laws there are, are simply written, so that there is no 
need for a class of lawyers who would quibble over inter¬ 
pretation. Every man in Utopia pleads his own case before 
the law, and abides by the decision of the council, which 
metes out punishments according in severity to the nature 
of the offence. Heinous crimes are punishable by bondage, 
while the death penalty is rare, it being used only for a 
repetition of a heinous crime. Thus have the Utopians 
applied the light of reason to their affairs. 

But the UtoiDians* freedom is by no means complete, 

for they are not allowed to travel from one city to another 

a, 

without a licence from the Syphogrant fp. 167) . Wherever 

they go they must immediately take up their own occupation, 

and, Hythloday remarks, "How you see howe litle libertie 

they have to loyter; how they can have no cloke or pretence 

to ydlenes." (p. 169). Freedom of movement is thus as 

restricted as freedom of enterprise. 

All the details of their social system, the unit of 

which is the family are carefully worked out: 

"First, the city consisteth of families: the families 
most commonly be made of kinredes. For the women, 

(1) Nearly every Utopia has this feature as we shall see. 

(2) Lupton cites Plutarch's hycurgus on this point; Plato 
also restricted the movements of people in the haws . 







' 





















. 













. 

- 













r 









- 








. 









■ 






























( 23 . 


"when they he mar ye d at a lawful age, they goo into 
their hushandes houses. But the male chyldren, with 
al the hole male ofspring, continewe still in their 
owne familie, and he gouerned of the eldest and 
auncientest father onles he dote for age; for then 
the next to hym in age is put in his rowme." (p.153). 


Uo family may have less than ten or more than sixteen 


grown persons in it, though the number of small children 
.1 


is not specified • If necessary, adjustments of numbers 
are made between families. Just as in Swift’s Houyhnhnmland. 
In the family itself the eldest always has precedence; 
husbands may chastise their wives and parents their children 
Thus, there is, in Utopia, a sort of patriarchal system of 
family government. 

Marriage is very severely regulated, and no woman 
under eighteen or man under twenty-two may take a spouse. 

It is interesting that More, who followed some of Plato's 
proposals, would have nothing to do with the community of 
wives; the rule of monogamy is rigidly enforced, and ante¬ 
nuptial offences are severely punished. Moreover, the 
betrothed individuals are left in no sort of mystery,for 
each sees the other naked before marriage, the woman being 
exposed in the presence of a trustworthy matron, and the 

p 

man in the presence of a good citizen . Adultery is punisted 


(1) More himself is a trifle indefinite. Cf. Lupton ed. 
pp. 153-4. 

(2) Cf. Bacon, Uew Atlantis in Ideal Commonwealths ed. Morlej 
pp. 126-7. 























T 





















(£ 4 , 


by bondage, and no man can divorce his wife because of her 
physical infirmity. However--and this has been a bone of 
contention—divorce is permitted in extreme cases of in¬ 
compatibility, even though the Roman Catholic church is 
so inflexible about it. More hastens to assure us never¬ 
theless that divorce is very rare. 

In discussing education More returns to Plato, al¬ 
though he differs In some details. Hirst of all there is 
universal education of the young, and the subjects taught 
are music, logic, arithmetic, geometry, (p. 184) astronomy 
and physical geography (p. 187). All of the youth, like 




Plato’s guardians, are trained in military sports' 1 2 . Pupils 


with special talents are singled out and they become members 

£ 


of the Order of the Learned . But, most important of all, 
the teachers ’’put into the heades of their children, whiles 
they be yet tender and pliaunt good opinions and profitable 
for the conseruation of the weale publique.” (p. 285). This 
proposal, unpleasant to liberals, is found in Plato, and it 
recurs again and again in Utopian thought; it is in the 
Hova Solyma , Oceana and is hinted at even in Wells 1 Shape of 
Things to Come . It is this feature of Utopias generally 
that arouses the ire of Mr. Aldous Huxley. ”If you want a 


(1) Cf. Plato, Bk.V, §467 (pp.177-8 ed. Davies and Vaughan) 

(2) Corresponding to the guardian class in Plato. 







































( 25 . 

great reform, take it back to the schools"—nearly all 
Utopian writers apply the principle. 

As for their learning itself. More’s Utopians had far 
outdistanced the philosophers of the Western world. Long 
ago had they freed their minds of vulgar superstitions, 
and they were experts in astronomy, meteorology and other 
branches of natural science. Being a rational people they 
had arrived at certain ethical principles based on reason, 
and held to the Epicurean philosophy mingled with certain 
religious beliefs, "wythoute the whyche....they thynke 
reason of yt selfe weak and vnperfecte." (p. 188). They 
had learned to discriminate between pleasures, like the 
ancients, but they believed in immortality and a system of 
rewards and punishments (because, they said, those beliefs 
could be demonstrated rationally). Pleasure, rationally 
pursued, would, they believed, end in the good life, and 

■j 

lead eventually (for they feared not death ) to everlasting 
happiness* 

Prom these basic assumptions their religious beliefs 
followed quite naturally. They believe in an eternal, all- 
powerful, incomprehensible deity, the originator of all 
things. And they were very willing to accept Christ, when 
Hythloday told of Him, because said they, Christ advocated 


(i) A recurrent Utopian idea 




















. 



X 

t 






, 



. 




' 


■ 















- 






























. 

















( 26 . 


2 

the community of* goods. But ever since the time of Utopus 


T + 


there had been almost complete religious toleration, (albeit 
atheists suffered the death penalty). Fanatics and bigots 
were severely punished for their actions but with these 
exceptions every man was given "free libertie and choyse 
to beleve what he woulde n (p. 274). Of the clergy there 
were two orders, one married, and the other, "pryestes of 
exceding holliness", unmarried. The churches were beautiful, 
ly and dimly lit, but all ceremonies were of such a hind 
as to offend no-one T s beliefs. It is not necessary to go 
further: surely More has here expressed enough radical 
proposals to cause anyone to doubt his orthodoxy; indeed 
one is tempted to conjecture that the subsequent course of 
his beliefs might have been vastly different had not the 
rash act of Luther in 1517 led to such revolutionary conseq¬ 
uences. 

There is but one matter to be dealt with before drawing 
together the various strands of this discussion, and that 
is the foreign relations of the republic of Utopia. More 
had seen enough, at first hand, of the treachery of European 


: 


governments, and it is not surprising therefore that the 




■ 


Utopians followed a policy of splendid isolation. They made 
no leagues with foreign nations, and imported no commodities 


(l) Whether this is so or not is a matter of dispute, and 
More wrote vaguely at this point. Vide Lupton's note 
p. 269. 





























. 

1 










. 




















■ 


. 




- 

. 













( 27 , 


except iron x . When they went to war, in self defence, or 
to relieve a stricken country of tyranny, they hired mercen¬ 
ary troops rather than expose their own countrymen to danger. 
But if they were forced to fight, they showed themselves to 
be exceedingly brave and skilful, although they saw no 
wrong (since war is an immoral business), in defeating the 
hostile nation by perfidy, treachery or bribes. Of course 
More is merely expressing his hatred of conflicts by out¬ 
lining a thoroughly sane, cold-blooded and Machiavellian 
theory of warfare, which is in no way a gentlemanly thing. 
For the Utopians are completely rational: if they are over¬ 
crowded, they see no harm in seizing and colonizing unin¬ 
habited country. In this, as R. W. Chambers points out. 

More is explaining merely what he thought should be England £ 
attitude toward the new world, but surely the German scholar 

was wrong who looked on More as the founder of British 
2 

imperialism.' 

What is the meaning of the Utopia ? Daniel Sargent is 
certainly wide of the mark when he says that "More started 
to write the Utopia to amuse a small circle of humanists**.. 
and found himself becoming.... frequently earnest and at 


n) To which might be added: gold and silver in exchange for 

the staples they exported. These treasures they accum¬ 
ulated for bribes in times of war. 

(2) R. W. Chambers, Thomas More, p. 141. 





































. 

. 




. 








. 







. 








: 

, 















. 






r 























' 

. 











( 28 . 


nl 


times indignant. 11 Christopher Hollis, who calls it a jeu 
d’esprit , says: TT In Utopia we have,...the picture of the 
state of society to which man can attain without revelation 


Where the customs of Utopia differ from Christian customs, 
it is....a misunderstanding to argue that More preferred 

o 

the Utopian customs.” Using that analysis, Hollis dis¬ 
poses of More 1 2 3 s communism, hedonistic philosophy, divorce 
laws and deistic tolerant religion. Here is, says he, the 
highest form of social organization that man can achieve 
in a natural state, hut without Christian revelation. How 
much worse do we, in Europe, conduct affairs, with the aid 
of a revealed religion. 1 It is easy to see however that 
Hollis baulks at communism and the religious difficulty, 
and he robs the Utopia of all meaning by applying a rigid 
Catholic analysis. He emasculates it completely. But 
there was much serious writing in the Utopia , much impas¬ 
sioned protest, which Professor Chambers recognizes. 
Accepting Hollis’s theory only in part. Chambers goes on 
to say: "From Utopia to his great speech at his trial 

More’s ideal is the same: peace and the unity of Christen- 
3 

dora.” More hated the new nation state and the new commer¬ 
cialism; he wished above all that the Church would be able 

(1) D. Sargent, Thomas More London 1936, p. 65. 

(2) C. Hollis, Sir Thomas More , p. 83. 

(3) op. cit. p. 3§8. 


ij! 










































.... 

, 

' 


' 






l ' ' ■ r ' 


1 : T 






. 








i 

- 



















( 29 , 


to settle its internal problems. And so he turned hack to 


the monastic ideal of communism. Let us not shy away from 
the word as Hollis does, because "modern” communism is 
revolutionary. More was ever "a man under authority", adds 
Professor Chambers, "...How communism and Catholicism have 
one thing in common. They compel a man to think of himself 
as a member of a corporate body under the strictest disci¬ 
pline." 1 2 Again, Professor Max Beer has shown that, ever 
since the primitive church, communism had been looked on by 
Catholics as more or less ideal, and that if Protestantism 
meant anything it meant individual enterprise. Many Cath¬ 
olics felt just as M 0 re did about the rising tide of free 
enterprise. 

But for the other questions, toleration, deism, divorce, 
hedonism, there is no such easy solution. Beer says, "Morefe 
Utopia is the application of the ethics and politics of 
the Church Fathers and the philosophy of Humanism the 
greatest secular problem--the organization of human society! 
How far humanism dominated the thoughts of any of the re¬ 
formers, Erasmus, Colet, More and the others is still a 
nice question, certainly beyond my powers to settle. It 
is impossible to say for certain what are More T s real 
opinions. But on one point, the opinion of G. P. Gooch is, 

I think, final, "It is surely extravagant to regard a work 


(1) IMa p. 395-6. ~7' 

(2) History of British Socialism. lonaon 1929, yol.I p.04, 






















. 

. 

t 

* 

■ 

- 

# 









(30 


which is so remarkable as a mere intellectual exercise." 4 

The influence of More has been enormous, for ’’each of 
the articles of his creed set a train of speculation in 
motion.”^ The Utopia has affected, in. one way or another, 
nearly all the Utopias since M 0 re*s time. That influence 
is very obvious in Campanella’s City of the Sun ; Swift 
salutes More in Gulliver’s Travels ; and Southey’s Colloquies 
shows the reverence of the author for More. The Utopia , 
says Chambers, "did more to make William Morris a Socialist 
than ever Marl Marx did."^ Karl Kautsky hailed More as 
the father of modern socialism. The list could be expanded 
indefinitely, for More’s Utopia h as been eagerly read by 
countless thousands; it is one of the few books which have 
won for themselves a place in V'drld literature. 

Since More’s work exerted such a profound influence 
on subsequent utopias, it would be well for us to character- 
ize the nature of that influence. First of all. More 
believed that society could be sanely and equitably organ¬ 
ized if the clear light of reason 4 were brought to bear on 
human problems* We shall meet with this idea again and 
again. Secondly, M 0 re believed that private property was 

the source of much of the crime in the world and that com- 

(1) English Democratic Ideas in the XVII Century, p. 29 

(2) TBidTprrrr—-- 

(3) Chambers, op cit. p.lE5. 

(4) Reason—with the help of religion, some critics would 
say. But see the foregoing discussion. 





















(31 

munal ownership would greatly reduce discontent and law- 
breaking. This belief has a long history and survives in 
modern radicalism. Thirdly, as one of the first Englishmen 
to outline a democratic state, More believed all men should 
have equality of opportunity, and some share in government. 
Therefore he endorsed universal education- 5 -, which is a 
fundamental aspect of later Utopian writing. Education 
becomes, in the hands of most Utopian thinkers from More 
to H. G. Wells an instrument of social stability. 

But there are elements of the Utopia which have not 
stood the test of time. The Utopians T simplicity of living, 
which More's high religion dictated, has not appealed to 
recent thinkers. To be happy in Utopia meant to lop off 
one’s desires; the modern man wants a wider, richer, more 
abundant life, free from regulation. In the Utopia there 
was not enough variety, not enough color, for the average 
Renaissance man, and the slight concessions to individual 
expression were not sufficient. There was a strong ele¬ 
ment of uniformity in Utopia, not only in buildings but 
in clothes, and the restless renaissance mind found medieval 
utopia not enough for his demands. Compare More's Utopia 
with Rabelais' description of the Abbey of Theleme, in 
Gargantua , and the difference in attitude becomes obvious. 

. . ’ ' 1 " (far ihtmoiipar't) 

(1) Plato s educational system was designed A for the guard¬ 
ians. More goes further, though he does provide higher 
education for the more intelligent. 















. 







(32 


Rabelais gives to the Thelemites liberty to live and dress 
as they please; there is endless color and variety.'*' 

However, uniformity and regulation are prominent feat¬ 
ures in Carapanella's City of the Sun , and they return in 
the cheerless schemes of the French utopian socialists 

Babeuf, Cabet and Fourier, whose passion for symmetry was 

2 

almost an obsession. Except for a few doctrinaires most 
Englishmen have rejected such ideas. The narrow confines 
of Utopia and the restricted freedom of movements of the 
citizens have also been attacked by later writers, notably 
H. G. Wells, who says that in More’s Utopia there was 
"intolerable continuity of contact.” 1 2 3 But social life in 
the Sixteenth Century had, within its narrow limits, far 
more natural solidarity than has ours, and continuous con¬ 
tact with his fellow men did not trouble Sir Thomas More. 

Whatever one may think of the desirability of living 
in More’s Utopia , one thing is obvious: his book gave vocal 
expression to the laments of the poor, whose lot was becom¬ 
ing ever more distressing in the sweeping agrarian changes 
of the Sixteenth Century. The steady conversion of arable 
land to pasture, which brought endless litigation over the 

vexed and confused problem of tenant right, was creating an 

(1) Rabelais* Works, trans. Urquhart and Motteux, Vol I, 
Bohn’s Library, 1864. 

(2) Vide Laidler, History of Socialist Thought, 1927 Chap. 
Till • 

(3) Wells, A Modern Utopia, p.25. 




















■ 

. 

. , 

* 















. 









, 

* 

* 

















■ 




- 






' 

. 


* 

r 






’ 












(33 


unbearable problem of unemployment and destitution. Seeth¬ 
ing discontent flared up into open revolt in the Yorkshire 
rising of 1536 and Ket 1 s rebellion of 1549. The middle 
of the century, which, says R.H. Tawney, ’’marks the bottom 
point in the condition of the sixteenth century peasant, 7 ’ 1 
was disturbed by continuous agitation on the part of ten¬ 
ants against the landlords. 

But one fact is to be noted, and I think it throws 
considerable light on the meaning of More’s Utopia . The 
demands of the peasants in these troubled years were 
comparatively conservative; they looked backward to the 
quiet community of feudal life. Whatever communism there 
was, was TT not that of the saints /the Puritans/ or the 
theorists, but the spontaneous doctrineless communism of 
the open field village.” 2 Even so was More T s Utopia . Not 
until the rise of Puritanism does doctrinaire radicalism 
in economics and politics appear; the peasants of More T s 
day (even M 0 re himself), still ’’accepted the established 
system of society with its hierarchy of authorities and 
division of class functions and they had a most pathetic 
confidence in the Crown.” 3 

(1) The igrarian Revolution of the Sixteenth Century , p.372 

(2) Tawney, op. cii p. 

(3) Ibid, pp. 339-40. 





























* 

; 


. 

■ 




. 

* 












. 












e 




' 
























CHAPTER II 


Bacon f s New Atlantis and the Renaissance 


With Elizabeth’s reign came a lull in radical thinking, 
The lot of the peasantry and the sturdy beggars was still 
very bad,but a new Poor Law was able, partly at least, to 
cope with the problem of poverty. "Sir Thomas Smith's 
Commonwealth of England ", says Gooch'*', "may be taken as 
representing the ordinary attitude of thoughtful minds at 
that time towards the more general problems of polities. 

*My map*, says Sir Tbomas, T is unlike Plato and Xenophon 
and More,—feigned commonwealths such as never were nor 
shall be—vain imaginations, fantasies of philosophers, to 
occupy their time and to exercise their wits. ,TI The spirit 
of medieval communism had been preached against by men like 
Latimer and Crowley during the middle of the Sixteenth 
Century, and the flashing brilliancy of the energetic and 
individualistic closing decades put communism quite in a 
shadow. Shakespeare treats Jack Cade unsympathetically; 


the ideal state outlined by Gonzalos in The Tempest, Act 2, 


sc.i , is described only to be ridiculed. In the Faerie 


Queene, V, canto 2, Spenser makes Artegall throw the Giant 

3 


Communism into the sea . Communism mixed poorly with the 
expansive Individualism of men like Marlowe, Shakespeare 


(1) English Democratic Ideas in the XVII Century , p. 32. 

(2) and f3) 1 am indebted to Professor Beer's History of 

British Socialism for these references, pp. "46-7. 
























* ' 









. 

r 


: . * 








, 

. 













' T 








; 



. 

, . 



. 


• 


. 































( 35 . 


and Jonson. 

nevertheless, there was unrest in England, even if 
it was unexpressed, and, in the interim. Independency had 

8 

been horn. Bacon might reassure King James that the mon¬ 
archy would last for a thousand years, hut in the deceptive 
calm a storm was brewing. Many refused to take it serious¬ 
ly, and it is striking to note that in the new Atlantis , 
so modern, so progressive in its scientific prophecies, 
the description of political arrangements was considered 
unimportant enough to he left till the end, and then never 
to he included. That such confidence was quite baseless 
is, of course, a commonplace of history. 


Bacon's new Atlantis, first written in Latin, was not 


published until 1629, three years after the author T s death 
Like More's Utopia it is an ideal commonwealth, hut that 
is the only point of similarity, for whereas More based 
human happiness on social reorganization and rational 
ethical principles. Bacon based it on the application of 
scientific discoveries to human problems. The name Atlantis 
as is well known, comes from Plato's Timaeus and Critias 
in which dialogues a great western island, peopled by 
the descendants of Poseidon and Evenor, is described. The 
Atlanteans, who were later to do battle with the primitve 
and virtuous Hellenes, had been clever engineers and had 

























(36 






built great bridges, aqueducts, canals and public buildings. 
For centuries they had lived in great magnificence and 
felicity, but at length, the divine blood in their veins 
having become diluted, they disappeared, and the island 
Atlantis sank beneath the sea. It was natural that Bacon, 
his imagination fired by the discoveries in the West, 
should have taken this early commonwealth of scientifically- 
minded primitives as the model for his Hew Atlantis . Some 
men had conjectured that the continent newly discovered, 
(America), was the old Atlantis now risen from the ocean, 
and Bacon, adopting this idea 1 , imagined another island, 
a Hew Atlantis, still further west in the untravelled seas. 
The Hew Atlantis, like the old, would be inhabited by just 
such a people as Plato had imagined. Such is the literary 
background of Bacon*s utopia. 

The work is a magnificent fragment. Bacon spends 
most of his time discussing the scientific advances of the 
Atlanteans, (natural enough in such a Renaissance mind as 
Bacon’s), but he does not elaborate their social system. 

’ f In the intellectual sphere”, says Professor G. C. Moore 
Smith, "Bacon was a reformer and an idealist, in the social 

sphere a conservative and conformist. Is this not the 

(l)"Bacon was not the first to identify the newly discovered 
continent of America with Plato’s Atlantis". See intro¬ 
duction to G. C. Moore Smith’s edition of the Hew At¬ 
lantis , p, xx. 







































' 






, 







. 




. 


. 






f 



, 










■ . 






























. 

. 

. 




. 










* 
















(37 




reason that the flew Atlantis remains a fragment?” 1 Such 
an appraisal is misleading, for as a political thinker. 

Bacon had very advanced notions as to the function of the 
new nation state, though these opinions may seem conserv¬ 
ative to us. But what Is. true is that Bacon assumed the 
benefits of science would he so far-reaching and universal 
that the social improvement would he the natural consequ¬ 
ence. That accounts, I think, for the fragmentary char¬ 
acter of the hook. 

One general feature of the work ought to he indicated 
at the outset, and that is the cold intellectual attitude 
of the flew Atlantis as compared with the spontaneity and 
charm of More*s Utopia . There is a certain laboratory 
unreality about Bacon’s Atlanteans when they are compared 
with the joyful, hardworking, genial Utopians. 

The Atlanteans are, like the Utopians, an orderly 
peace-loving people; each man plies his craft or trade in 
perfect harmony with his fellows. The citizens live in 
quiet splendour, as a description of their homes and public 
buildings reveals. They treat foreigners with civility 
(how Bacon was distressed by his contemporaries.’), so much 
so that few strangers ever leave the island again. In 
Atlantis, officials are amply paid by the state and are 
therefore incorruptible: T ’when we offered him some pistolet^ 


(l) Ibid, p. xxii 
























( 38 . 




he smiling, said, *He mast not he twice paid for one 

labour’"- 1 -. Most of these things we might have found in 

More’s simple democratic state, but A Bacon’s nation has a 

2 

caste system is obvious from a remark that the travel¬ 
lers in Atlantis met many of the citizens, "not of the 
meanest quality", whom they found generous and friendly. 

And there is another sharp difference between the Medieval 
More and the Renaissance Bacon. Everywhere in Bacon’s 
utopia there is an atmosphere of courtly splendour; the 
garments of the officials are rich and many-coloured, and 
the feasts and ceremonies of the book reveal Bacon’s love 
of magnificence and display. Atlantis is a utopia for 
aristocrats; Utopia is the commonweal of everyman. More 
always held physical comfort in derision, because he 
placed the joys of the mind so high: his simply clad Utop¬ 
ians do not suffer by comparison with the Atlanteans. One 
other point of difference: More, in describing an ideal 
people, was content to show them without benefit of Christ¬ 
ianity^, whereas Bacon, even by invoking a miracle is anx¬ 
ious that his people (even the Jewish residents), be al¬ 
ready converted to the Christian religion. There was 

greater sincerity in More, deeper religious feeling; in 

(1) New Atlantis, Reprinted in Ideal Commonwealths, ed- 

Morley, 1895, p. 106. All further references will be 
made to this edition. 

(2) Ibid, p. 120 

(3) It is true of course that Hythloday converted some of 
them. 



































. 



. ’ 







. 

’ 


: 






. 









. 

. 




. 










' 














' 











• 





















(39 


Bacon's mind there was a solicitous desire for conformity. 
The conversion of the Atlanteans is one of the least 
pleasure able incidents in the "book. 

There is no necessity for us to pause over Bacon's 
account of the history of the Few Atlantis, which is 
merely an addendum to Plato's myth, or to tell of the con¬ 
version of the people, after an ark containing the Bible 
was found floating in- the sea near a great pillar of "blind¬ 
ing light. But we are concerned with the laws of the 
ancient king Salomana, who, like Here's TJtopus, drew up 
a constitution to guarantee the then achieved happiness 
of Atlantis. Following a policy of economic self-suffic¬ 
iency, he placed an interdict on strangers, "doubting 
novelties and commixture of manners" 3 -. Similarly he 
forbade the inhabitants to travel abroad, except on one 
condition,—as the accredited emissaries to enquire about 
the scientific advances in other countries. He organized 
a great college for research, afterwards to be called 
Saloman's House, from which were sent, periodically, to 
foreign lands, investigators 

"whose errand was only to give us knowledge of the 
affairs- and state of those countries to which they 
were designed, and especially of the sciences, arts, 
manufactures, and inventions of all the world; and 
withal to bring us books, instruments, and patterns 
in every kind....Thus you see we maintain a trade. 






i 




(1) As in Plato's haws, and partially in More. 














( 40 , 


not for gold, silver, or Jewels, nor for silks, nor 
for spices, nor any other commodity of matter; hut 
only for God's first creature, which was light; to 
have light I say, of the growth of all parts of the 
world. n (pp. 119-120) 

But except for this intellectual commerce with other nations 

the New Atlantis was a self-sufficient island. 

The family is the unit in the state, as in $TOre F s 
Utopia , and within limits there is a certain patriarchal 
control. Barge families are encouraged, and any man who 
has thirty living descendants, is given 1 a feast, for him¬ 
self and family, at the Stated expense. (One is reminded 
of the recent edicts of Stalin and Mussolini). Before 
the feast, "the father of the family whom they call the 
tirsan....sitteth in consultation, concerning the good of 
the family" (p. 121), settling disputes, reproving the 
wayward, arranging marriages and so on. "The governor 
sitteth to the end, to put in execution "by his public 
authority, the decrees and orders of the tirsan, if they 
should he disobeyed, though that seldom nedeth" (p. 121), 
This is clear enough, hut we are not told under whose 
Jurisdiction the family is if no one can qualify as tirsan. 

We might expect that in such a patriarchal state 
morals would he strict. They are. After bitterly denounc¬ 
ing European morality. Bacon tells us that "there are no 

stews, no dissolute houses, no courtesans" in the island 

(l) i.e. at the time he achieves this happy condition. 























(41 


(p. 125). The Atlanteans do not allow polygamy, and "have 
ordained that none do intermarry, or contract, until a 
month he past from their first interview....Marriage with¬ 
out consent of parents they do not make void, hut mulct 
it in the inheritors" (p. 126). Reacting from More’s 
arrangement to show the betrothed couple to one another. 
Bacon institutes the more decent "Adam and Eve pools, where 
it is permitted to one of the friends of the man, and 
another of the friends of the woman, to see them severally 
bathe naked" (p. 127). One notices here an increasing 
Protestant influence. 

But the New Atlantis is chiefly remembered for the 
description given by the father (or ruler) of Saloman’s 
house, of the scientific progress of Atlantis. Bacon 
believed that science was "the true Extender of the King¬ 
dom of Man over the universe, the champion of human liberty, 
and the Exterminator of the necessities that now keep man 
in bondage 1 2 ." In order that these material advances might 
be achieved. Bacon proposed in the New Atlantis "such a 
College of Research as he had himself thought of trying to 
create years before, if he could become Master of some 

p 

existing foundation in Cambridge or Oxford ." 

(1) Quoted by G. C. Moore Smith in his introduction. Op. 

cit. p. xi. 

(2) Ibid, p.xvii. 


































» 


















. 
















* 




, 








■ 


' 


. 




. 





. . 

• ■ ■ 

* 















(42 


The discourse of the official falls into four parts, 
the first of which is merely a statement of principle: 

"The end of our foundation is the knowledge of causes, and 
secret notions of things, and the enlarging of the hounds 
of human empire, to the effecting of all things possible" 

(p. 129). This is Faustian declaration in the best renais¬ 
sance manner. The official then went on to describe "the 
preparations and instruments" for achieving these ends. 

It would be tedious to catalogue these, but here are a few 
examples: Caves for "coagulations, indurations, refrigera¬ 
tions and conservations of bodies;" high towers "for 
insulation, refrigeration, conservation" (p. 129) and for 
meteorological services; fish nurseries; artificial baths; 
experimental ("demonstrating") laboratories, and so forth. 

In their great institution the Atlanteans practised vivi¬ 
section and made experiments in the grafting of plants, and 
the cross-breeding of animals. Besides this they had 
places for experiments with foods and beverages, drugs and 
dies, and perfumes; they used telescopes and microscopes, 
made investigations in mechanics, in light and sound. In 
addition they had engine houses, for producing swifter 

means of locomotion, and for making new instruments of war. 

. 

We have seen sufficient of this latter aspect of scientific 

i 

research in our own times to doubt whether Bacon could 
















/ 







. 
















. . 




. 









(43 


have had any conception of where this Utopian dream might 
lead. 

Next the official described "the several employments 
and offices" of the workers in Saloman r s house. First of 
these were "merchants of light" who went on intellectual 
missions to foreign lands. Second were scientific invest¬ 
igators in various capacities. "lastly", he said, "we 
have three that raise the former discoveries by experiments 
into greater observations, axioms and aphorisms. These 
we call interpreters of nature TT (p. 136). The autiior of 
the Magna Instauratio , (which tried to correlate all the 
sciences), naturally saw himself as a potential director of 
the House of Saloman 1 . 

But the seeds of a scientific tyranny were sown even 
in the Hew Atlantis , for the official continues, "And this 
we do also: we have consultations, which of the inventions 
and experiences which we have discovered shall be published 
and which not; and all take an oath of secrecy for the con¬ 
cealing of those which we think fit to keep secret; though 
some of those we do reveal to the State, and some not." 

(p. 136). The pernicious results of this principle we have 
witnessed in our own day, and Aldous Huxley has graphically 
shown in his Brave Hew World into what abject physical and 
mental slavery government- or class-controlled science 

(1 ) discussion by will Durant The Story of P hilosophy 

p.131 ana ff. 























(44 


■■PPM 

could "bring the human race. Hot all of the anticipations 
of Utopists are ideal. 

The book closes with a little section on what Bacon 
calls "ordinances and rites". These appear in general to 
"be certain government activities and injunctions. The 
Atlanteans have a museum, consisting of two long galleries, 
and in this building models and plans of inventions and 
statues of great inventors are housed. The government cir¬ 
culates publications concerning new inventions, sends out 
public health circulars and so forth. "We have certain 
hymns and services, which we say daily, of laud and thanks 
to God for his marvellous works" (p. 137). This latter 
suggestion Huxley brilliantly satirizes in his description 
of the Fordson Community Singeries and Solidarity Services. 
But Bacon saw clearly, nevertheless, that government could 
use the findings of science to promote the health and well¬ 
being of its people, and in this he was centuries ahead of 
his time. 

In describing the great benefits of science to the 
human race. Bacon was naively confident that the conquest 
of material environment would be attended naturally by 
human happiness. But the human creature is, unfortunately, 
not so simply or conveniently organized. It is not fantast 
ic to conjecture that in the unfinished portion of the 
























* 

- 

. 

; . 

. 

. 

, 


* 


- 

, 

. 




. ■ 























(45. 

New Atlantis Bacon could not have offered much by way of a 
solution for the social problem. "These last two centuries 
have told us," says Will Durant 1 , "that science, unaided, 
cannot solve our social problem." Bacon saw that a science 
of society was needed 2 , but it is hard to visrsLize a 
science that will nicely discriminate between clashing 
individual wills, that will be able to adjust equitably the 
conflicting desires of dominant and insurgent classes. 

Wells in his A Modern Utopia tries to grapple with this 
complex and urgent problem; it is the main task of a new 
sociology. 

Whether Bacon was unequal or not to the problems of 
sociology, one thing is certain: he did realize the high 
function of science in man’s conquest of the surrounding 
world. And he foresaw that the state would at some time 
avail itself of the findings of science to better the con¬ 
dition of its citizens. This, to my mind, is far more sig- 
nifieant than Bacon’s striking scientific anticipations 
observatories, the grafting of plants, microscopes, mechan¬ 
ical guns, airships, submarines and so forth, important 
also was Bacon’s conception of a learned council of 
scientific investigators: Saloman’s House may be called 
the spiritual ancestor of the Royal Society, and all similar 

(1) Philosophy and the Social Problem, 1919. p. Q2l 

(2) Ibia. p. 83. 

























































(46 


academies of science. The international checking of results 
of scientific research may also he traced to the New At- 
lantis. 


Bacon had an imagination that leaped over the centuries* 
he saw what developments in his own time were significant 
for the future, and he tried to guide his countrymen 
accordingly. He was a representative as were Newton and 
Harvey of that great enthusiasm for scientific knowledge 
in the Seventeenth Century, which produced, two hundred 
years later, such astonishing results in the ordinary life 
of men. His prophecy of the material wealth, comfort and 
prosperity, which would result from science may not excite 
us unduly in the Twentieth Century hut similar claims for 
science form the basis of H. G. Wells' Utopianism. Wells 
admits that science is not enough, hut he never fails, 
as Bacon never failed, to describe the intoxicating ex¬ 
pansion of human activity that science could provide. 





















* 









. 




. 










. 




, 

- 



, 

. 














( 47 . 


CKAPTFR III 

Utopias of the Puritan Revolution, 

Although the New Atlantis of Francis Bacon had in it 
no very radical political suggestions, extremely radical 
opinions were in the process of formation in other quarters 
From the beginning of the seventeenth century the monarchy 
was criticized by the new bourgeoisie and the religiously 
oppressed alike. "Modern democracy," says Gooch^, "is the 
child of the Reformation, not of the Reformers". So it 
was that the vague democracy and free thought of More, 
Calvin, Luther and Enox,set free insurgent reform movements 
from the Brownists of the Sixteenth, to the Baptists, Indep¬ 
endents, Quakers, ETillenarians, Levellers and Communists 
of the Seventeenth Century. Writing of a Utopian cast 
appeared everywhere, even though there are only a few 
full-fledged Utopias. The argument against monarchy gained 
momentum slowly, for the emphasis was upon religion, upon 
freedom of conscience. "Let religion be our premium 
quaerite" said Rudyerd, "for all things are but etceteras 
to it" 1 2 , and these words might easily be taken as the 
motto for Samuel Gott's Uova Solyma which we shall discuss 
presently. But besides religious freedom there were pleas 
for responsible government, equality before the law, abol¬ 
ition of monopolies, restoration of enclosed lands, and so 

(1) Gooch, op. cit. p. 7. 

(2) Quoted in Gooch, Ibid. p. 89. 





























(48 


npr 


on. The idea of communism re-appeared, as it always does 
in periods of social upheaval, and with it that recurrent 


theoretical plea of all insurgents: that all men were free 


and equal in a natural state, and had a natural right to 
the bounty of the earth. "The final defeat of the king 
opened the flood gates of radicalism that was stored up 
in the newly grown religious bodies” 1 , and English thought 
in the commonwealth years was torn back and forth by their 
controversies, rationalism and the social contract theory 
made their appearance, and for a period the True Levellers 
worshipped Reason just as did the Jacobins in the French 
Revolution 2 3 . Hot till H 0 bbes was the first attack made on 
the communist idyllic picture of ius naturale ,--even Milton 
in his Tenure of Zings and Magistrates had championed the 
idea of the original freedom of man, the theory of natural 
Rights, and a kind of social contract. 

Luring these years appeared also the Anti-Uorman 
agitation which declared that all of England's troubles 
were traceable to the Conquest, and the subsequent enclos¬ 
ures of the common lands by the crown and nobility. John 


Hare produced pamphlet after pamphlet^ in i^hich he propounded 


this theory; the energetic and levelling Lilburne accepted^ 


(1) Gooch, op. cit. p. 115 

(2) Vide M. Beer. History of British Socialism I, 54 

(3) Some of these, e.g. St Edwards Ghost and Anti-Hormanism 
are reprinted in the Harleian Miscellany. 

























(49. 

before he finally joined in the communist activities of 

Walwyn, Everard and Winstanley. 

'Extreme patriotism and primitive communism were at 

the base of inti-Normanism, but the Diggers added a new 

element: religion. The Diggers, who had gone to St. 

George’s Hill in Surrey on April 1st, 1649, to dig up the 

crown lands, were not only making a desperate gesture 

against private property in land, against civil law and 

oligarchy, but were pleading for TT a rationalist and 

Christianized ius naturale . The Diggers looked on Jesus 

as the first True Leveller.” 1 W© have found a similar 

idea in Mode’s Utopia already, and it crops up again in 

the Christian Socialist movement of the Nineteenth Century. 

Even in the Twentieth Century there are constant attempts 

to equate socialism and Christianity. The reason for this 

is obvious and has been glanced at in the introduction 2 : 

our religious heritage in the teaching of the prophets of 

the old Testament and of Jesus Christ is strongly U-topian, 

and all Christians embrace some phases of it with more or 
' 

less intensity. Too much has been written on both sides 
of this controversy for anyone ever to be able to settle 
Christ s real attitude toward property, and we shall make 
no attempt to settle it here. While Winstanley and his 

(1) Beer, op cit. p. 63. 

(2) p. 3. 






















fellow Diggers were vigorously defending their communistic 
theories on the basis of Christianity, others among the 
Protestants were just as vigorously defending, on the same 
basis, the principle of private ownership. 

The Utopias produced in these years reflect the turbu¬ 
lence of the times, although fas ideal commonwealths were 
not produced by every radical group) not all the main 
currents of thought are represented in the Utopias 1 . We 
shall deal with them in the order of their appearance: 

An Account of the Voyage of Domingo Gonzales to the World 

in the Moon , by Bishop Francis Godwin (1638), A Description 
of the Famous Kingdon of Macaria , by John Hartlib (1641), 
Nova Solyma by Samuel Gott (1648), and Oceana by James 
Harrington (1656). 




The Voyage of Domingo Gonzales to the World in the 
Moon^ is a satirical fantastic voyage, and much of it is 
quite irrelevant to our purpose. Gonzales, after a sojourn 
in the Indies, trains some wild swans to carry him from 
place to place. On one occasion they carry him up to the 
moon, after eleven days’ journeying. The inhabitants of the 


(1) 'They were not produced by everyone so that a thesis 

might be written on them, unfortunately. 1 * * 

(2) Harl. Misc. VIII 332-348. A View of St. Helena....wi th 

an Account' of the Admirable Voyage of Do mingV Gor 7 *?aXesT. 

..etc. I have greatly shortened the title in the text. 









































< 




. 

' 
















. 


. 








■ 


. 

« 






■ 























(61 


moon live in a Puritan Utopia. The people vary in height 
according to their mental and moral worth, and their caste 
system is based on the height of men. Now some Puritans, 
Samuel Gott for example, believed that virtue should be 
the basis of a true aristocracy. So we get a glimpse of 
Bishop Godwin’s purpose: he will poke fun at the Lunar 
men, the Puritan radicals. 

The Lunar men are ruled over by a Monarch, and his 
twenty-four provincial princes. It is not surprising to 
find (as this Utopia was written by an Anglican bishop) 
that Hiruch, the greatest church official, "orders all 
Things through the Globe of the Moon, in Matters of Religior 
as absolutely as the Pope doth in any Part of Italy." 

(p. 344)“. The Ting and his princes live in great mag¬ 
nificence, and are clothed In costly garments and Jewels. 
Gonzales has, on one occasion, the rare privilege of 
having an audience with Ming Irdonozur through an open 
window. So the Utopians have also their own fantastic 
formalities; in this as elsewhere there is a fine shaft 
of sarcasm. 

In most ways Gonzales finds the commonwealth a 
Paradise, for "there is never any Rain, Wind or Change 
of Weather, never either Summer of Winter, but it were 
a perpetual spring, yielding all Pleasure and Content"(P. 346\ 


(l) This (and subsequent references) refer to Harl. Misc 

Vol. VIII * —-----— 





















( 52 , 


and he is loath to leave it* Pood is abundant, and none ap¬ 
parently need labour to get it* "As for Clothes, Houses or 
whatever else a Man may be supposed to want, it is provided 
by their Superiors, though not without some Labour, but 
yet so easy, as if they did it for Pleasure" (p* 345). 

A gentle reminder of all TJtopists—by no stretch of the 
imagination could the material side of life be made so 
simple* "Their Females are all absolute beauties" (p.345), 
yet there is no such thing as lawless love in the Moon. 

For is there any crime in their world, no thieving or murder 
no sickness and no civil contention. And as a result, 
there is no such thing as Law; "What need is there of ex¬ 
emplary Punishment, where no offences are committed?" (p.3< 
Therefore there is no need for lawyers, or xohysicians, as 
they never surfeit themselves. The air is always "pure 
and temperate", and there is never any cause of sickness. 

The inhabitants live in perfect bliss. 

Bishop Godwin writes however with a sly twinkle in 
his eye, for he has his "little Spaniard" Gor. sales observe 
quite naSvely, "But the chief Cause of their good Govern¬ 
ment is an excellent Disposition in the nature of the 
People, so that all, both old and young hate all Manner of 
Vice, and live in such love. Peace and Amity, as it seems 
another Paradise" (p. 345). Then he goes on to say that 












































. 



















• 

■ 





' 

■ 




' 



, 



. 







. 





; 





. 







. 





. 


• 






' 




































( 53 * 


all undesirables, all those who soon after hirth show signs 
of fractiousness, are sent off down to the Earth, in ex¬ 
change for better specimens. It is easy to build a perfect 
commonwealth, implies Godwin, if you have perfect human 
beings. In a playfully skeptical way Godwin proceeds 
with his grave recitation of exact details. 

To die without fear is a constant Utopian theme, so 
Godwin has his Lunar Men ,T die without the least pain". 

But then he tells of the death of one of them: "as soon 




as he understood his End to approach, he prepared a great 
1 


Feast, and writing all whom he estemed, exhorted them, 
f To be merry and rejoice with him, since the Time was 
come he should now leave the counterfeit Pleasures of that 
World, and be made Partaker of all true Joy and perfect 
Happiness 1 " fp. 346). How the Puritan radical was just 
as absurd in his thinking as this Lunar man; he propounded 
schemes for a fantastic Utopia on earth at the same time 
as he preached that all earthly existence was a time of suf¬ 
fering and trial ordained by the Creator. So with a 
brilliant little scoff Godwin concludes his treatise on 
the Lunar men. Poor Domingo Gonzales returns home only 
because of his wife and children, but he never forgives 
them the tie by which they hold him: "0 my Wife and Child¬ 
ren", he laments, "what Wrong have you done me, to bereave 


(1) This feature is recurrent in Utopias. 














Hr or' 






















. 


■ 


. 

. 

. 














: \ 1 \ 


■ ■■ , , u 






. 

' 

T 


. 




. 


! 

' . 































(54 


me of the Happiness of that Place.* But it is no great 
Matter, for by this Voyage, I arn sufficiently assured, 
that when the Race of my mortal Life is run, I shall attain 
a greater Happiness elsewhere'* (p. 346). This is a ridic¬ 
ulous sort of reasoning hut Godwin infers that thinking of 
this kind was only too prevalent. 

The disguise is extremely clever. l\ T o one would guess 
that a pamphlet opening with a solemn description of St. 
Helena would become a gay bit of raillery at the lunar 
schemes of the Puritan crackbrains. But so it is. Godwin, 
with matchless dignity, and meticulous attention to details 
riddles their schemes with satire. Given perfect humanity 
and a Popish control of religion, certainly a Utopia is 
possible, says Godwin, but Utopia mixes badly with Calvin- 
istic theology, for this earth according to that way of 
thinking is no Heaven (nor can ever be), but is a vale of 
tears and suffering. Still, utopianism often thrives on 
similar contradictions, and Godwin*s words fell upon 
unheeding ears. 

One of those who listened not, one who chased the 
perfectibility ideal throughout his whole life, was John 
Hartlib, the very close friend of Milton. Both he and 









































(55 


Milton had written on education 1 , and it is this interest 
that seems to link: them with Samuel Gott, whose Utopian 
romance is largely taken up with educational schemes. 
HartliVs Utopia appeared as a pamphlet addressed to the 
parliament which met at Westminster on November 3, 1640. 

In the midst of the furious discussion of grievances came 
this little treatise, "which, composed hy way of Novel, 
was designed to intimate a new Model of Government therein 
specified, as the properest means to reconcile the destruc¬ 
tive Breach, that then was beginning to appear between the 
Ming and Parliament"^. It was called A Description of the 
famous Kingdom of Macaria , and in it Hartlib outlined a 
plan, in deadly earnest, whereby all nations might achieve 
happiness. "Nearly twenty years afterward he told Bo$e," 
says Gooch^, "that its scope was to endeavour the reforma¬ 
tion of the whole world, and wrote to Worthington that he 
was sanguine that Macaria would soon have a visible being." 
It is easy for us, after three centuries, to be not quite 
as sanguine, but Hartlib r s ideal state is interesting as a 
specimen of the times. 

The name Macaria Hartlib took from More, for Hythloday 
speaks of such a country in the first book of Utopia : "Here 
if I should brynge furth before them the lawe of the Macar- 


(1) Milton's Tractate on Hdueat3m is addressed to Hartlib. 

(2) Harl. Misc. I p.564, note. All further references made 


win be Uo Vol. I. 
(3) Op cit. p. 177 note 





















. 

' 

, 

■ 

. 

. 

■ - ■ 

■ 

* 






, 











■ 

' 


* ' 




* 






















( 56 * 


iens, which© "be not farre distaunt from Ytopia, whose kynge, 
the day of hys coronacion, is bounde by a solempne othe, 
that he shall neuer at anye tyme have in hys treasure aboue 
a thousande pounde of golde or syluer"^-. In Hartlib T s 
Macaria, the benevolent king, by strict cultivation of the 
crown lands 1 2 , has built up a fine treasury against fear 
of war. "For they hold it to be a principal Policy in 
State to keep the King’s Coffer’s full, and so full, that 




it is an Astonishment to all Invaders" (1,567). The country 


is governed, not by the king, however, but by a great 
a *4 


council, A five undercouncils for husbandry, for fishing, 
for trade by land, for trade by sea, and for new planta¬ 
tions. Such is the government of Macaria: it places the 
king in proper subordination to his parliament, but keeps 
the monarch!al idea. That was the sort of compromise 
which was in the air. 

The financial arrangements of Macaria are obvious 
reflections of the times, although death dues are an in¬ 
novation. The latter exactions are imposed on the goods 
of all deceased men, and the money so raised is used for 
public works, "by which Means the whole Kingdom is become 
like to a fruitful garden" (I, 565). To prevent greediness 
no man is allowed to hold more land than he can cultivate 


(1) The Utopia of Sir Thomas More , ed. lupton p.95 ? 6. 

(2) See the opening remarks in this chapter: non-cultiva¬ 
tion of English crown lands had been a source of dxs- 
cont ent.' 




















( 57 . 




on pain of expropriation by the Commonwealth. Trade other¬ 
wise is free and unhampered, except that the number of 
Tradesmen and Apprentices is regulated by council. This 
hovering between one creed of economic belief and another 
is indicative of the transitional period to which the 
Utopia belongs. 

Hartlib believed that England could support twice 
its population^-, but, guarding against the great spectre 

o 

of all Utopias, over-population , the Macarians had a 
government-controlled and subsidized emigration policy 


for disposing of surplus population. And they hept their 
way open to do this by maintaining an army so strong as to 
be able to resist and deter any possible invaders^. 

These economic and political proposals are clearly 
dated, as are the ideas on social reform. The College of 
Experience, a medical centre which spreads knowledge of 
preventatives and cures, and a public medical service-- 
these look like an anticipation of State Medicine until we 
learn that all divines are doctors in Macaria, Just as 
they are in the Nova Solyma . Moreover we learn what was 
the real attitude of a large body of rigid Puritans 


UT ffjs Book of Husbandry reveals this apparently. See note 

in Bari. MX sc . 1, 567. 

(2) The objection of Wallace and Maithus. 

(3) Cf. More T s Utopia 

(4) Cf. the cure of maniacs by Puritan exorcists in the 
Nova Solyma. 




































* 

. 












. 




■ 


. 


. 


















' 


. 


■ 

„ 




• 


, 































' 












(58. 

toward free thought: "they /i.e. the Macarians/ have a 
Law that if any Divine shall publish a new Opinion to the 
common People, he shall be accounted a Disturber of the 
publicke Peace, and shall suffer Death for it" (I, 566). 
Before any new opinion is acceioted it must be publicly 
debated, and the council decides for or against its adop¬ 
tion. And that is final. "Their Religion consists not in 
taking notice of several Opinions and Sects but is made upof 
infallible Tenets, which may be proved by invincible Argu¬ 
ments, and such as will abide the grand Test of extreme 
Dispute; by which Means none have power to stir up Schisms 
and Heresies; neither are any of their Opinions ridiculous 
to those who are of contrary minds" (l, 566). Bishop 
Godwin knew well that many a Presbyter was as bad as a 
Papist at heart, and his jibe about Hiruch was very just¬ 
ified 3 -. There would be no real freedom in Macaria. 

But if we take Hartlib's word for it, "the Ming and 
the Governors do live in great Honour and Riches, and the 
People do live in great Plenty, Prosperity, Health, Peace 
and Happiness, and have not so much Trouble as they have 
in these European Countries" fl,565). Hartlib, who thus 
reveals himself as a doctrinaire, earnestly pleaded with 
parliament to follow the example of the Macarians, for he 
could "shew an hundred Texts of Scripture, which do plainly 
(l) Cf. above p.5 and Earl. Misc. VIIT, 344. 



















. . 1 : ijsC-^4 j 





































' 























, 





• 










■ 


. 






- 










. 
























(59 


prove, that such a Reformation shall come before the day 
of Judgment 11 (1,508). Bishop Francis Godwin must have 
chuckled over this. 1 Parliament was in no mood to bother 
much about the earnest plea or the scriptural proof, and 
disregarded the scheme. B^t there was really very little 
in the Hartlib plan that would commend it to anyone but 
the author himself, so it is not wonderful that as a 
political proposal the utopia was doomed to be still-born. 


Religion was present in Hartlib T s Macaria, but it 
becomes the dominating element in Samuel Gott T s Nova Solyma , 
one of the most curious and completely ineffective Utopian 
writings of the Civil War period. It was published In 1648, 
in Batin, and fell dead from the press. Hot until the 
Rev. Walter Begley published a translation of it in 19OS was 

HI 

it ever heard of again. But it occasioned an eight years 1 
controversy when it did appear because Begley tried 

to father it on John Milton. The prevalence of Miltonic 
ideas is strong in the book, but, in spite of the fact 
that a passage cited by Begley from the Apology for Smect- 
ymnuus seems to indicate a certain admiration on Milton's 
part for the works of Plato, More and Bacon- 1 -, the following 
words from the Areopagitica are far more representative of 

(1) Vide Begley's introduction. Nova Solyma , 190S. Vol. I# 

























' 












, 






■ 






. 
























(60. 


Milton’s thought: "To sequester out of the world into 
Atlantic and Utopian politics, which can never he drawn 


into use, will not mend our condition; hut to ordain wisely 


as in this world of evil, in the midst whereof God hath 
placed us unavoidably" 1 . Milton was a stern democrat who 


wrote indefatigahly against the idea of monarchy and divine 


right, hut it is difficult to believe that his mind nursed 
any Utopian dreams except those of the Garden of Eden and 
the rejoicing after the last day. Of Samuel Gott, the 


author of U 0 va Solyma , little is known, hut he seems to 
have held views similar to those of the Hartlib-Durie- 
Sadler coterie who were close to John Milton. 

Th e Nova Solyma, or Jerusalem Regained is a didactic 
romance, hut although its digressions are numerous, and 
although it has much adventure and a love theme, it is a 
Utopia. "It shows us", says Begley, "the brightest, strong¬ 
est elements of God-fearing Puritanism, while the Anti- 
nomian and levelling spirit, sometimes associated with 
that name is as absent from the hook as it Is from Milton 
itself"2. This is a good indication of the hook’s character 
--it will he a Utopia, hut not a communistic one. It will 
he Puritanism in an ideal setting. 

There is another side to the hook. During the 1640 T s 

fl) Selected Essays of John Milton , ed. L.E.Lockwood, p. 83. 
(2)Begley*s edition. Introduction, I, p. 18. 

































- 


' 




















. 






. 

- 


- 









. 

- 






. ■ 














. 




, 


■ 






. 


■ 

- 




















(61. 




there had been much talk concerning the return of the lost 
tribes to Jerusalem. John Sadler, who was to write TT a hare¬ 
brained Utopian work"-*- had in the course of his Millenarian 
mathematical calculations, fixed on the year 1648 for the 
return. There was considerable exhortation to the English 
people to prepare the way by removing Jewish disabilities 
in England; Sadler hoped that the Jews would settle in 
England on the great day. In the Nova Solyma the Jew's 
(converted in the meantime to the Christian religion) have 
already returned to Jerusalem, the scene of our story, and 
set up an ideal commonwealth, on the best Seventeenth 
Century Puritan lines. To Jerusalem go two young English¬ 
men, Politian and Eugenius, who after becoming morally re¬ 
generate under the benign influences of the place, marry 
two of the most beautiful and well-born young maidens in 

the city—a very adequate recompense for their wrestlings 

n:>Op. cit., I, 318. Sadler's Olbia , which sets out to 

describe Utopia and never does, is not treated in this 
study. Of it Begley says: ,f ... ./Sadler/ had a decidedly 
eccentric and visionary turn of mind, which at times ran 
riot on prophecies, numbers (cabalistical), types and 
times of Scripture, and it was partly this which pre¬ 
vented our having his Utopia. For he began Olbia.... 
with a fair promise to fulfill the title page, and then 
occupies all the rest of 380 pages in a mad medley of 
Biblical numbers and types, the numbers 666 and 1666 
occupying most of his attention. In this latter year, 1666' 
something very extraordinary was to happen, some new 
dispensation, some Feast of Tabernacles to come, ending 
with the Great Hosanna of the Last and Great Lay of the 
Feast." 





















. 
























* 

r 


, 

- 



. 

- 

. 







' 













(62. 


with the spirit. 

The Hew Jerusalem, which had been in existence for 

fifty years, had reached a state of "wonderful prosperity" 

(I,88)% through the industry, thrift, and temperance of 

its people; it is described as "a town devoted to liberal 

studies and honest pursuits" (1,202). The buildings are 

very beautiful, from the town hall, with its silver bell 

for convening meetings, to the small stores in the market 

place where merchandise of all kinds is offered for sale. 

In the business section there are splendid colonnades and 

structures with pillared porticos; behind the "many fine 

and spacious mansions" (I, 82) are gardens that run up 
2 

to the city walls , 

In the hall of one of the houses, the visitors Politian 
and Sugenius come upon an inscription which might do well 
for a moral constitution of Nova Solyrna : 

"...For this house had its foundation on Just gains, 
and was built from no proceeds of fraud,... 

"...Prink paves not here an easy road to every crime, 
nor does the ignoble mind, a slave to its vices, shirk all 
true and earnest work. 

"No gambling nor secret lawless love, no strife nor 

anger, no long-pent-up revenge crying out for blood can 
(l) This and subsequent references are to Begley’s edition. ■ 

f 2 ) Compare More’s Utopia . 






. 

. 

. 

. '■ ■ f 

r . ■. ■ ■ *’ : 

. 


. 

- 

. 

: 

. . 

. . . 

- 

- 

, 

. 

’ 












(63, 


find a place here 


"...This is the abode of universal love which cherishes 


and pities the brethren in the faith. Her aspect is with¬ 


out guile,nor is she wont to keep away any from her fellow¬ 
ship by overdue ceremony and gesture. 

"The necessaries of life are stored up as occasion 
requires, but honestly always, and each one is occupied by 
his own work for the commonweal, while the happy spirit 
of union breaks forth in songs of mutual joy. 

"We are not neglectful of what is proper and becoming 
in dress, nor of common human wants in the short journey 
of life. The other, higher wants we seek from heaven, and 
there too we look in hope for the promised mansions of the 
Father’s Kingdom." (I, 83-4). 

The Puritanism which this inscription reveals is the 
spirit of the whole book. As we have noted, it was not a 
communistic Utopia, but a city in which individual enter¬ 


prise flourished, in which there was complete liberty of 


conscience , and in which democratic government prevailed 


All of these things were rallying cries of the revolutionary 
2 


years in England . Th© ethical standard of "devotion" to 
an economic "calling" is everywhere evident, as is the 


(1) Gott thus presents a more desirable type of religious 
attitude than Hartlib. Both strains of thought existed 
among Puritans. 

(2) Wide Gooch English Democratic Ideas in the XWII Century, 
passim. 

































( 64. , 

constant injunction to thrift, temperance and simplicity. 

The Nova Solyma is a veritable source book for the psychol¬ 
ogy of English Puritanism. 

Although there is but slender reference to the polit¬ 
ical arrangements of the New Jerusalem, we are told that 

i 

all the magistrates of Zion are elected annually at a 
general assembly convened in the centre of the town. There, 
is chosen the father or chief of the Senate, and also 
leaders for the young men and young women. We are told no 
more about the Senate, or the duties of these officials 
except that the young man and young woman chosen become 
leaders and examples to the rest. But the chief of the 
Senate seems to have the powers of an elected monarch, for 
old Jacob, (one of the characters) says, long before he 
himself is elected: "We ought to live in accordance with 
the laws and customs of our native land, so long as they 
do not oppose our religious belief, for in temporal matters 
they are the main authority, and have been ratified by the 
common consent of the people. Therefore every subject 
ought to obey his duly elected king, even if his govern¬ 
ment is autocratic" (I, 224). later on, however, Jacob 
says that no tyrant,can dictate in matters of religion and 

(l) Annual parliaments have been constantly demanded by 

radicals from the seventeenth to the nineteenth eentuii^ 













































■ 











■ 






* 

- 



■ 












(65. 




and conscience, nor can a king enforce the performances of 
religious rites. Samuel Oott thus makes all the dreams of 
the Puritan radicals come true in New Jerusalem. Utopia 
is certainly in this case an example of wishful thinking. 

The inhabitants of the New' Jerusalem are really 
idealized Puritans; they "live simply and unaffectedly, and 
luxury is subject to public censure" (11,133). Like More r s 
Utopians their clothes are simple, and people of high rank 
are distinguished not by the gorgeousness of their raiment 
but by the length and color of their attire. It is consid¬ 
ered ungodly to dress in a showy fashion 1 , or to put on any 
display at funerals and other ceremonies. As in More, the 
elders are respected, and at table, where a highly relig¬ 
ious atmosphere prevails, only simple food is eaten. It 
is notable however that, as in More, light wine is per- 

9 

mitted and great delight is taken in music • The lives of 
these people must not be considered dull, for their pageant 
on the great national holidays are brilliant affairs, with 
military displays, and mystery plays (II, 222 ff.). The 




magnificence and luxury of such celebrations must needs be 

(1) It is notable that the outlandish garb of foreigners 

is not jeered at (I, 106). Puritans, of Uott T s ckcle, 
wished to shelter refugee Protestants from Europe. So 
it is not surprising that the Jew*s in this romance, 
like Bacon f s Atlanteans, treated foreigners with resp¬ 
ect and consideration. 

(2) The Puritan attitude towards music has often been 
grossly misrepresented. 























remembered to Gott’s credit; he at least was not a complete 
drah Puritan. 

In their workaday lives the people went their economic 
ways in peace, for everyone considered himself a member of 
the great Brotherhood of Man 1 , and kept the interests of 
his fellows in his heart. TT We regard trade with much favour,” 
says Alphaeus, "all classes of society engage in it. Mer¬ 
chants and farmers are under no social discredit; it Is 
only the dishonest business people who are despised and 
disgraced” (I, 238-9). So speaks the early bourgeois/ 

There are few poor people in Uova Solyma, because of 
the practically universal thrift and temperance, "As for 
the old-fashioned thriftiness, which is such a foe of 
extravagance, and the nurse of the manly virtues as well 
as the extinguisher of riotous living, we hold it in great 
esteem, and we think the real use of money consists in the 
just expenditure of it for simple necessaries" (II, 133). 
Therefore luxuries are all exported; none are consumed at 
home. But because the puritan believed that it was dif¬ 
ficult for lives to enter heaven, and that La 25 arus was 
somehow to blame for his poverty, we read this: "With us 
there is no necessity to heap up riches, and in consequ¬ 
ence we do not desire it. He who wastes the means he has 
inherited, or as is less likely, aquired for himself (J), 


(1) I, 132 and also II, 37 












(67. „ 


is obliged to send in his accounts not only to his creditor^ 
but to the public censors’ 1 2 (II, 133). And as there is al¬ 
ways a suspicion that a poor man has somehow his own unre- 
generacy to blame, all charity is organised by the city, 
so that only worthy individuals may be assisted. Begging 
is absolutely prohibited. (I, 238). Their whole attitude 
is thus dominated by the idea that God will reward him 
who works diligently and abstemiously in his appointed 
calling 1 . 

For the ITew Jerusalem has a theocratic atmosphere. 

TT We hold religion, TT says Alphaeus, "to be the foundation 
and corner-stone of society, and the great connecting link 
that holds it together in all its different sections (l, 
239). God, the peoiole believe, had committed his Kingdom 
on earth to man T s governance, and had commanded him to 
administer it rightly. "If men obeyed this command,” says 
JoseiDh, "the whole world would be one great republic, one 




great commonwealth; what peace, what love, what prosperity. 


would come back to each one of usJ” (II, 37)^. 

What are their religious beliefs and practices? Much 
what we might expect. The Sabbath is a day set aside for 


(1) For a systematic treatment of this, see R.H.Tawney T s 
Religion and the Rise of Capitalism . 

(2) It is interesting to note here "that Gott, like other 
Puritans believed that all of man's passions had been 
noble in the Garden of Eden (the state of nature), but 
had had to be curbed since the fall. The same idea 
runs through Paradise host . (See introductory chapter 
also). 




















. 




6 




■ 









* 

, 

. 














■ 

■ 










divine worship, which consists mainly of prayers and psalm¬ 
singing. Preaching of the word, "is either exercised in 
public meetings or in private colloquy in the family circle 
Christ used both" (II, 195-6). Ceremonies are decent and 

orderly "without any taint of superstition" (II, 197),- 

a jibe at Poman Catholicism. Every man is free to worship 
as he pleases, although fine-spun theological wrangling 
and the multiplication of sects are strenuously discouraged 
A simple religion they hold to be best, and they oppose 
too close probing into Biblical texts. It is scarcely 
necessary to comment upon these characteristics, for they 
are merely wish-fulfilments of the average Puritan of 
Gott’s time. 

A great deal of the booh is tahen up with discourses 
on religious problems, such as cosmology, the origin of 
evil, immortality, the character and power of God, etc., 
but we need not pause over them. We are told of Joseph’s 
dark night of the soul, when he "wrestled with God"; of 
AXcimius T s religious despair and his final peace with God, 

of Joseph’s strange ecstasy and prophetic utterances-all 

in good Seventeenth Century manner. We watch the Puritan 
exorcists driving the devil out of Theophrastus’s soul. But 
along with religious Inspiration went ceaseless lectures on 
morality, on The Well Regulated Mind . These lectures 


























(69 


were full of praise for intellectual virtue, a disciplined 
mind and “body, temperance and frugality-qualities essen¬ 

tial for a man to be "ready with every nerve and limb that 
he can use to serve God, to help his country, and to save 
himself" (II, 129). The true gentleman is drawn after 
Aristotle’s ideal, and men of this type comprise the 
nobility of Nova Solyma. 

As one would expect, marriage regulations are extremely 
rigid. There is a great deal of mystery and sentiment 
about love in the book, and chastity is severely enforced, 
but marriage arrangements are singularly commonplace, for 
the parents choose the bride’s husband and fix the amount 
of the dowry and patrimony. The bride has nothing for it 
but to accept. As for courtship itself, it is extremely 
formal. After marriage the husband rules in the household 1 2 , 

and divorce is strictly prohibited. "Matrimony", we are 

2 

told, "is the foundation stone of society, and should be 
in the highest degree honoured and guarded, lest the other 
duties of life suffer through neglect of it" (II, 106). 

A man must curb all unlawful passions by "/turning/ his 
eyes toward our most perfect pattern Christ" (II, 110-11). 

If the foregoing were all that the Nova Solyma con- 


(1) Cf. Milton, Paradise lost throughout and P.W. Ill, 248: 
"every man should bear rule in his own house Tf » 

(2) But see above p.67: "we hold religion to be the founda¬ 
tion and corner stone of society". This curious verbal 
repetition is a significant example of the Puritan 
way of thought. 



























































■ 




. 




' 




• 

. 






















f 70. 


tained it would have only an historical interest, 

hut a great deal of the hook is.taken up with the question 
of education, and it contains some remarkable anticipations 
of modern practice- 1 -. "The founders of the republic in their 
zealous enquiry how best to establish it on a sound basis, 
put the education of the rising generation in the very fore¬ 
front of all means to that end" fl, 235), The teaching of 
morals of course occupies a very prominent place in the 
curriculum--to be a good man was the first consideration-- 
but there was an effort "to improve by art and culture in 
every way the gifts of the body and mind with which kindly 
ITature endows our race, in order that /the/ children, both , 
by their natural ability and the formative care they receive 
when young may strive onwards to the acme of human perfec¬ 
tion" fl, 90), We shall meet this idea of endless perfectib 
ility through right education in Godwin and Shelley, and 
there is a similar implication in the writings of H. 0* 
Wells. Physical education was considered as important 
as mental, and by what is surprisingly like University 
extension lectures, the education of citizens went on all 

through their lives. Special aptitudes among students were 

fl) There was very widespread discussion of the education 
of the young in the middle of the Seventeenth Century, 
and the Nova Solyma is an example of it. Yide Begley’s 
ed., I, 316. Hartlib and Milton had both written on 
the subject. 











. 

. 










. 












* 













. 

. 

« 










( 71 . , 


sounded out and encouraged (as in other Utopias), and schol¬ 


arships were provided for persons of talent. An arduous 
training in languages and literature was outlined for stu¬ 
dents (there is almost no mention of science), hut those 
pupils with no taste for intellectual training were sent to 
technical schools to learn their crafts. "But as regards 
morality, military drill, and religious exercises, these 
are inculcated on all without exception" (l, 238). 

The Colleges, which were well endowed, had beautiful 
buildings, and excellent instructors. Students were under 
regulations similar to those at Oxford, because moral wel¬ 
fare was the chief consideration. But for all that, uni¬ 
versity students had far more freedom than those in the 
lower schools andwsre encouraged "to judge for themselves", 
particularly in matters of state policy. This, I think, is 
a good reflection of the radical Puritan mind. A system 
of prizes (symbolical prize pens) was instituted for oeativej 
activity in oratory, logic, poetry and so forth. Thus 
the educational system was devised so as to stimulate in¬ 
dividual self-expression as well as to ensure the continued 
harmonious working of the commonwealth. 

Samuel Gott, then, was not just an obscure Puritan 




(l) Treating of dramatic poetry Gott took an idea from Plato 
students were not allowed to act the parts of drunkards, 
adulterers, etc. for fear such would encourage "a 
tendency to the vice", I. 297. 

























. 

« 


























r 




















■ 







radical, "but a man of quite singular liberalism, a man who 
desired human happiness above all things. His work is full 
of poetic digressions eulogizing the glory of nature and 
of human life, and the hook itself closes, amid great 
celebration and rejoicing, with a bridal hymn. It is 
easy to presuppose that a reformed environment will create 
happy human beings, but Gott was wise enough to acknowledge, 
as did Christ and the Old Testament prophets, that Utopia 
must begin with the individual, and in the human heart. 
Gott’s Utopia seems curious to us and occasionally repel¬ 
lent, but some of his ideas, particularly those on educa¬ 
tion, we have not out,grown. 

The democratic idea is very strong in Hartlib T s 
Mac aria and in Gott T s Nova Solyma , but Hartlib pinned all 
his faith upon a naively simple economic reform, and Gott 
upon moral regeneration and education, neither really 
challenged the idea of free enterprise as some of the 
Communists were doing in the same period, indeed the 
Protestant economic ethic is very prominent in the nova 
Solyma . The spirit of individualism was spreading fast, 
and it is notable that Samuel Gott r s educational schemes 
were specially designed to encourage individual self- 
expression. Upon it he based his Utopia. 


But although they were democrats, neither Hartlib 
















, 


, 






















. 






, 


. 



















. 












! 









* 











( 73 ., 


nor Gott thoroughly outlined the stupendous Utopian results 
that woul$ he attendant upon democracy itself. A Utopist 
is usually a doctrinaire who overemphasizes one aspect of 
society. 5 r e have seen where Hartlib and Gott placed the 
stress. It remained for James Harrington to emphasize 
politics unduly, and to outline the perfectly amazing 
results of representative institutions and an agrarian law. 




The Oceana of James Harrington is an. imaginary state 
only hy the merest chance, since the "selection of an imag¬ 
inary setting for his ideas was dictated hy the rigorous 
censorship of the Protectorate"- 1 . The fictitious names are 
only a cloak for reality. Thus Oceana is Ungland, Marpesia 
is Scotland, and Panopea Ireland; Oliver Cromwell appears 
as Olphaus MOgaletor, Bacon is referred to as Vtruiamius, 
and so on. Harrington’s utopia was written as a practical 
exhortation to Parliament in the anarchical years of the 
Commonwealth when an infinitude of sects and parties abounded 
In Oceana the author draws up, with inordinate attention to 
detail, a complete system for the management of a state, 
and Utopianism, except in the closing pages and In a few 
scattered passages, is its least characteristic feature. 

There is very little of the exuberance and visionary per- 

(l) G.P. Gooch, Political Thought from Bacon to Halifax, 

p. 117. — 





























- 





« 










' 




, 




















. 







, 

. 


, 







. 

■ 










(74 


• 

fectionism that one finds in some Utopias, and Oceana 
easily qualifies as one of the dullest hooks ever written. 
"It lacks the magic of style," remarks G. P. Gooch, "and 
has therefore Joined the great army of hooks which are 
often mentioned and seldom read."-** Yet it was the pride 
of Harrington f s heart: he spent twenty years preparing 
the hook and the actual writing took six. It is a hook 
that is strikingly original, especially in the elaborate 
system of elections and of state organization, hut 
Harrington^ obsessions with balloting arrangements, and 
his financial pedantries, are marked with the Imprint of 
a doctrinaire thinker. 

But Harrington brought a new feature to Utopian 

writing: historical perspective. The LordArehon in Oceana 

_ 

heading a body of Prytans for drawing up a constitution. 
Judges all proposals in the light of historical evidence, 
and the hook is crammed with historical explanation, crit¬ 
icism and illustration. In this sense Qceana belongs to 
the history of political thought rather than to Utopian' 
literary writings. Hot only Is Harrington important as 
one of the first to apply the historical method, "he was 
the first of modern thinkers to recognize the decisive 
influence of economic phenomena on political structure and 


( 1) IMd. p. 113 


















f 75, 


' 

function."-*- In his long preamble he formulates an. economic 
interpretation of the causes of the English revolution in 
the Seventeenth Century, emphasizing the struggle between 
classes* The conclusion of this discussion is the start¬ 
ing point of his system: no state can be stable unless 
there is maintained a constant balance of power between 

p 

classes . 

How was such a balance to be achieved? By Harrington's 
agrarian law (or as he calls it simply, the "agrarian"), 
which prevents any man from holding land in excess of 
£2,000 income yearly, in additional proviso, which will 
prevent too rapid accumulations is that inheritances are 
to be divided equally among the children of the deceased. 

But not only is financial power to be kept in balance,— 
intellectual power is also to be kept in a state of equil¬ 
ibrium. The latter, which will ensure freshness in the 
administration, is to be achieved by constant rotation of 
officials (which principle Harrington adopted from the 
Venetian republic). The .Agrarian Haw and the principle of 
Rotation are the two cardinal principles of Harrington 1 2 s 
ideal state; the first v^ould ensure that no body of person s 
would ever become financially powerful enough to assu me 


(1) Ibid. p. 114. 

(2) Marx used a similar economic analysis, but he concluded 
that the only solution was the abolition of classes. 













. 


„ -;n'.o*r 


•' 




1 ■ 








■ 


















- 













(76 


oligarchic control, and the second would prevent the rise 


of a dominating clique or party of officials. And this lea’s 


us to Harrington's third proposal: the use of the secret 
ballot, which would guarantee the foregoing arrangements, 
and confer on the people the freedom of political pronounce¬ 
ment. 

It would he tedious, and not very rewarding to the 
reader, for me to attempt here any detailed analysis of the 
extremely intricate political system which Harrington pro¬ 
posed, hut one general remarh might he made hy way of 
preface. One feels, in spite of Harrington T s repeated 
protests to the contrary, that liberty would disappear in 
the intricacies of the system. Harrington optimistically 
believed that people would readily submit to the cut and 
dried program which he outlined, and that officials would 
willingly agree to perform the functions which he assigned 
to them. That, of course, is the folly of every systematized 
constitution which is not a product of historical growth 
and experience. 

Harrington divided the country into ten thousand 
parishes, which are subsequently grouped into larger units, 
the hundreds. “The hundreds in turn are grouped by twenties 
into fifty tribes which are the political basis of the 


country. From them each year members are sent to the two 










T ft 



Tf ™ 


(77 


governing councils at Emporium (London) and Hiera (Westmin¬ 
ster). The electoral system of these pyramided units is 
painstakingly described (as later is municipal government), 
the principles of rotation and balloting being rigidly 
observed. Harrington also computes the costs: he estimates, 
for instance, that the cost of setting the system in 
motion would be ,2239,OOQ 1 2 . The duties of officials so 
elected are all carefully catalogued, and the book, in 
its own way, is encyclopaedic in scope. There is one 
illuminating restriction placed on rotation however: we 
learn that "if a man has prodigally wasted and spent his 




patrimony, he is neither capable of magistracy, office 

2 


or suffrage in the commonwealth’ 1 (p. 239) . 

The general principle guiding the whole state is 
summarized by Harrington in this manner : TT An equal common¬ 
wealth... is a government established upon an equal agrarian, 
arising into the superstructures or three orders, the 
Senate debating and proposing, the people resolving, and 
the magistracy executing, by an equal rotation through the 
suffrage of the people given by the ballot" (p. 205). This 
idea of the separation of powers is the keynote of his 
whole system. The Senate elected by the tribes brings in 


(1) Later in the book he gives the budget of the forty-first 
year of the Commonwealth, showing a surplus of£12,000,0® 
which, to say the least, is very gratifying. 1 

(2) Oceana reprinted in Morley T s Ideal Commonwealths. All 
further references will be made to his edition. 















. 














. 











( 78 . ■ 


all new legislation, debates it, and then submits it to the 
assembly (representing the people), for ratification. The 
law, subsequently, is put into effect by the magistrates, 
none of whom may represent the people in parliament. But 
the magistrates themselves are not free: they are answerable; 
to the people for their actions. 

Harrington recognizes that a good commonwealth can only:; 
result from good laws, and, admitting that men are not 
born equal, he, like Plato, finds his lawmakers among the 
Natural aristocracy” 1 , who must guide the rest. "A nobility! 
or gentry, in a popular government, not overbalancing it 
is the very life and soul of it” (p. 189). The Senate, then! 
was to be composed of these natural aristocrats, who, 
Harrington was optimistic enough to believe, would be suf¬ 
ficiently numerous to fulfil the rotation requirements, 
benevolent enough to do their duty, and capable enough to j 
do it well. 

The Senate appoints four councils, the Councils of 
State, W&r, Religion and Trade, TT distributing to every 
council such businesses as are properly'to belong to their 
cognisance, whereof some they shall receive and determine 
and others they shall receive, prepare, and introduce into 

the house” (p. 289). Of these councils, Harrington dis- 

(l)wells has a similar idea, "voluntary nobility” in his 

A Modern Utopia. 














(79 


cusses most the National Council of Religion, which is to 


direct the state religion and ensure liberty of conscience, 
Its duty is to apportion livings and benefices on recommend^ 
at ion from the Universities, receive petitions, and guaranies 
that there is no religious coercion, no persecution of Jews 
or idolators. (We learn that pastors and vicars are to be 
elected by parishioners from among candidates, or proba¬ 
tioners, appointed by the Universities). All theological 
disputes are to be settled by the universities, debating 
separately, and their decision is to be incorporated into 
the state religion, though no individual need accept the 
decision* But one thing is definite. In Oceana there must 
be no unlawful assemblies, and to this end it is decreed 
that no preacher may treat of political questions. "I 


wonder’S asks Harrington impatiently, "why ministersof all 


men, should be perpetually tampering with government... An 1 
ounce of wisdom is worth a pound of clergy" (p. 357). 
Polities and religion must be kept in watertight compart¬ 
ments, if there Is to be any peace. This surely was one of 
the lessons of the Puritan revolution. 

The economic arrangements of Oceana are insufficiently 
described, except that we are informed continually that the 
agrarian law will prevent large personal accumulations. In 
outlining the civic government of Emporium (London), Harringi 















(80, 


ton reveals that his attitude is still medieval, for he 
proposes to leave economic matters in the control of guild 
organizations. As for national policy, his attitude is 
clearly that of an early Mercantilist: the council for 
trade directed the foreign business of the nation , and 
this council looked upon the piling up of bullion in the 
State treasury as too obvious a sign of prosperity to need 
justification. Harrington’s emphasis on the importance of 
agriculture as compared with other trades is also symptomat¬ 
ic of his Mercantilist creed. In fact the Agrarian Law was 
his ohly striking economic innovation. But it did not mean 
an equalization of incomes such as some of his contemporar¬ 
ies were advocating. "Take the bread out of the people’s 
mouths, as did the Roman patricians and you are sure enough 
of a war. In which case they may becomes levellers; but 
our agrarian causes their industry to flow with milk and 
honey" fp. 338). The Lord Archon speaking in the council 
of Prytans, disposes of the usual anti-UtopIan arguments, 
by proving to his own satisfaction that the people would 
not fall into idleness or laziness, or fall victim to the 
vices of leisure. The Agrarian Law cements society to¬ 
gether: "there is in this agrarian a homage to pure and 
spotless love, the consequences whereof I will not give 
for all your romances" (p. 271). The benefits led Harring- 





























. 

' 






















1 








4 

- 


























. 






- 








. 






■ 






(81 


ton a "bit far in this curiously modern anticipation: "But 
if our agrarian law excludes ambition and covetousness, we 
shall at length have the care of our own breed, in which 
we have been curious as to our dogs and horses. The 
marriage bed will be truly legitimate, and the race of the 
commonwealth not spurious" (p. 271J 1 This fragmentary hint 
at eugenics is not, however, developed at much length as 
a benefit of the new economic order. 

But if Harrington had little to offer in the economic 
field he did make important suggestions concerning education. 

He proposed universal compulsory education at the State’s 
expense and under the state’s control. Between the ages 
of nine and. fifteen the child was educated in the school, 
after which time he must pick a profession or trade. 

Education was of several kinds: in the schools and univers- 

i 

ities, in the inns of court and chancery, in travel and in 
military activities. A knowledge of history and the 
culture of other nations Harrington thought essential to 
him who would govern well, and accordingly young men are 
encouraged to read widely and to travel. "Ho man,""he said, 
can be a politician except he first be a historian or a 

traveller" (p. 358). Those young men however who take up 

("l) Like most Utopians Harrington has - not failed therefore 

to show the inestimably beneficial results to love and 
marriage of a revised economic regime. The same theme 
is reiterated by Shelley, Bulwer-Lytton, Bellamy, Morris 
and Hells. 















f 82 


the study of theology, physic or law, automatically "exclude 
themselves from all magistracies, offices and honors" (p. 
357), It is not strange that Harrington should make this 
proviso when we remember that everywhere he insisted on the 
separation of functions. 

As for the young men who did not enter the universities 
they must pass through the various degrees of the militia 
of Oceana, for Harrington, like Plato, thought courage, not 
wisdom, to be the chief characteristic of youth. Military 
service 1 was compulsory for all classes, with a few excep¬ 
tions, and, in case of invasion, any man was liable to 
be drafted into the service. Harrington thus anticipates 
the modern democratic conscript army: "This commonwealth 
drives her citizens like wedges" (p. 359). When military 
service of this kind is placed beside Harrington’s proposal 
to tax unmarried and childless adults we are reminded of 
certain threatening developments in modern Europe where 
centralized state control of individuals has run beyond all 
reason. 

In the Corollary appended at the end of the Model of 
the Commwealth, our fears that liberty would somehow be 
crushed under the weight of organization are fulfilled. 
Earlier in the book Harrington has described Tuesday lectures 




(l) It is worth noticing here, I think, that even in the 

army, officers are elected. 

















.. 

- 







(83.,, 


for the purpose of teaching the people to understand and 
like the new regime. These lectures were designed to 
"keep the system of government in their memories," that 
they might not "suffer themselves to he stuttered out of 
their liberties" (p. 331). To feel you are free is undoubt¬ 
edly to be free, but the censors see to it that no popular 
assemblies arise, and they rigidly censor the theatre. The 
State theatres (which prove to be very remunerative venture^ 
supply entertainment that will be innocuous, and the Poet 
laureate 1 , who is elected, we cannot but feel, would be 
only a puppet. The general policy is to permit as much 
moral freedom as is consistent with an ideal commonwealth, 
but it needs only a little reflection to realize that be¬ 
hind such a harmless generality there may be a mailed fist. 
Harrington becomes ecstatic over the new spirit of Oceana 
after the reform--there is no prostitution, and no riotous 
living; everyone is prosperous and happy. But somehow 
the book leaves us apathetic, even hostile. 

Harrington, however, believed that the Oceanan state 
would last forever because it was a system of perfect bal¬ 
ance; in modern parlance, it had no set of Marxian anti¬ 
theses. But the author*s head surely became a little turned 


(1) The Laureateship was not an official position in England 
at this time. T)ryden, the first official Poet Laureate 
was appointed much later,--in 1668. 















. 

c 






. 

* 












(84. 

when he envisaged world empire for this intelligent and 
militaristic state: "For if a people have hy your means 
attained to freedom, they owe both to the cause and you 
such aid as may propagate the like fruit to the rest of 
the world" (p. 380). The Englishman has often been called 
a self-appointed missionary, hut Harrington enlarges the 
r8le: "How if you add to the propagation of civil liberty 
(so natural to this commwealth that it cannot be omitted) 
the propagations of the liberty of conscience, this empire, 
this patronage of the world, is the kingdom of Christ: 
for as the kingdom of God the Father was a commonwealth, so 
shall the kingdom of God the Son: the people shall be wil¬ 
ling in their day of power" (p. 382). This aspec.t of 
Harrington’s work is usually not insisted on, but surely 
it is half mad, it is the wild imagining of an obsessed 
doctrinaire. Harrington addresses the people of England, 
pointing out to them the dangers of not accepting his 
scheme. One of these dangers is that the English would 
lose the empire of the world, "nor is this all, but some 
other nation will have it" (p. 382). 

In addition to this gruesome Imperialism, Harrington’s ■ 
system suffered from a bad defect: 

"no sufficient security for freedom or for the redress 
of grievances...was to be found in a scheme where the ; 
senate was the sole legislature and could negative a 

proposal before it reached the votes of the people. 













It never occurs to him that the well-being of a 
community may slip on the polished surface of a 
theoretically faultless scheme. "3- 


(8! 


Other difficulties with the plan have been noted in the 
discussion and need not be repeated here, but Harrington wag 
influential in his own day. The Rota Club was formed ex¬ 
pressly to debate its proposals^, even though Cromwell 
thought Oceana "too unpractical to be dangerous"3. The 
Restoration passed it by, like the schemes of Wynstanley, 
in favour of the old constitution. But H^me and Coleridge 
admired Harrington and some of his ideas found their way 
into the Constitutions of Carolina, Hew Jersey and Pennsyl¬ 
vania; he was constantly quoted by the men who shaped the 
American constitution. He was, after all, the first champ¬ 
ion of the ballot, and "his critical and constructive power 
entitles him to rank among the foremost of those thinkers 
who have endeavoured to combine democratic principles with 
the interests of order."4 

Harrington thus bases his utopia on representative 
institutions and a simple economic reform, although he 
realizes that without education the whole plan is fruitless. 


(1) G.P. Cooch, English Democratic Ideas in the XVII Century 

p. 253. 

(2) Some surviving Levellers accepted Harrington's ideas, 
as did some Fifth Monarchy Men who were "taken with 
Harrington's model". 

(3) G.P.Gooch, Political Thought from Bacon to Halifax, 1914 ■ 

p. 118. ~~ —— " - - 

(4) G.P.Gooch, English Democrati c Ideas in the EVlI Century 
p. 254. 















f 86. 


like Samuel Gott he insists on the perfectihility of the 
individual, and his dream of human happiness depends entire¬ 
ly on the right of every man to think, speak and strive for 
himself. Although there were national controls in Oceana 
Harrington demonstrated, as did Gott, that Utopia could 
he imagined on capitalistic lines. But it will he admitted 
that most of the instruments for the achieving of Utopia 
were external; Harrington, like most utopists, maintains 
that a reorganized society will improve human morals. Like 
so many he looks on society as something external, from 
the individual, whereas in reality, every man is a part of 
his environment. Bering the early eighteenth century, when 
the need of economic reform was less pressing, utopists 
changed the emphasis, insisting that true reform could come 
only from the individual. And they accordingly placed their 
faith in reason. 














CHAPTER IV 


(87. 1 


Utopia in the Eighteenth Century, 

After the tumultuous years of the Revolution and 
Commonwealth, Utopianism dies down in literature, or rather 
it undergoes a profound change. During the Restoration, 
the characteristic attitude toward the saints is that of 
Butler’s Hudibras ; the hope for a fundamental re-shaping 
of society was shattered as much hy revulsion against the 
insurgents who proposed schemes as hy the absurdity of the 
schemes themselves. In the words of Dryden: 

”To change foundations, cast the frame, anew. 

Is work for rebels, who base ends pursue.”- 




The people had had enough of TT apostolic blows and knocks’ 1 2 , 


and the rising middle class sought to free itself of 
ancient restrictions by more peaceful methods. Moreover 
the general advance in well-being after the turn of the 
century was an effective deterrent to revolutionary doctrine 
’’English society, after it emerged from the Glorious Revol¬ 
ution,” says Beer, ’’consisted of a population fifty percent 
of whom were relatively well-to-do•Enclosures went on 


more slowly and the condition of farmers was by no means 
desperate; the Industrial Revolution had not yet got under 
wav. And the tone of religion was against revolution. 

Anglicanism had taken on its traditional r61e of settled 

(1) Absolom and AchitQphel , 805-6. 

(2) History of British Socialism, p. 79. 




















(88 


conservatism, and the- whole spirit of Deism was that of 
optimistic inertia. Even the zealots, the Methodist 
revivalists of the mid-century, counselled the weak and 
downtrodden to hear their miseries with "brave resignation, 
for God. had willed the evils of this world and would reward 
sufferers in the next. Pope T s Essay on Man , with its 
reasoned defence of the status quo is as characteristic of 
the whole period, as are, years later the thunderous pron¬ 
ouncements of Johnson 1 and the passionate admonitions of 
Burke. In general there was a cold rationalist attitude 
toward social problems and a deep suspicion of zeal. "The 
very coolness of the atmosphere", says Mr. Harold laski, 
"only more surely paved the way for the surprising novelties 
of Godwin and the revolutions...There is throughout the 
time an over-emphasis upon the value of order, and a not 
unnatural tendency to confound the private good of the 

o 

governing class with the general welfare of the state". 

That the Romantics should revolt against this optimistic 
and class-dominated stagnation was perhaps an inevitable 
development. 

Before discussing the new utopianism, which, as we 

(l)There is a small Utopian element in the Happy Valley in 
Johnson T s Hassel as . But this unreal happiness is merely 
postulated so that Johnson may insist on his main thesis 
that human life is a state in which much is to be en¬ 
dured and little to be enjoyed. 

(£)Political Thought from Locke to Bentham, pp. 11 and 13-14 





















( 89 . 




shall see, grew out of current primitivistic ideas and the 
imaginary voyages, it would he well to notice briefly a 


characteristic document of the age, Hume's Idea of a Perfect 


•vl 


Commonwealth , which reveals the settled skepticism most 


men had concerning Utopia. 

The essay opens with the argument that an’ established 
government has an infinite advantage, over an untried scheme 
simply because it enlists the support of the people, who are 
long accustomed to it. nevertheless, it is not beyond pos¬ 
sibility that someday, somewhere, a Utopian scheme may be 
tried. Therefore, Hume continues: "In all cases it must be 
advantageous to know what is most perfect in the kind, that 
we may be able to bring any real constitution or form of 
government as near it as possible, by such gentle altera¬ 
tions and innovations as may not give too great disturbance 
to society" (p. 524). Hume believes that no wise ruler 
should tamper with the system of government, and he promises 
to be brief on such a trifling matter: "A long dissertation 
on that head would not, I apprehend, be very acceptable to 
the public, who will be apt to regard such disquisitions 

11 

both as useless and chimerical" (p. 524). This, clearly, 
is the spirit of his age, and Hume T s Utopianism may be 


l)Pu.blished in Hume 1 s Essays and Treatises, Edinburgh, 1804, 
Vol. I. pp. 523-40. cVronoio^"y is interrupted by treating 
Hume T s essay here, but this seems the most fitting place 
to discuss it. It W4S written about 1742. 














■ 


















- 



, 












■ 




. 















n 





■ 






. 

















- 
















( 90 . 


accurately gauged “by his guide dismissal of Plato and More 
and by his remark that Harrington T s Oceana was the only 
valuable model of a commonwealth that had ever been offered 
to the public. He points out the dangers to liberty in the 
Oceana and then proceeds to outline his own scheme, which is 
not very exciting. 

Believing it best to follow the general lines of "the 
ancient fabric", he gives us what might be called a reformed 
English constitution. Like Harrington he divides the 
country into counties and parishes, and gives to the countfes 
a great deal of local self-government. Stipulating a 
property qualification for the franchise, he ordains that 
one hundred senators be elected to the legislature. To 
prevent corruption these men are unpaid,—only active of¬ 
ficials receive any remuneration. The senators elect a 
protector and six councils, as in Harrington; and a system 
of local county checks is provided to prevent unwanted leg¬ 
islation. The most interesting innovation is the Council of 
Competitors composed of defeated election candidates, who 
received a third of the votes. To this council is given 
no power except "the inspection of public accounts, and the 
accusing of any man before the senate" (p. 529). This seems 
to me a brilliant way of giving minorities a voice; they can 
suggest legislation, but have no power except that of criti- 











f 91., 


cism. Hume then deals with local self-government and the 


legal system upon which he is not startlingly original. In 


church matters it is interesting to note that he prefers the: 
Presbyterian system, and in the matter of militia he adopts 
Harrington’s system of rotation. A curious political ar¬ 


rangement is that tT the first year in every century is set 


apart for correcting all inequalities which time may have 


produced in the representative 1 . This must he done by the 


legislature' 1 (p. 532). In the system of checks and balances 
which need not detain us, he provides against combination 
and division in the Senate, prohibits the re-election of the 
Protector, and prevents large assemblies of the people by 
providing for debate in small county assemblies. In such 


ways Hume hoped to avoid any unnecessary outbreaks of 
enthusiasm or violence. 

But he makes no extravagant claims for his scheme, and 
is not carried away as was Harrington into vain and foolish 
dreaming. "It is needless to enquire", he goes on, "whether 
such a government would be immortal" (p. 540). Plague, or 
the irrational impulses of men could easily upset the state; 
"perhaps rust may grow to the springs of the most accurate 
political machine , and disorder its motions"; the love of 
conquest may also bring ruin to a strong and healthy state. 

Therefore, he concludes, let us not be too sanguine about 

(l)That is, in the proportion of representation. 































































. 


, 



. 







(92. 

our best laid plans, or too hopeful about them: TT It is a 
sufficient excitement to human endeavours, that such a 
government would flourish for many ages; without pretending 
to bestow, on any work of man, that immortality which the 
Almighty seems to have refused to his own productions" (p. 
540). This surely is not the enthusiasm of a true Utopist* 
Humd s attitude is comparable to that of Wallace, who, in the 
middle of the century, tlecloned- that over-population would 
soon wreck the most perfect Utopia. 1 At best, RUme advo¬ 
cated a sort of patched-up British constitution, and he 
made the proviso that the patching must be done cautiously 
and without undue zeal. In its own way his Essay is a 
perfect example of the times. 

But it would be wrong to assume that Utopianism died 
out in this arid atmosphere, as it would be to think that 
Godwin's "perfectibility" doctrine had no ancestors. ye 
have said at the opening of this chapter that Utopianism 
"undergoes a profound change", and to understand that change 
it is necessary to look back for a moment. 

It has been shown, in the introduction, how interwoven 
were medieval ideas of the Earthly Paradise and of the 
primitivistic state of bliss. With the discoveries of the 
Renaissance the Happy Islands seemed suddenly to spring into 

existence somewhere beyond the setting sun, and the account s 

(l) Vide Beer, op. cit. pp. 84-7. 





















. 


. 

* 


■ 




'• . 












• 


■ 

. 




. 

■ 


. 


. 


. 































of travellers led men to believe that in a state of nature 
men existed pure and undefiled, unsmirched by the sordid¬ 
ness of civilized life. Utopianism in the eighteenth 
century was to re-assume its primitivistic guise. 

Montaigne had written with enthusiasm of the cannibals 
but in England, at first, during the middle of the Seven¬ 
teenth Century, the state of nature had, except among some 
radicals, been ridiculed. Thus Hobbes, drawing on the 
same material as Montaigne, had pictured the life of prim¬ 
itive man as Tt a time of Warre, where everyman is enemy to 
every man’ 1 -. It was a state of evil. Hot lon^: after, 
however, Locke reversed this idea completely and made the 




state of nature ideal, by resuscitating the ancient 
Arcadian picture of nature which had been so enthusiastical¬ 
ly received during the Renaissance. Locke r s conception, 
as we know, had a profound influence on Rousseau, and 
through the latter, on the Romantic poets. But there were 
other aspects of the Tf noble savage” tradition: Shaftesbury's 
idea of an instinctive moral sense, the widespread Protest¬ 
ant notion that Cod had given to man the divine gift of 
reason to solve his problems, and Lockes theory that the 
mind at birth was an unspoiled tabula rasa . These things 

(l)E.U.Fairchild, The Noble Savage , 1928 p. 23. In this 
part of the study I have used Professor Fairchild's 
excellent book freely. 


















f 94 


. 


combined, or coalesced, to form the noble savage. ”We may 
conclude then,” says Professor Fairchild, ,T that the ration¬ 
alism which dominated England from themiddle of the seven¬ 
teenth to the middle of the eighteenth century was less 
inimical to the Noble Savage idea than might he supposed. 
That idea depends upon belief in nature as a norm of ex¬ 
perience, simplicity, and upon belief in the instinctive 
goodness of man. These beliefs as old as human thought 
persisted through the rationalistic period” 1 . In literature 
these beliefs led to the exotic plays of love and honor In 
the restoration period, and to novels like Mrs. Aphra Behn 1 s 
OroonokQ . The same conception produced in the next century 
the philosophic Orientals, who, as in Goldsmith T s Citizen of 


the World , are unspoiled beings, Utopians in fact who come 
to civilization to sermonize on its follies and vices. 

Later in the Eighteenth Century, the same ideas gave birth 
to the ”noble savage” heroes of novels like Mrs, Inchbald T s 
Nature and Art , and Bage's Hermsprong . But we shall return 
to this theme later. 

There had been another force at work. The numerous 
accounts of the explorers had set free a train of specula¬ 
tion about other ways of living and there arose everywhere 
a large body of ”imaginary voyages” of which, in the Seven¬ 
teenth Century, Bishop Francis Godwin's story of Domingo 


(l) Ibid, p. 28. 



























Gonzales is an example in England, and Cyrano de Bergerac’s 
Histoire comique de la lune 1 in France. To this class 
belong also works as diverse as Defoe’s Robinson Crusoe 
and Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels . The importance of the 
imaginary voyages was that they revealed a new rationalistic 
attitude toward society; they imagined it in a new and ar¬ 
resting way. "They are, Tt says Professor Laski, TT the work 
of men eager to contrast the splendour of nature with the 


evil of civil society, the ’natural’ man with the contempor¬ 
ary European"^. They provided a new impetus; they gave 
men new horizons. Of these works, it is Swift’s Gulliver’s 
Travels to which I wish now to turn my attention,for in it 
seem to be concentrated the primitivistic beliefs and also 
the new rationalistic utopianism of the Eighteenth Century. 

Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels is not primarily a Utopia, 
as the first three books are merely a scathing denunciation 
of human meanness and folly, and none of the first three 
contains a real Utopia 4 . We are left merely to speculate on 
what Swift thought was ideal: thus, when he satirizes the 
Royal Society,in the stupid investigations of the scientists 

of Lagado, we can only surmise what Swift thought to be the 

(1) Vide U.A.Uddy, A Critical Study of Gulliver’s Travels, 

1923, intr o due tor y chapt er. ’ 

(2) The Rise of European liberalism , 1936 pp. 121ff. 

(3 )T. e. iii Book IV. See subsequent discussion. 

(4)There are a few hints of it in Book II. 



i 




















( 96 . 


real business of science. But in the fourth book, The Toy-, 
a .-re to the Houyhnhnms Swift does present a picture of an 
ideal commonwealth, and it is with this that we shall deal. 
There is one general remark however that must he made about 
Swift's ideal state, for it applies to much early Utopian 
writing. Swift describes a hypothetical state in the spirit 
of Plato; nowhere is there the suggestion that it would do 
as a working model for Europe. It was merely a "standard” 
by which European society might be Judged. Mot until the 
Bomantic period were men willing to make a dash for Utopia, 
as they had done in the Puritan revolution, and as men 
were to do again in Twentieth Century Russia. Men toyed 
with the idea of a perfect noble savage, and the quietness 
of the Eighteenth Century has caused some people to believe 
that no utopianism existed. But this is only because no 
one was prompted to act on his convictions. 

Gulliver 1 s Travels is an Imaginary voyage. In writing 
it Swift took advantage of the craze for discovery and 
adopted the "authentic" method, that is, he made every 
attempt to create the illusion of reality by including 
dates of embarkation, exact details In description, longi¬ 
tude and latitude, and so forth. But the Inclusion of such 
details to throw an air of truth about the story was purely 




















. 






• 




















. 


















* 


















. 









. 



■ 























subsidiary to his purpose, for his avowed aim was ,T to vex, 
not to divert the world’ 1 . His aim was, hy showing a dif¬ 
ferent race, to inveigh against the evils of contemporary 
Europe. In doing this he was merely following the example 
of many continental writers 1 . 

Among some of these writers a variation in treatment 
had sometimes been introduced, that of contrasting men with 
a superior race of animals. It has been remarked hy Pro¬ 
fessor Eddy that Swift T s choice of horses as the inhabitants 
of an ideal state was a wise one. He did not invoke T1 the 
long distance illusion, 11 —his Utopians were not phiIo©phic 
Orientals who seemed to Europeans to he without guile, on 
T1 the theorem that virtue increased as the square of the 
distance from Europe 11 2, in Swift there is no such cheap 
sentimentality; he made his Utopians horses. In this he was 
not original, for the heast fahle and beast epic were 
common devices in literature,--in modemtimes Anatole France 
employs the method in his Penguin Island . Beast Utopias 

1 

had also been written, and Professor Eddy has presented good:! 

reasons for believing that the fourth book of flul 1 iver had 

for its source Cyrano de Bergerac f s Histoire des oiseaux . 

Source hunting is often unnrteresting, but in this case an 

important point is involved. What do the Houyhnhnms re- 

(1) Wide W. A."Eddy, op.' clt. p. 4l. 

f2) Ibid, p. 42* 














i 







■ 






















( 98 . 




present? 

In the beast fables animals are usually made to repres¬ 
ent human types. Are we then to look upon the Houyhnhnms as 
ideal human beings? Professor W. A. Eddy says that the 
horses are used as satirical allegorical figures but are 
"never a utopian contrast to men.../it/ is obvious that in 
Gulliver’s fourth voyage. Swift does not conceive of any 
underlying blood relationship between the houyhnhnms and 
man. The horses are intended to represent horses and no¬ 
thing else."- how it is true that Swift was attacking the 
human race and represented them as Yahoos In Houyhnhnmland, 
but the horses are set off as a contrast. Dr. Eddy's argu¬ 
ment that horses are intended leads him to object to the 
clumsiness of the satire (e.g. horses do not weave mats, 
thread needles, or ride in carriages) but this supposed 
"clumsiness" is the result of Eddy's hypothesis not of 
Swift’s ineptitude. For, I think, it is obvious that Swift 
intends us to believe that the horses are representations 

p 

of ideal rational human beings and Yahoos the degenerates*'*. 
In the first book Swift had attacked individuals and their 
vices; in the second his subject deepened to a generalized 
attack on European society. It is this generalized mode of 


(1) op. cit. p, 174. 

(E). He would have argued that most of us are degenerates. I 
have not tried to deal here with the various theories of 

the identity of the Yahoos. This Intricate question 
has been carefully examined by many scholars. The 
Yahoos are not Utopian conceptions and do not enter 
this discussion. 


























(99 




attack that characterizes the fourth hook. His attack 
here is upon human rottennes, typified in the Yahoos, and 
he puts in contrast men "capable of reason”—the Houyhnhnms. 
Whether Swift, with his fierce misanthropy, thought such 
men would ever walk the earth is another question. 

Professor Fairchild is right I think when he maintains ' 

that Book IV is TT a unique treatment of the noble Savage 

idea 11 **', and that the Houyhnhnms "beneath their equine dis- 
2 

guise” are unspoiled primitives, whose simple honesty , quiet 
dignity and unclouded reason single them out from corrupt 
and civilized man. Like other primitives they have no 
learning, no war nor.weapons, no laws nor lawyers, no 
diseases, no politicians, no ministers of state. These 
"blessed deprrvations" are of course the paraphernalia 
of all utopias. It takes away something of Swift T s origin¬ 
ality to state this so baldly (Swift was a notorious borrow-, 
er), but the inhabitants and the political arrangements of 


Eouyhnhnmland are least remarkable for originality of con¬ 


ception. The book lives because of its powerful, dignified 
and yet bitter style, and the fact that his Utopians are 
horses does not arouse in us any real sense of absurdity 
when the horses perform human actions. 

Having, I hope, established the relationship of Swift's 


(1) op. cit. p. 45, 

(2) Ibid. p. 46. 






















(10Q 


work to contemporary primitivistic writing, it is necessary 
for me to add one qualifying remark. Swift was too sane a 
man to ‘believe that the Noble Savage really existed. He 


merely adopts the current technique, and creates for his 
own purpose of satirising humanity, ideal creatures, whose 
characters albeit, bear striking resemblances to the ideal 
primitive of current ideology. 

The Utopian content of the fourth book is actually 
small, for it is not until nearly the end that Swift brings 
himself to described the social system of the Houyhnhnms. 
Most of the book is taken up with an attack on the Yahoos, 
whose repulsiveness Swift describes with an attention to 
disgusting detail that is almost pathological. Swift’s 
saeva indignatio often leads to hysteria and over-statement, 
and the reader need not feel hypocritically on the defensive 
in objecting to the picture of the Yahoos. Swift, after all, 
was a man himself, and to imply that he exempted himself 
from the attack would be acciise him of unexampled priggery. 
He was obsessed by man’s bestiality, and the ordinary 
physical aspects of man’s life inspired in him a disgust 
that was not normal. That is why, I think, the fourth 
book is unconvincing: the picture is deliberately overdrawn, 
'but so much so that it destroys the sympathy of the reader. 
Oftentimes too Gulliver himself compares not unfavorably 























f 101. 




with the horses-he is for instance more susceptible to 


n 


new ideas than they are! 

Gulliver notes very soon how nearly he himself resembles 
the horrible aborigines of the country. He notices that in 
their quarreling, greed, gluttony, intemperance, immorality 
and bad temper, in their tendency to be dirty and-diseased, 
that the Yahoos were exactly like the Europeans from whom 
he had come. But the Eouyhnhnms recognize that Gulliver 
is superior to the Yahoos, that he ,T was not only endowed with, 
the faculty of speech, but likewise with some rudiments of 
reason TT (p. 267;. This is important, for we also remember 
that on every occasion when Gulliver described the state 
of Europe, the Houyhnhnrn master remarked that human vices 
were traceable to wilful neglect of sweet reasonableness, 
or to a corruption of the reasoning faculty that could be 
worse than brutality. Our defects "were plainly owing to. 
gross defects in reason, and by consequence, in virtue; 
because reason alone is sufficient to govern a rational 
creature" (p. 270). Man is, if not a "rational creature", 
yet a being "capable of reason". 

Swift’s Houyhnhnms are more than this; they are 
idealizations. "The word Houyhnhnrn in their tongue, sig¬ 
nifies a horse , and in its etymology the perfection of 
nature" (p. 243), These "excellent quadrupeds" had a mild 


(1) Gulliver T _s .Travels in Bohn T s an dard hihnarg*. 
■^11 subseauent references will be to this edit 


ion, 





























. 







• 



. 











' 








- 


































. 



. 




. 








. 




















. . 

' 















( 102 . 


mien, and had no conception of lying or dishonesty. Vice 
and brutality were foreign to their natures; they were 
temperate, hospitable and just. Like good Utopians, "their 
wants and passions are fewer than among us" (p. 250). "As 
these noble Houyhnhnms are endowed by nature with a general 
disposition to all virtues, and have no conceptions or ideas 




of what is evil in a rational creature, so their grand 
maxim is, to cultivate reason and to be wholly governed by 
it" (p. 278). The clear light of reason is brought to bear 
not only upon matters of personal conduct, but also upon 
the organization of the state. 

As a result there are a great number of negative ad¬ 
vantages in Houyhnhnmland. Gulliver found that living upon 
his new simple diet he had achieved a hitherto inexperienced 
sense of well being: 


"I enjoyed perfect health of body, and tranquillity of 
mind...I wanted no fence against fraud or oppression; 
here was neither physician to destroy my body, nor 
lawyer to ruin my fortune; no informer to watch my 
words and actions, or forge accusations against me 
for hire: here were no gibers, censurers, backbiters, 
pickpockets, highwaymen, housebreakers, attorneys, 
bawds, buffoons, gamesters, xooliticians, wits, 
splenetics, tedious talkers, controvertists, ravishers 
murderers, robbers, virtuosos.....” (pp. 287-8).... 

and so forth. A lone: list of Swiftian classifications of 


brawling humanity follows: none of these types existed in 


Ho uyhnhnmlan d. 


















The little island was, like all pre-industrial Utopias 

a self-sufficient unit. One of the horses is made to say, 

■ 

"that must needs he a miserable country which cannot 
furnish food for its own inhabitants" fp. 263). To this 
idea, now antiquated, we need not feel too superior, but 
Swift 1 s subsequent argument that economic self-sufficiency 
would be a deterrent to vice f p. 263), strikes us as a 
trifle fantastic. There is no clear presentation of the 
economic system, except that there seerns to be sufficient 
for everyone, and there is no greed. There is a spirit 
of universal brotherhood abroad: "his Honor...went upon a 
supposition that all animals had a title to their share in 
the productions of the earth, and especially those who 
presided over the rest" {p. 262). 




This last remark is interesting inasmuch as it indi- 
cates a certain higher reward for those in positions of 
authority. The Yahoos as we might expect perform many of 
the lower tasks; they fulfil , for instance the duties 
of draught horses among us. But among the Houyhnhnms them- I 
selves there is a caste system: 

"He made me observe, that among the Houyhnhnms, the 
white, the sorrel and the iron-grey, were not exactly 
shaped as the bay, the dapple-gray, and the black; 
nor born with equal talents of the mind, or a capacity 
to improve them, and therefore continued always in 
the condition of servants, without ever aspiring to 
match out of their own race, which in that country 
would be reckoned monstrous and unnatual" (p. 269). 






















( 104 . 



This idea of a natural and hereditary inequality of men 
was generally believed in the early eighteenth century, 
later radicals were to declare that all men were horn free 
and equal, and still later men like H. G. 'Jells were to 


propose a ’Voluntary nobility* of talent-*-. There were def¬ 
inite limits in Swift f s mind to the idea of democracy: those 


best fitted by fact of birth should rule, and, presumably 
receive greater benefits. 

Although the rule of monogamy exists among them, "they 


Q 

have no fondness for their colts or foals 6 , but the care 


they take in educating them proceeds entirely from the 
dictates of reason. And I observed my master to show the 
same affection to his neighbour T s issue that he had for 
his own" (p. 279). Marriage is the result not of love. 


but of the arrangement of the parents of contracting parties 
There is no courtship, andno settlments are made. In their 
minds the propagation of hardy offspring was the first 
consideration and sentimental ideas get no welcome. Swift's 
own life may explain these notions, although other men 
have entertained tkem^, but he was naively optimistic when 
he said that there were no unhappy unions and no infidelity. 

Population is rigidly controlled by council: "This 
(l) Vide. A Modern Utopia . 

f2) Swift elsewhere reveals an abnormal hatred of children^ : 
so this passage is not remarkable. 



(3) Plato has an idea approximately the same 



















( 105 . , 


caution is necessary to prevent the country from "being 
over-hurthened with numbed (p. S79). A married couple 
is permitted to have a colt of each sex, and no more. 

The deficiencies in a family are sometimes made up hy 
exchange with another family. "But the race of inferior 
Eouyhnhnms "bred up to "be servants is not so strictly 
limited upon this article ; these are allowed to produce 
three of each sex, to he domestics in the noble families" 

(p. £79). There is also a certain adumbration of eugenics 
in their regulations of mating, but it is of course vague 
and general. 

The education of the young is strictly supervised, and 
involves regulation of diet and habits as well as physical 
training for speed and hardiness. The emphasis is all 
upon moral values: temperance, industry, exercise and 
cleanliness are the habits carefully inculcated. Moreover 
and this has a forward look about it, education is the same 
for both sexes. It was notable that in Samuel (Iott T s 
educational system only boys received the benefits: the 
inferiority of, women was still a basic assumption. But 
education must be meagre, for the Houyhnhnms have no letter^ 
all knowledge being traditional, nevertheless, "In poetry 


: 


they must be allowed to excel all other mortals; vtfierein 


the justness of their similes, and the minuteness of their 













descriptions are indeed inimitable" (p. 285 ). 

Their manner of life is exceedingly simple, closely 
approaching that of the primitives the mariners had dis¬ 
covered. And, after living to a venerable old age, they 
die, like all Utopians without regret or apprehension. 

This simple rational view of life they carry over into 
government: "Every fourth year, at the vernal equinox, 
there is a representative council of the whole nation" to 
discuss economic conditions, labor (i.e. Yahoo) problems, 
redistribution of goods and children for equity, settling 
of population problems. There is no executive or magistra¬ 
cy and it is unnecessary to exhort obedience to decrees 
or punish failures to comply with the simple, rational laws. 

Such is Swift’s Utopia. It attempted to show that 
reason was perfectly capable of producing an ideal state, 
for virtue was reason’s handmaiden. It dismissed the 
emotional life of man as unimportant, and by whittling away 
his desires made him content. Y©t Swift retreated from 
the actual world in his Utopia, and so fierce was his 
hatred of the human race that he practically denied to man¬ 
kind any hope of a better world. Uearly all of the "perfec' 
features of Houyhnhnmland are negative qualities, and the 
life of the horses is as unreal as it is uninviting. There 















. 








■ 












is too little that is constructive in the hook, and too 


much that 
claims for 
altogether 


is merely a negation; hut Swift's elaborate 
reason were to he asserted again, though on 
different grounds hy William Godwin. 













{ 108 , 


CHAPTBR 7. 

Utopia in the Romantic Period. 

— 

Swift’s Utopian picture is an extreme example of the 

theory that man had deteriorated under the influence of 

■ 

civilization* This theory of deterioration had "been common 
enough in ancient times,hut it remained for the idea of 
progress, which arose in France in the Eighteenth Century, 
to give a new turn to men’s thinking. Three principal 
variations of noble savage thought appeared: a. man had 
deteriorated and there was no remedy; b. man had deterior¬ 
ated but was capable of reforming himself again; c. man 
had not deteriorated (i.e. in his inner nature) and was 
capable of infinite perfectibility. Swift's Utopia 
belongs to the first classification. To the second, belong 
a host of minor novels and much periodical writing'—it was 
Rousseau’s view. To the last class belongs the work of 
William Godwin, who inspired two generations of rebels 
among English poets. Thus it might be said with some 
truth that there is a gradual swing upward from Swift to 
the climax, in the hymns of Shelley’s Hellas . It would be 
wrong of course to say that England at large went with the 
swing. The fine outburst of English enthusiasm in the 
early years of the French Revolution was crushed during the 
Terror and Empire, and England survived the Luddite riots 
to achieve not a violent revolution but a reform bill, to 


















' 

' 















(109 


■believe not in Godwin’s anarchist perfectibility but in the 
liberal and tamer "idea of progress". 

It would be beyond my subject to trace in any detail 
the growth of revolutionary ideas among the poets; it began 
early In the Eighteenth Century. To love IJature came to 
mean: to love what was "natural" in man, and to hate social 
distinctions, urban life, social conventions, traditional 
government, and artifieal poetry. The nobility comes in for 
a good deal of condemnation in the novels of the time, and 
the peasant for just as much praise. The Idea of the Golden 
Age had been revived in long passages In Thomson’s Spring 
and Warton T s Enthusiast ,—even in the artificial melancholy 
of Pope’s Pastorals there is a wish for escape. This mood 
was to grow with the years. Later in the century, Cowper 
took up the refrain of rustic simplicity as opposed to 
urb an unnatur alness: 

"God made the country, and man made the town." 

The mood of escape, however, was not enough. The 
idea of a golden age had received a fresh Impetus from the 
writings of Rousseau, but the craving for actuality went 
unsatisfied. "The natural goodness of man," says Professor 
Crane Brinton, "had if possible to be placed in a contemporary 
setting" 1 ; as Wordsworth was presently to write. Its scene 
(l)Political Ideas of the English Romanticists.1926, p. 26. 


















( 110 . 


must “be 


"Hot in Utopia, subterraneous fields 
Or some secreted island Heaven knows where, 

But in the very world which is the world 
Of all of us, the place where in the end 
We find our happiness, or not at all*" 

(Prelude, 21 , 140-144.) 

Many men found the setting for Utopia in America; "Washing¬ 
ton became the perfect copy of virtue, an example of the 
way man developed away from civilization. The fairy tale 
of the golden age had come true in the United States"^. 

The first Romantic poets were inspired by the American 
Revolution, even as they were by the revolt in France. In 
the "second generation" we find Shelley and Byron looking 
upon the United States as the home of freedom. Campbell T s 
Gertrude of Wyoming contains also (ill, 1-9) a survival of 
the idea that Arcadia existed in the American wilderness. 

In the early Revolutionary period, the Jacobins 
assailed society in novel, poem, and drama, with the cease¬ 
less refrain that an unspoiled man (often the hero, a young 
virtuous radical), was infinitely superior to a civilized 
man. They looked to America as the "locale" of Utopia. 

We should expect then that somewhere the two ideas should 
come together, and they do, in Bage’s Hermsprong (1796): 







(1) Ibid. p. 26. 






















( 111 . 


"Stop friend," said Her ms prong, smiling, "and do not 
abuse thyself. I have sixty thousand acres of un¬ 
cleared land upon the Potomac. It cost me little. 

I have imagined a society of friends within a two 
mile ring; and I have Imagined a mode of making it 
happy. In this it is possible I may not reach the 
point I desire, hut with common prudence, we cannot 
fail of plenty, and in time of affluence." (Yol.III 
p. £39). 

Hothing comes of this in the novel, hut it indicates that 
such ideas were in the air. We know that Coleridge read 
the hook 1 2 (even after his own scheme had collapsed); it is 
a good indication of the desire to establish Utopia across 
the waters. Three decades later Robert Owen {acting under 
similar illusions) was to try his Utopian experiment in 
Indiana. Other communist attempts (of which the Oneida 
community is a notable example), have dotted American 
annals and have saved its economic history from being a 
"dull record of expansion". It is my purpose here first 
to discuss briefly the abortive Pantisocracy scheme of 
Coleridge and Southey, and then to discuss the Utopianism 
of Shelley, which like Pantisocracy owed its origins to 
William Godwin. 

Godwin, aheist, materialist and necessarian treated 
man as a syllogism, that is he believed that man is formed 

entirely by environmental forces^. "Man is the creature 

(1) Ibid, note, p. 40$ 

(2) This is the corner stone, also, of Owen s Hew View Qi. 
society (Vide G.D.H. Cole T s biography). It is constant- 
ly reiterated by other men of the century* 
























( 112 . 


of conditions, but primarily of conditions which he may 
hope to modify--education, religion, social prejudice and 
above all government 1 ' 1 , looking about him, Godwin saw 
society as corruption, and decided that institutions must 
he abolished if man were ever to rid himself of a slave 
morality, if man were ever to reassert his natural dignity. | 
But man is, he says, governed by his opinions, and appar¬ 
ently, may change his own environment. It has been ob¬ 
served that Godwin’s whole philosophy rests on this direct 
contradiction of "necessity” and "perfectibility”, for the 
one is static and the other dynamic. ”P@rfectibilitarian- 
ism and necessitarianism”, says H. h T . Fairchild^, ”are not 

m 

inconsistent if we assume that through the operation of 

necessity man is automatically becoming more and more 

reasonable and is therefore continually improving. But in 

order to achieve this mechanistic optimism we must deprive 

reason of that voluntary character which Godwin frequently 

insists upon as essential. This tangle in his thought is 

never quite unravelled”. Certainly Shelley never unravelled 

it 1 , and it is worth noticing that Shelley's utopias all 

come about by a miracle. The dynamic element in Godwin's 
Ttth: U.Brailsfor^, Shelley, Godwin and their Circle T9l3 

/ x P« 

(2) The Romantic Quest 1931, p. 30. 

(3) Some Marxists get into a similar difficulty. It is really■ 

the old problem of predestination and free will in- 
modern dress. 

(4) See the discussion of Shelley, below. 























- 

- 

. 

















( 113 . ' 


thought is hard to set in motion, when the doctrine of 
necessity is remembered* 

The individual, said Godwin, is far more important than 
society, and his inner nature is capable of infinite per¬ 
fectibility. Institutions like government and marriage 
hinder man from achieving the highest development of his 
personality, inasmuch as they put 'clamps upon him and warp 
his mind; therefore they must be abolished. To the individ¬ 
ual reason, in its search for truth and justice, must be 
given unbounded freedom, for Godwin believed, as did Swift, 
that reason left to itself could arrive at a code of ethics 
suitable to everyman. Vice was the result of intellectual 
error and could be rectified by reasoning, and the same 
applied to crime. Justice, the dispassionate and impartial 
treatment of all human beings, would be the ultimate re¬ 
sult of this ’ T apt)lied Tf rationality. But there is another 
side to the doctrine. Since, as Godwin said, our voluntary 
actions originate in our opinions, we must make ourselves 

conscious of our motives--we must make them rational. The 

. 

essence of perfection "is to approach as nearly as possible 
the absolutely voluntary state, to act always**.from a clear 
and comprehensive survey of the consequences we desire to 
produee tfi . The rest is simple—truth will always triumph r ; 
(l) Brailsford, op. cit. p. 104. 




















( 114 , . 


over evil, and reason conquer all vices. All a man needs 
is sincerity and determination; Justice will naturally 
follow. 

So Godwin goes on to absolute freedom of expression, 
freedom of religion and free education (no national estab¬ 
lishments). As there should be no government in a state 
of purely rational creatures, Godwin foresaw a time when 
all government would be at an end. He wished to end all 
authority and coercion, and he left the enforcement of 
virtue to individual reflection, in which he placed great 
faith. He had an unconscious belief that men would reach 
some sort of workable unanimity in an anarchist commonwealth 
Punishment for offences would be unknown, and, as universal 
benevolence spread, crime would disappear. I n fact society 
would become nothing but embodied Justice. 

In economic matters Godwin proposed to apply also the 
rule of benevolence. He granted that men were not born 
equal, but he insisted on equality of opportunity. Dis¬ 
parities of wealth could not arise because every article 
of property was to belong to him in whose hands it would 
be of most benefit. Every man, then, had a claim on every- | 
one else; moreover, every individual was only a steward of 
economic goods. "But subject to censure and remonstance, he ■ 

must be free to dispose of his property as his own under- 







f 115, 


standing shall dictate. The ideal is equality, and all 
society should he what Coleridge called a Pantisocracy"^. 

This system of universal sharing (on a voluntary basis) 
would gradually extinguish all the crimes and vices that 
are a product of economic oppression^. 

But there is one other important aspect of Godwin's 
doctrine. Marriage, he thought, was an indefensible 
invasion of individual liberty and he proposed to substitute' 
free association of the sexes. He does not fear lust or 
licence, for men would be completely sincere and rational 
in their love, Any children that were born v^ould be cared 
for by the mothers with the spontaneous assistance of 
neighbours. Finally, population would not increase to the 
breaking point, for men, by an act of will,would learn to 
control passion and would gradually cease to propagate the 
species, life itself would become immortal, and an endless 
Utopia, of easy-going intellectuals, something 1ike A Bernard 
Shaw anticipates in Back to Kethusaleh , would result. 

And all this could be established by moral suasion, 
by love, but not by violence. Justice is the eternal enemy || 
of conflict, therefore the anarchist state must quietly 
rise through the peaceful efforts of men of good will. This 

is. the doctrine that Coleridge, Southey, and Wordsworth read,. 

(1) Brailsford, op. cit. p. 115. 

(2) This is substantially the argument of later socialists. 







( 116 . 


— it is this that coloured all of Shelley T s thinking. 

One of the first fruits of Godwin’s philosophy was the 
Pantisocracy scheme of Coleridge and Southey. These young 
students planned to set up, on the hanks of Susquehannah, 
a little model state based on equality of rank and community 
of property 1 , a brotherhood that would make its own laws 
and regulations. Coleridge and Southey believed, rather 
naively, that once having bought the land they "could hold 
it as sovereign possessors without interference from federal i 

i 

or state authorities"^. In the Pantisocracy every man was 
to do his own share of the work required in clearing and 
cultivating the wilderness, (though it is difficult to 
imagine Coleridge so engaged), and the two young men had a 1 
childlike belief that two hours labor a day would be quite 
sufficient for their co-operative pioneering. All the 
rest of the lazy American day would be spent in extending 
their domains, or in individual pursuits, reading and writ¬ 
ing, or as Professor ITacGillivray maliciously adds, listen¬ 
ing to "the inspired Coleridge monologue" 3 . The plan was 

(1) To Coleridge Godwinisra meant communism. "In his notebook 

in a list of projected works we find this entry’Pantiso¬ 
cracy, or a practical Essay on the abolition of Ind.lv/ld/-j 
ual Property.... 1 " etc. Tide J.L. Bowes, The Hoad to 
Xanadu, 1927, p. 20. 

(2) Studies in English, University of Toronto Press, 1931. 
Article by Prof. 7.B. MacGillivray, "The Pantisocracy 

erne and its Immediate Background", pp. 145-146. 

(3) lbid, p. 143. 










I 














(117 


not necessarily a return to Rousseau's state of nature but 
rather "the application of Godwin’s idea of perfectibility 
through reason to a selected group of people in an environ- . 
ment that had the negative advantage of shutting out oppor¬ 
tunities for evil • "1 

So in the summer of 1794., Coleridge and Southey went 
up and down the country campaigning* "We preached Panti- 
socracy and Aspheterism everywhere," wrote Southey in 
September to his brother. "These, Tom are two new word§, 
the first signifying the equal government of all, the 
other the generalisation of individual property; words well 
understood in the city of Bristol."^ They were not talking 
in a vacuum, for as Professor MacGillivray shows in his 
excellent study, the poets "had sought out the most authen¬ 
tic information about America. They had read books of travel 
and had consulted travellers in the flesh.They had 
read the accounts of Brissot and Cooper concerning the 
region, and had enquired about the soil, the climate, the 
"musketoes", and so forth. A Genevan banker, one IT. 
Clavi&re, had actually proposed a similar Utopia in America, 
so they were spurred on. Cooper had "found the upper valley 

of the Susquehanna}! ideal for such a settlement, and 

(1) Fairchild, The Romantic Quest , p. 54. 

(2) Quoted by J. L, I'owes, The Hoad to Xanadu , p. 573. 

(3) op. cit. p. 133. 


















(118. ■ 

announced it to all interested, including 1 2 the Bristol group, 
in his Some Information Respecting America 1 . The famous 
Dr. Priestley actually went out to Pennsylvania, and then 
to the Susquehannah to await the young liberals, who never 
came. So the Pantisocrats were among distinguished company 
in their folly, and had their feet far more on the earth 
than is generally supposed* 

Therewes however one rather pressing and awkward dif¬ 
ficulty, that of raising the necessary £2,000 to set out, 
and this nroblem neither Coleridge nor Southey was able to 
solve. Moreover there arose new difficulties, indicative 
of waning enthusiasm: what about the little Prickers and 
Southeys already born in a corrupt society? "These childrof 
Coleridge wrote to Southey, . .are they not alread;/ deeply 1 
tinged with the prejudices and errors of society? Have 
they not learned from their schoolfellows Pear and Selfish¬ 
ness , of which the necessary offsprings are Deceit and 
desultory hatred? r & Strangely enough, Southey and Coleridge 
thought themselves free of the evils under which these 
children suffered. But doctrinaire faith hates a blemish-- 
it would be unfair, they thought, to test the scheme after 

deliberately introducing patent imperfections. So the en- 

(1) Ibid. p. 133 

(2) Quoted by MacGillivray, pp. 167-8. • ! 



















thusiasm died away, especially when Southey wanted to take 
servants along (much to Coleridge's indignation). later 
Southey proposed to "buy a farm in Wales: this was the 
mouse of which the Mountain Pantisocracy was at length 
safely delivered:! Coleridge himself lived to say that it 
was the name chiefly that had attracted him to Pantisocracy, 
hut Southey in spite of his later conservatism still clung 
to hopes of improving society, and uttered his blessing over 
the experiments of Kobert Owen. The pantisocracy scheme i 
itself remains but the boyish enthusiasm of two energetic 
young students, all on fire with theory. 


The closing years of the Eighteenth century witnessed 
a decline in Godwin’s reputation, and the enthusiasm of the 
poets died away. Concurrent with this were the repressive 
measures of Pitt, which for the time being stifled protests 
against the evils of the old system of government and the 
iniquities of the new industrial order. But after the 
Napoleonic wars, the problems of unemployment and labor 
flared up once again, and agitators renewed their struggle 
for reform: Burdett, ,f Orator ?T Hunt, Cobbett, Brands Place, 
on the one hand, and on the other the I iteratl , Eazlitt, 


Leigh Hunt, Byron, Shelly and Moore, from a different and 
more cautious point of view, the Benthamite radicals also 












f 1 SO. ' 

were debating- the problem of reform. It was natural in this 


atmosphere that an example of pure Utopianism should appear: 
it did in the work of Shelley. Robert Owen was conducting 
his work at hew Lanark, and in France, the imaginative 
Fourier, inspired by Owen, was about -to draw up plans for 
his communistic phalan^steries. There is one striking 
similarity between Owenism and the Utopianism of Shelley 
(it is an aspect of nearly all subsequent liberal thought): 
a reformed environment would mean a better race of men. 

The difficulty is of course that environment is not purely 
an exterior impersonal thing, for man is to a large extent 
his own environment. For is man the mere recipient of ex¬ 
ternal pressures; he does in a very real way affect his 
surroundings. There is no influence that is not reciprocal. 
The tangle in Godwin T s thought centres on this point,---his 
necessarian ideas prevented him from seizing on a truer if 
more intricate answer. And Shelley himself had no real an¬ 
swer. 

But if Godwin outlined no Gtoioia, Shelley did ; he 
completed the picture. H. R. Brailsford asserts that ,r it 
would be no exaggeration to sag/ that Godwin formed Shelley 1 s 
mind, and that Prometheus Unbound and Hellas were the great¬ 
est of Godwin r s works." 1 That is true if one qualification 

(l) Shelle:/, Godwin and their Circle, p. 174. 


























( 121 . ■ . 



is made* Prom youth, Shelley had been a rebel, and he found 


in Godwin*s philosophy 


a way to make the whole world 


free and happy. Unlike his contemporaries, Shelley was not 


an ameliorator. He longed for a state of absolute 


happiness, but to be completely happy meant, for Shelley's 
sensitive body, freedom from all pain and. suffering. .Again, 
he could feel no contentment himself, unless all those 
about him were happy also. This explains his dreaming of 
a day when even animals would no longer prey on one another, 
of a day when all men would live in perfect harmony and 



love. For Shelley believed that any other Utopia would 
be too imperfect to be desired. Thus what is for us most 
visionary in Shelley's rhapsodic visions, was for him its 
most important characteristic. Godwin is the method, but 
Shelley coloured the result with hiS own personality. 

In his early work, though, it is fair to say that 
Shelley was ’completely dominated by Godwin. Many men have 
said that if the Political Justice were to disappear 
it could be dug up again from Shelley's Queen Mab . In 
Queen Mab there is first a virulent attack on the past 
tyrannies and miseries of this world brought about by des¬ 
potism and religion, then there is a black picture of con¬ 
temporary conditions, and finally a picture of the "bliss 
to come when reason will reign. Virtue,, freedom and love 





















• : 






. 

t 













(122 


will finally overthrow the powers of darkness* moreover, 
such a development is inevitable: (ill, 253-40), Aftd then, 
when all miseries are swept out of the world (for evils of 
every sort are inter-connected), the first dawn will break 
over Utopia: 

,f A garden shall arise, in loveliness 
Surpassing fabled Eden. 11 (IY, 88-9) 

It would be well to remark at this point that all of 
Shelley 1 s Utopias have an "Edenesque" quality. He never 
quite shook himself free of the primitivistic idea that 
man, who was innately good, had once lived in a state of 
perfection 1 . His long poems nearly all close with a vision 
of a golden age, a heaven on earth, brought about by love. 
And the character of this utopia is something like the 
pagan idea of the state of primitive bliss, or the Christ¬ 
ian idea of the garden of Eden. 

Early in Queen Mab we read that 

"... every heart contains perfections germ" (IY, 147), 
and it is this universal quality of perfectibility that 
finally triumphs in the Utopia of the eighth part. Hope 

has conquered fear at last (YIII, 11), and love, freedom 

fl) Cf. The Revolt of Islam , II, xii,l: 

"Such "man has been, ana such may be again," 
and Hellas , 1. 1060,* 

"The world ? s great age begins anew 
The gdden years return..." 




























* 








































■ 










(125 




and health have brought about universal peace (11.15-54). 

The whole world has become habitable (even the North Pole 
and the equatorial regions), as the rigours of climate 

have disappeared (11. 58-78). There are no storms (1. 117); 

1 

"fruits are ever ripe, flowers ever fair" (1. 119); and the 
lion lies down with the lamb (11.124 ff• ): 

"All bitterness is past; the cup of joy 
Unmingled mantles the goblet T s brim 

And courts the thirsty lips it fled before," (11, 131-5) 
The character of man "chief perceives the change" 
fll, 142 ff.), for now, "with taintless body and mind", and 
blessed from birth "with all bland impulses", he is complete:/ 
master of himself and his desires. Flesh-eating, which 
seemed, to the vegetarian Shelley, the source of all base 


passion, has long since ceased, and man, now clothed with 

immortality, lives on in endless peace among the animals: 

"All things are void of terror: man has lost 
-His terrible prerogative, and stands 
An equal amidst equals: happiness 
And science dawn though late upon the earth: 

Peace cheers the mind, health renovates the frame, 
Disease and pleasure cease to mingle here. 

Reason and passion cease to combat there." (VIII, 225- 


231 


How did all this come about? Through the slow and per¬ 


sistent action of love uoon men T s minds: 















(124 


"Then steadily the happy ferment worked, 

Reason was free......... . Tr (IX, 49-50). 

Disease, crime, falsehood and poverty disappeared; cathedrals 
fell into disuse, and prisons into ruin. The hond of 
marriage loosed (ll. 80 ff.) and man was free to live on, 
endlessly perfecting himself in an atheistic anarchy of love. 
It will he seen quickly that the benefits of Shelley’s 
Utopia are principally negative. With the wand of a magic¬ 
ian he has spirited unpleasantness away from the world, 
forgetting that all joy depends upon the presence of sorrow. 
But the Queen Mab vision is very representative of Shelley, 
inasmuch as the ideas are repeated in almost the same order 
in Cythna’s great speech in Canto V of The hevolt of Islam . 
In substance they are reiterated in Act III of Prometheus 
nhound , and their spirit pervades the closing hymns of 
Hellas . But there is very little that is of a positive 
nature except eternal happiness. 

Shelley had far more precise ideas of the evils of 

this world than he did of the actual bliss to come. Qneen 

- 

Ivlab is full of youthful rant, and The Kevolt of Islam has, 
side by side with passages of rare beauty many passages of 
unexampled bluster and violence. "The gorged and drunken 
Kings, the baleful and malignant Priests who represent, in 

















( 125 .' 


the fiction of Queen Mat) , the political and ecclesiastical 
tradition of Europe, cannot he dismissed as the passing 
nightmares of adolescence,” says Professor George Gordon, 

’’Shelley, though he disowned, the poem, never wholly out¬ 
lived it. Tti The sinister influences of society are 
halefully personified in Jupiter in the Prometheus ; the 
dark picture never passed away. Shelley was a propagandist, 
it is true, hut he got this mental trait from Godwin, whose 
hook is nine-tenths denunciation of existing institutions. 
But Shelley did not. have a violent character, and the rant 
seems strange. The fact is that he could do little hut 
repeat the denunciatory outbreaks of Godwin. To construct 
Utopia was not in Godwin’s power, and when Shelley came to 
describe it he fell hack for the most part on Godwin’s 




negations. 

In the Prometheus there is not as much of the denuncia¬ 
tory mood, even though Jupiter symbolizes the oppressions 
of this world. After Jupiter’s fall, joy passes like a 
thrill though mankind; Utopia is brought In almost by the 
blowing of a trumpet. The ocean now flows 

’’Round mai$^ peopled continents and round 
Fortunate isles..,.’ 7 (ill, ii, ££-3) 

Thrones, altars, judgment seats and prisons have tumbled 

down, and man, _ 

(l) Shelley and the Opxoressors of Mankind, 19S2, p. 11. 







































( 126 .' 


’’Sceptreless, free, uncireumserihed, "but 
Fqual, unciassed , triheless, and nationless 
Exempt from awe, worship, degree, the king 
Over himself; Just, gentle wise: hut man 
Passionless; no, yet free from guilt or pain, 

IIor yet exempt, though ruling them like slaves, 

From chance, and death, and mutability. 

The clogs of that which else might oversoar 
The loftiest star of unascended heaven. 

Pinnacled dim in the intense inane,” (ill, iv, 193-204)' 

But still the picture is negative. All things may ’’have 

put their evil nature off” when Jupiter falls, hut Shelley’s 

picture of positive Joys, occupations and enthusiasms is 

pale and shadowy. Prometheus says that he and Asia will 

retire to 

”A simple Dwelling, which shall he our own; 

{ 

’There we will sit and talk of time and change..... 




And we will search with looks and words of love. 

For hidden thoughts, each lovelier than the last 
Our unexhausted spirits...” fill, iii, 22-36) 

There, will visit them 

’’the progeny immortal 
Of Painting, Sculpture, and rapt Poesy, 

And arts, though unimagined, yet to he.” (Ill,iii 54-6) : 
But this Is a very vague and unreal picture of the world 
to come; it has no relation to the vital, pulsating active 
life we know, in which merchants open their shops, and 


miners dig ore out of the earth 


’’The passion for reform,” 















( 187 . ' 


justly observes Professor George Gordon, "is lost in the 




rapturous contemplation not merely of the world made better. 

* 

1 

hut of a better world." in Prometheus Unbound Shelley’s 
flight from reality is complete. 

There is another point worth observing. Shelley, in 
his quest for a new and better world had no solution but 
reform through a sudden emotional conversion. The appear¬ 


ance of love and reason brings Utopia in Queen I Tab. in 


The Revolt of Islam all men f s hearts become softened 


immediately after laon and Cythna show themselves to the 


multitude. In Prometheus TTnbound , Jupiter descends from his 


throne at the mere sight of Demogorgon, and the beautiful 




music of a horn banishes all ugliness and evil from the 
world. Granted that these are only poetic representations 
of change or revolution, nevertheless it is reform through 
a "mysterious moral cataclysm"; it is complete transforma¬ 
tion of the world through sentiment. "Shelley," says 
Professor Crane Brinton, "wants to achieve earthly happiness 
without earthly suffering." 1 2 It is a commonplace of history 
that great changes do not occur so easily, but most 
Utopian thought is an attempt to supersede the dark histor ¬ 
ical realit y. 


(1) op, cit. p. 11. 

(2) Political Ideas of the English Romanticists, 


p. 235. 
























































, 













- 









. 













. 


















. 













( 128 ,:, 


Let us not be unjust to Shelley, for Prometheus is not 


the whole picture. In his Philosophical View of Beform he 


does suggest concrete measures such as universal suffrage. 




annual parliaments, universal education and legal reform, 


Throughout his works he asks for complete religious tolera¬ 
tion. And most of these things have come about. Again, 
Shelley’s preaching that labor was the sole source of 
wealth and his vigorous assertion of the equality of men 
have made him one of the accredited prophets of Socialism. 

But in giving him his due, let us not forget that most 
of his poetic visions, from their very nature, are fated 
never to be realized upon- this imperfect planet. 

Shelley T s Utopianism has been of considerable influence;? 
however. W# H« Hudson in his delightful little fantasy 
A Crystal Age describes in living terms the Utopia 
which Shelley with his negations was never able to make 


convincing. In the fifth part of George Bernard Shaw’s 
Back to Methuselah , the Utopia of long-living intellectuals 
reminds the reader of Shelley’s work, and in the remodelled 
world of Wells’ In the Bays of the Comet , the Shelley in¬ 
fluence is everywhere present. For, in its way, the 


anarchist dream of health and happiness strikes a deep chord ;.' 


of sympathy in every man, 


















■ ; . ■ 


- . - ■ • • 

. 










’ 

. 










CHAPTER VI 


Two Kid-Century Protests 


Nothing exploded the noble savage tradition as well 


as did continued exploration. Contact with actual aborigines! 


dispelled forever the myth of innate virtue in primitive 
people, and Utopian thought, based upon the "noble savage’ T 
Idea collapsed. If a contemporary Utopia in a remote part 
of the world was shown to be a fatuous notion, Utopists 
had one of two escapes: a. Into the past, or, b. Into the 
future. Carlyle and Ruskin look with admiration upon the 
Middle Ages, and William Morris imagines his Utopia on 
Medieval lines; In modern times there Is G. K. Chesterton. 
Their yearning for a glory that is faded is comparable to 
the longing of the ancients for the golden age, and springs 
from a similar frame of mind. To the second class belong 
all socMist utopian writings from Owen until the present 
day. Hot to be cheated of the vision of a better world 
Marx elaborated his Scientific Utopianism. The latter, 
which was an ingenious combination of Hegelian dialectic, 
evolutionary thought and a new materialistic determinism 
was, for all its imposing array of terminology, just 
civilised and extremely intellectual rationalization of the 
Utopian attitude 1 . This class-ridden world was to pass 
into the "classless" society from which there was presumably 





fl) But see the next chapter. 




























( 130 . 


to “be no change . Karxfs work influenced the thought of 
the literary Utopias which we shall discuss in the next 

O' ’ W 

chapter. Many radicals accepted his idea that Utopia 
would "of necessity" exist in the future. 

This is not meant to disparage reform. The sprawling 
industrial towns of the Nineteenth Century cried out for a 
remedy, and a multitude of opinions appeared. Progress in 
industry, the rise in real wages, the achievement of free 
trade, had created,it is true,a complacent and stentorian 
conviction in most Englishmen that there was no place like 
England and no age like the present, out some of the great 
Victorians, Carlyle, Ruskin and Arnold protested, and one 
"branch of liberal thought turned to reform. To patch up 
evils was by many considered to he enough, because there 
was a belief that enlightened selfishness would end in the 
general good. Macaulay, so English, so skeptical of doc¬ 
trinaires, was typically Victorian when he said he would 
rather have an acre in Middlesex than a principality in 
Utopia. But the ground-work of modern socialism was never¬ 
theless being laid, and the impact of its principles was. 
strong in the actual Utopias that were written. 

This impact requires us to make two general observa¬ 
tions. First, the Godwinian conception of perfectibility 


{1} Some apologists dispute this view of Marx however. e.°* 


» 9 ■ * 

Sidney”Hook in his Toward the Understanding of Earl Marx 
1933. 
























f 131. 

passed into the belief that Utopia was achievable through 

reform. Teufel s dr oclh "quotes without censure that strange 

aphorism of Saint-Simon T s concerning which and whom so 

much were to be.said: l 1 age d T or, qti’une aveugle tradition 

a plac6 jusqu’ici dans le passe, est devant nous" 1 . So 

Carlyle and so Ruskiji. The latter, who like his great 

Master looked to the Past, everywhere dreamed of a new 

world, one which, in A Crown of Mild Olive he believed would 
E 

be everlasting • These men, like Morris, held the theory 

of■deterioration and perfectibility at the same time, Just 

as did some of the ancients. Truly it is said, there is 

nothing new under the sun. 

Second . If Utopia were to be achieved in the real 

world, then a method must be found. It is beyond my scope 

to outline even in passing the twists and turns of this 

most fascinating subject: it has been the grist of every 

mill of every radical party since the French Revolution. 

But it had a definite influence on literary Utopias. They 

must needs be accoutred with the latest raiment of reform; 

they must put in the machinery of strikes and class wars. 

Morris employs the conception of the Syndicalist general 

strike; Bellamy (baulking at the class conflict) follows 

Marx’s tlieory of finance capital. The case of H. G. Bells 
(1) C ar I yl e , 3 ar tor Re s ar'tus , pT 17 8 (Ever yman 1 s Edit ion) 

(E) Rusk in, A Crown of /lid Olive . Lecture on Traffic, 
concluding paragraph. 































is interesting: in his early Apocalyptic writings he used 
class and international wars freely, and in the latest 
vision The Shape of Things to Come invoked a dark Spengler- 
ian prophecy, to which he added a Utopian appendix, Utopia 


must he up-to-date in its apparatus, even if .its mythology 
is as old as recorded time. 

The period of the French Revolution marks a definite 
division in the history of Utopian thought. Uo longer are 
Utopias written, as they were from More T s time to that 
of Hume (with the exception of the Commonwealth period), 

l 

in the Platonic manner , hut now they involve action . f e 
have mentioned the Pantiscracy fiasco, and Shelley, who 
wanted, from his early Dublin adventures onward, to realize 
Utopia in this world. But there is another difference. 

Most Utopists demanded as a prerequisite that man T s moral 
nature he changed; Godwin had provided a method for such a 
change. Since his time (although other men have advanced 
similar ideas independently of him) there has heen a general 
belief that an improved environment would mean better citi¬ 


zens 


’his attitude involves a dual act of faith: first. 


that man can change his environment in a morally beneficial 
way, and second, that the inter-action between character 
and environment is a perfect causal relationship. Both of 
these are large assumptions, but from the time of Godwin 


(l) i.e. as standards of excellence merely. 

























( 133 . 


and Owen to the present day men have been willing to make 
them. All reformist doctrine of the Philosophical Radicals 
and others in the Nineteenth Century adopted this theory ion 
or less completely. Butler attacked it in his I m, i wt 
he was considered a "crank". A corollary to the theory was 
that machinery, if properly managed, would pour out its 
Blessings on all and sundry, and that Utopia would come as 
a result. Machinery and a smoothly running state would 
produce ideal conditions and ideal citizens. This latter 
unproved conclusion arounsed the ire of Bulwer lytton in 
the Nineteenth, and Aldous Huxley in the Twentieth, Century, 
hut many, including K. G-. Hells, still Believe it. 


Bulwer Lytton T s Utopia The Coming Race (1870} and 
Samuel Butler T s satire on England (1871) are not real 
Utopias, But are, rather attacks on Utopianism. The points 
of departure are radically difficult, as might Be expected. 
Although they were written quite independently, 1 Butler 
remarks in his preface to the second edition that he "was... 
surprised at the many little points of similarity Between 
the two Books.That similarity is, as we shall see, 
more apparent than real. Neither man liked the Utopian 
idea. But Samuel Butler *s reasons were far more philosophical 

(l) prewhon, p. 7 (Travellers library) 



i 

1 














.. 












• 




. 








, ■ 






. ' : ■ 

* 

. 














( 134 , 


than lord lytton’s* 

The Coming Kace is a "sub-terrestrial voyage", ’which 
had its prototypes in eighteenth century continental 
writings***. The booh has a new and modern quality which is 
interesting: it is the first of the "prognostication" 
Utopias. Although his Utopians live underground and are 
contemporary with the Victorians, their manner of life is a 
"forecast" of what civilized life may become. Fow this 
feature unites Utopias as different in purport as those 
of Morris, Bellamy, ’.'ells, and Aldous Huxley, all of Which 
are prognostications of the shape of things to come. Bulwer 
had been, early in his life, an admirer of William Godwin, 
but in this novel he tries to show the dire results of 
perfectibility in its ultimate meaning. 

The hero of The Coming Race descends an old mine shaft. 




tnd after a series of falls comes upon a strange underworld 


commonwealth, which, lit by artificial light, has a wild 
exotic vegetation (gigantic ferns and enormous fungi), and 


strange brightly plumed birds. The architecture of the 






place is lofty and spacious; the walls of the buildings are 

made of metal and are studded with precious jewels. Every- 

* 

where there is the atmosphere of cold but glittering mag¬ 
nificence. Even the people, who are tall and powerful, and ; 


(1) Tide A. Eddy’s Critical Study of Gulliver’s Travels, 


introductory chapter, 




















■ 












' 




. 


.. 















, 













( 135 . 


use wings to fly about, have something of this coldness in 


their character. The countenance of one citizen is describe? 


by the traveller in this fashion: "The nearest approach to 
it in outline and expression is the face of the sculptored 
Sphinx, so regular in its calm, intellectual, mysterious 
beauty." (p. 277) 1 . 

The Yril-ya for Ana), as they were called, had, centuries 
before,been driven underground by a flood. But they had 
brought with them their arts and traditions and had sue-' 


ceeded in setting up an industrial order of rich and poor. 


The strife of rival democracies was the inevitable resuT 


and this conflict was only brought to a close by the dis¬ 
covery of a mysterious magnetic force called "vril”, 
which, though it could destroy like lightning, had the 
power to replenish life and cure disease. Its destructive 
power rendered all warfare impossible, and T, with the cessa¬ 
tion of war other effects bearing on the social state soon 
became apparent.” (p. 304). The necessity of self-preserva¬ 
tion was removed, and society split into moderately-sized 
communities, which governed themselves and lived in perfect- 
harmony. 

The Ana had inherited a great contempt for democratic 
institutions and competitive economics for their early 


fl )A11 citations will be made from The Coming Pace in The 
Hovels of Lord Lytton, Little Brown and Co., 1893, THH7. 






















( 136 . 


history had been a long series of religions and class wars, 
finally, one family had managed to gain political ascend¬ 
ancy, and, sweeping away all democratic institutions, it 
"brought order out of chaos 1 2 . "These despots finally dis¬ 
appeared, as the discovery of the vril led to tranquil 
institutions under which flourish all the races of the 
Vril-ya" (p. 358). h r 0 w, supreme control was vested in the 
"Tux", who was elected for life. He supervised all depart¬ 
ments hut chiefly the scientific ones, for instance the 
foreign department (which was organized for the investiga¬ 
tion of the scientific advances of other nations), and the 
College of Sages (which carried on philosophical, historical 
and scientific research, as in Bacon T s ^ouse of Saloman). 
State-supervised science was thus the basis of political 
and social well-being. 

"There were customs and regulations to compliance with 
which for several ages, the people had totally habituated 
themselves" (306), and every man obeyed without question 
the command of the Tur, who was an ideal philosopher king. 
"We are all formed by custom," says one character (p. 405), 
and a proverb in general acceptance was: "Ho happiness 
without order, no order without authority, no authority 

without unity" (p. 406As we might expect there are no 

(1) This is an anticipation of H. 0. ells. 

(2) Cf• Aldous Huxley T s motto for the world State: "Community 
Identity, Stability." Brave Hew /orld, p. 1. 


























political societies except in remote "barbarous regions 
where democracy is in vogue. The completely adjuster Ana 
have found political and economic arrangements which exact¬ 
ly suited their needs. ITo wonder- is it then, that "No 
race above ground is so law-observing" (p. 306). 

Machinery is widely used and the Ana are very skilful 
mechanics. Their discoveries far surpass the inventions of 
the IMneteenth Century, one notable innovation being great 
transport airships for passengers and freight. Automata, 
which act as servants in houses, are often used to operate 
machines, and the use of them has been greatly extended by 
the application of "vril" power. A s a result, the Ana 
have much leisure, especially in view of the fact that 
menial tasks and machine tending are performed by the 
young'*'. 

Their communities vary in population, "according to 
the degree of excellence to which they have brought their 
machinery" (p. 375). In order that no class of poor should 

■prciijrv- »jj 

arise through A population the number of citizens 

is carefully.controlled: their most efficient communities 
contain only four thousand families. An attempt is always 







made to limit each state to this figure so that maximum of 


civilization, intellectual development, and happiness can 
(1) Bellamy follows this idea. 

























( 138 . 


■be achieved. If necessity commands, subsidized emigration 
tak.es place, and the Ana are quite cold-blooded about 
taking over the territories of more backward peoples. 

Someday, if the population becomes too great, it will be 
necessary for the Ana to return to the surface of the earth, 
and then, woe to our civilization! 

In describing the economic life of the Vril-ya Bulwer 
merely paints a picture of an idealized nineteenth Century. 
Property is not held in common by these Utopians, and 
disparities of income do exist, nevertheless, there is "no 
difference of rank or position...each pursues his own 
inclinations withwfereating envy or vying" (p, 306). There f 
is no competition in business, and the control of popula¬ 


tion keeps away the spectre of poverty. AH members of the 
state act together as one happy family. Thus lytton 
describes a system that has all the virtues of laissez-faire 


and none of its vices. It is interesting to observe that 


continual demands are made on the rich so that no citizens 
are allowed to become poor. (This was the theoretical duty 
of Dives in the nineteenth Century). So successful is their 
system that destitute persons (who are rare) are treated 


as mental cases, at the public’s expense' 


Any man may 


(l) Cf. Butler’s Brewhon 






















(139 


engage in trade (even with other states), and retail shops, 
which presumably never cut prices, are very numerous. 

Lytton merely "wishes away n the evils of competition: his 
description is not very satisfactory, and we must take for 
granted that such a system could work. 

Among the Yril-ya educational facilities are also 
ideal, children being taught handicrafts, agriculture and 
household work as well as the humanities. As is usual in 



Utopia, no one is forced to take up an occupation against 


his will, and a youth may choose to travel or study in the 
Colleges of Sages, before taking up his life work. 


It is significant that education and occupations are 
the same for girls and boys, although the sexes are segrega¬ 



ted. Ihe dreams of Mary Wollstonecraft have come true, for 
all occupations are open to women. But with mock-Vietorian 
gallantry, Bulwer goes on to show the women (the Gy-ei} 
have developed into stronger, more intellectual creatures 


than men, and could, if they wished, easily dominate the 




country. Since women have become the more aggressive sex, 
they do the wooing, and the men stipulate the terms of the 
marriage contract. Bulwer is obviously smiling at ail this 
but he goes on solemnly to declare that although no marriage' 
is binding for more than three years, divorce, re-marriage,-; 










































































* 











- 





. 






. 

. 






. 





- 






. 






- 



■ 



























( 140 , 


and polygamy are extremely rare* 

The Ana have a great number of familiar Utopian 
characteristics which may he summarized briefly. They are 
a temperate race, and their luxuries, in spite of the gen- 
eral munificence are simple, Tice is unknown. They are 
exquisitely polite and refined, generous in their sentiments^ 
and they devote their leisure to cultural pursuits. They 
have developed perfect physiques, they have astonishing 
mental powers, and would have been ideal citizens for 
Plato's "aristocratic republic" (p. 386), After living to 
a great age they die without fear of death, and a funeral 

5 

among the Vril-ya "is rather a cheerful though quiet festival' 1 
than a sacred ceremony" (p. 413), Th_ e ^*© is nothing original ! 

about these features of the work; we have met them all in 
previous Utopias, 

But the Aea are a ruthless people in their own way. 


Saving accepted the doctrine that the fittest survive, 
they argue that they themselves are the most worthy to live. 
Therefore they have no qualms about exterminating a barbar- 
ous nation, if they wish to occupy its territory, and they 
have no mercy on weaklings. Lord Lytton disliked the 


implications of Darwinism, and this is one of them. If 
"a troublesome, quarrelsome race of ina resents our vicinity;' 












f 141. 


and picks a quarrel with us; then of course, as menacing 
our welfare, we destroy it" (p. 377). The Ana experienced 
special satisfaction in blotting out a democracy''. Sooner 
or later it would he necessary for them to stamp out the 
civilization of the upper world. This ruthless spirit is 
found again, in Aldous Huxley 1 s Brave Hew k'orld . 

There is complete religious freedom among the Ana, 
although certain general beliefs are widely held. They 
worship one Divine Creator (as well as "vril"), and hold a 
belief in immortality. Services, public and private, are 
usually short and without ceremony: there is no wrangling 
between sects. All forms of life are considered equal befor 
God, who in his wisdom has created the whole Universe 
Justly. This latter belief, as Bulwer hints, grew out of 
their social system. 

So far, The Coming Dace seems to be a Utopia on the 
most up-to-date Nineteenth Century lines, but Utopia was 
extremely distasteful to lord Lytton, and presently we shall i : 
see why. His reasons,it may be remarked.here,are exactly 
the same as those of Aldous Huxley whose extremely similar 
work appeared sixty years later. 

Although the language of the Yrii-ya, or Ana, is 

complex and highly developed their literature is a literature 

(l) Lytton himself attacks democracy all through the book, 
but that is really a side issue. 

















* 





















. ■ 


* 




















" ' ' 




. 




- 
























































of the past: ,T the present felicitous state of society at 
which the ina have attained forbids the progressive cultiva¬ 
tion of literature, especially in the main divisions of 
fiction and history” (p. 327). Since government and social 
arrangements are static, "no one would read works advocat¬ 
ing theories that involved any political or social change, 
and therefore no-one writes them" (p. 365), The cessation 
of religious dispute has put an end to controversial theol¬ 
ogical writing, and there is no new history, because, as 
one of the ina says, "We have no events to chronicle". 

Older literature depended for its raison d T §tre upon 
"ambition, revenge, unhallowed love, the thirst for renown 
and suchlike. The old poets lived in an atmosphere impreg¬ 
nated with these passions, and felt vividly what they ex¬ 
pressed glowingly. No one can express such passions now, 
for no one can feel them" fp. 366). There is no longer 
great temptation or high aspiration, so the poet has no 
base vice or lofty virtue to describe. Poetry has been 
starved to death. 

The same causes, however, do not operate to kill 
scientific research, for "the motive to science" says Aph- 
lin (one of the characters) "is the love of truth...and 
science with us...is devoted almost solely to practical 
uses, essential to our.social conservation and the comforts 

































f 143. 


of our daily life" (p. 369,4. This tragic state of affairs 
is exactly what Aldous Huxley describes in Brave Hew ForId , 
indeed the great conversation of Mustapha Mond and the 
Savage in it 1 * * 4 , reads like an excerpt from The Coming Race . 
Painting struggles on, and music flourishes, especially 
choral and mechanical music", hut there have been no 
original comxoosers for ages. The creative impulses of the 
Vril-ya are dead, 

And so the real theme of the book emerges. lytton 
has deliberately gathered together and harmonized the most 
exalted dreams of Utopian writers, and outlined a state of 
perfect happiness. But, he says, the best representatives 
of mankind would, in such a place, "either die of ennui, 
or attempt some revolution by which they would militate 
against the good of the community"^ (p. 439), The common¬ 
wealth of the Ana stamps out all aspiration and ambition, 
all emotion good or bad, and it prevents the rise of any 
great personalities. It condemns mankind to a level plain 
of "the general average" to a life of pleasant uneventful¬ 
ness. The thrill of life depends not upon average 

(1) Brave Hew 7orId , Chpts. XVI and XVII. There is almost 
certainly "literary influence here, 

f £) Gf. Huxley’s Fordson Community Singeries, op, cit. 

{3) Cf. Huxley’s Synthetic Music. 

(4) Compare: the characters of Bernard Marx and Helmholtz 
Wa ts on in. Brave ITew : or 1 d. 


























- 



























( 144 , 


pleasure, but upon heights of Joy and sorrow, of ecstacy and ■ 
despair, upon vice and folly as well as upon virtue and 
wisdom. Without them life would he intolerable- . 

Thus lord lytton 1 s purpose, like Aldous Huxley’s is 
plain: Utopia is described only that it may be assailed. 

A state of perfection would be intolerable. Moreover fand 
here Bulwer approaches the Butlerian attitude), the elements 
of contest and struggle, so essential to human happiness, 
would TT become dormant or annulled in a society which aims 
at securing for the aggregate the calm and innocent felicity 
which we presume to be the lot of beatified immortals TT (p. 

' 

440). Lord Lytton expressly states that he has no wish 1T to 
represent the commonwealths of the Vril-ya as an ideal form 
of political society, to the attainment of which our own 
efforts at reform should be directed” (p. 440). For their 
way of life would smother our civilization; and should a 


race of men ever arise (and of course it is a possibility), 
"they would according to their own traditional persuasion 
of their ultimate destiny, destroy and replace our existent 
varieties of man” {p. 441). 

Such is Bulwer T s final word about Utopia. The posi¬ 
tion of Samuel Butler is similar at some points, but is far 
deexoer in its philosophical content. Bulwer is merely 

(l) Cf. Brave Hew World f pp. B8E-3. 
































. 








* 













■ 


















( 145 , 


afraid of standardization and ennui; Butler proceeds to 
undermine the very foundations of Utopia. 

Samuel Butler T s Erewhon in spite of its promising 
■ title is not a Utopia at al f", "but "belongs rather 
to that literary type called the imaginary voyage”. In 
its own way it resembles the first three "books of Gulliver , 1 2 
"but It very rarely has the utopian cast of Swift T s fourth j 
"book. Never in his life did Butler play the rdle of a 
social reformer, although his work was propagandist, and 
certainly he had no Utopian dreams. His leaning toward 
"High Yigrunism” is an example of his real opinions, and 
it is significant that the problems of labor and the 
position of. women occupy no place in his Erevu.m . In 

p 

Srewhon Revisited he laughs at the idea of reformatories , 
and the Benthamite radicals are satirized In Erewhon (pio. 
129-134). Butler always shows more concern for the race 
at large than he does for Its individual members, and, 

convinced as he was that all change was slow, contented 

. 

himself with satirizing the curious antics of men in their 

attempts to explain their own lives and beliefs. A reforms, . 

(1) The meaning of ^rewhon has often been misunderstood. 

Many have found Utopian Ideas in it, but that such an 
‘opinion is quite mistaken, it is my purpose to show. 

(2) Chapter Thirteen. 


















he points out in the chapter on "Malcontents", is like a 
variant type in the evolutionary process: if he has the 
"logic of events" on his side, his ideas will survive; if net 
the ideas will perish. The reformer runs that chance, even 
as every individual, responsible or no for his character, 
must bear the responsibility for his actions. Society has 
the right to crush any reformer it does not like, simply 
because it has the power to do so, "Property, marriage, 
the law; as the bed to the river, so rule and convention 
to the instinct; and woe to him who tampers with the 
banks while the flood is flowing" 1 , (p.127) His opinion 
of capitalism is couched in the same realistic terms. 

Girding at Proudhon, he says; "For Property is_ robbery, but 
then, we are all robbers or would-be robbers together, and 

1 

have found it essential to organize our thieving, as we 
have found it necessary to organize our lust and our 

revenge" (p. 127). Convention, then, is the inevitable 

- 

king, under whom we serve, whate f er age or clime, and 
Butler satirizes only that part of convention, which, grown 
old, has developed hardening of the arteries. To all human 
affairs he asks for the application of Common Sense, for he 
had no faith in medicine men (reformers) or doctrinaires. 

The Erewhonians (who are no other than the English) he says 

---- — --- --— 

(1) Erewhon (Travellers Library) 








, 




• 





. 




























. 


■ 

. 








■ 


. 











■ 


, 






. 




























f 147 


' 


"are a meek and long.-suffering people, easily led "by the 
nose, and quick to offer up common sense at the shrine of 
logic.•.Happily common sense, though she is by nature the 
gentlest creature living, when she feels the knife at her 
throat, is apt to develop unexpected powers of resistance, 
and to send doctrinaires flying" (p. 271). It is signifi¬ 
cant that Butler always voted Tory, and was content to play 
the capiiaListic game while that game was the vogue. Bo 
man of common sense, he thought, could do otherwise. 

Erewhon is a loose stringing-together of articles 


Butler had written early in his life, and is therefore 
sometimes inconsistent, but we shall not pause over that 
minor defect. His purpose is to expose English life, and 
accordingly, using assumed names, he satirizes: medical 
practitioners, who attend only physical disease, and neglect 
mental disorders- 1 ', the churches (Musical Banks), the 
universities (the Colleges of Unreason), teaching of the 
classics (Hypothetics), Puritanism In matters of sex (The 
Rights of Animals), ideas of immortality and the relations 
of parents and children f The World of the Unborn), anthro¬ 






pomorphism in religion, Mrs. Grundy, and so on. Utopianism 


is, it is true, sometimes vaguely present by implication, 
although in a harmless guise: he. wanted technical Iraining 


TlT This he does by a simple reversal of terms (mental for 

physical, etc.) 






















4 - 
















(148. 


for "boys, the abolition of hideous statues to forgotten 
dignitaries* he wished for greater candour in religious and 
social thinking, and a saner attitude toward &ex. 

Hone of these things constitutes great Utopianism'*'. 

But there are some stumbling blocks in this an%sis, 
for everything in Erewhon is not always clear. First of 
all the Erewhonians were fine physical specimens, healthy 
and good looking. HqW Butler admired a good physique, 
thinking it desirable for the preservation of the race. 

But he is pointing out that the English (who, in the fiftie 


r 1 


and sixties had made a cult of the physical^}, were in their 


admiration of the body, content to let mental health (i.e, 


rationality) go its foolish way. In Erewhon crime is a 
disease, and disease a crime: by this reversal of terms 
Butler shows how stupid it is to take a onesided . view of 1 
life, Again, the Erewhonian consider poverty a crime: yes, 
says Butler, like all other disabilities it is unfortunately I' 
awkward, but the individual must bear his troubles, no 




matter what they are, simply because he has no alternative 


n He who sins aught 
Sins more than he ought; 
But he who sins nought 
Has much to be taught. 


(1) Erewhon ! s Hospital for Incurable Bores, and Society for 
the Suppression of Useless knowledge, and the Completer fj. 
Obliteration of the Past are examples of his UtopianismI 

(2) He speaks of the aristocracy usually, and this applies 
to them. 






















■ 


, 










- 




* 

' 

, 

■ 










1 



. 







' 







fl49. 

Beat or "be Beaten, 

Eat or Be eaten. 

Be killed or kill 

Choose which you will” (p. 291) 

So it all comes to the same thing in the end. The goodness 

or Badness of a human character may, it is true. Be traced 

Back through an infinite number of anterior causes. 

then says Butler, if carried far enough this would lead 

Back to the primordial protoplasm, which reduces to absurdity 

all such theorizing. The individual, like the venomous 

snake, makes an evolutionary error when he develops 

j 

qualities which the race considers dangerous. So in a r 
itude of ways Butler drives home his Basic principle: it 
is the survival of the race which is of first importance. 

In 

and the race at large makes its rules of survival cutting 
out.undesired types. Society may make mistakes: By solidi¬ 
fying its position it may weaken the Breed, with the disr-~ 
appearance of internal competition (p.267)\ But that is 
merely unfortunate. By and large the Best individual types 
are the millionaires who By luck or cunning have extended 
their capabilities; the less fortunate.are also inferior 

: 

types. 

There is one other chief difficulty. The Hrewhonians 
have abandoned machinery. As a result of this, fl they were 

about as far advanced as Europeans of the twelfth or thir- 

fl) T.H. Huxley tries to meet this problem in his Romanes 

lecture. Evolution and Ethics. 
















f 150. 


teenth century” fp. 80). That does Butler mean? Certainly 
not that machinery should he abandoned: the simplest 
machine raised man above brute level (266-7), and more 
complicated machines are like added limbs. They are 
dangerous only if they induce racial laziness, 1 q aliz- 
ing men and ending internal competition (p. 267). Why 
did the E r ewhonians abandon machines? It is a complicated 
problem. The Book of Machines is an allegory of Darwin T s 
Origin of Species , and attempts to shew the absurdity of a 
theory of evolution that is based on mechanistic ideas. 




The Darwinian philosophy reduced men to the status of 

i 


conscious automata*, and so by analogy Butler T s philosopher 
argued that machines might develop consciousness and come 
to dominate mankind. The Erewhonians (the English) had 
an absurd reverence for the philosopher (Darwin) and became 
terrified. They ordered all machines invented in the 
past 271 years to be destroyed. Of course they were absurd 
in doing this, and Butler means us to see the absurdity. 
Machines are tools, and are extensions of ourselves but 
have no consciousness except what measure of it we confer 
on them. The Erewhonians* false conception of machinery 
was based on.a fallacious theory of consciousness: man is 


not ;'ust the mechanical product of anterior causes , for he 


(1) This is precisely what Euxley had said, 

(2) Cf. Shaw Back to Methuselah Part V. 
































(150a * 




does shape his own destiny with the aid of his own conscious¬ 
ness. 


Nov/ we see where Butler is going: he is firing a 
broad-side against all mechanistic ideas about man and 
society. An improved environment is not the answer, .for 
after all, any improvement is the result of the will of 
the race, and is subsidiary to that will. Machinery is 
dangerous if it weakens the will, but machines can be 
great instruments for the enlarging of man's power and 
consciousness. Butler agreed with Buiwer Lytton, that 
machinery was a menace if it caused degeneracy through 
comfort or caused man to become "nothing but soul and 
mechanism, an intelligent but passionless principle of 
mechanical action" (p. 267). But, unlike Lord Lytton, 
Butler thought this an improbable contingency (pp. 267-70). 

The Erewhonians, like Lytton 1 s "Vril~ya" did not be¬ 
lieve in progress; they lived in a static society, paralyze 
by mechanistic philosophy. When Higgs, (Butler’s hero) 
finds that in the schools "they have no class lists, and 
discourage anything like competition among the students’’ 

(p. 222), we foolishly believe that this is Utopianism. 

Hot at all. To kill competition is to end life. "I 
ventured to say that I did not see how progress could be 
made in any art or science, or indeed in anything at all. 






















' 






. 

- 

■ 

■ 










(151. 





without self-seeking, and hence unai'mi ability". "Of course 
not, said the Professor, "and therefore we object to pro¬ 
gress" fp. 223 )h In common parlance Butler means simply 
this: a mechanistic theory of society rules out the possib¬ 
ility of progressive change. And he will have none of it, 
simply because it runs counter to "Common Sense". 

It is instructive to compare the analyses of Lord 
Lytton and Samuel Butler, for the two men were provoked 
by essentially the same problem. Lord Lytton, far less 
subtle than Butler, is terrified by the prospect of a race 
which has acted upon the mechanistic implications of Par—^ 
winism and Industrialism. He accepts those ideas as more 
or less inevitable, and knows no philosophic answer to 
them. He is terrified by the prospect, and his reaction 
is a sentimental one: The Coming Race will be devoid of 
human feelings, it will know no passions or ambitions. 

Life in an ordinary sense would be impossible. But Samuel 
Butler, genial and skeptical, with no malice or fear in his 
heart, was confident that mechanism was a bogey, albeit a 
dangerous one, He need fear no bloodless passionless 
Utopia, because men, through an innate over-belief in free 





IS 


will, never can or will submit for long to a mechanistic 

(l)Robert Shafer makes fun of Butler r s theory of common ’ 

sense: it is after all a dangerous touchstone. But But¬ 
ler was not a good metaphysician. Bide Christianity and . 
naturalism . Chapter VT. 





















(152. 


view of life. Butler hated the veneration, in England, of 
the prophet Darwin, and provided an answer to him, which 
some modern vitalists have to a certain degree adopted. 
Bernard Shaw used Butler's theory of consciousness freely 
in outlining his picture of human life in the year 31,920. 
But certainly not all thinkers have accepted the Butlerian 
attitude. The utopias of Bellamy and Wells are "built on 
the old "environment-mechanistic" hypothesis, and the 
reply of Aldous Huxley, who is still in the grip of it, 
is more or less a passionate repetition of Bulwer lytton's 
fear. It seems as if men are doomed for a long time to 
oscillate "between two contrary views of the deterministic 
argument. Few men have "bothered to unravel the Butlerian 
answer, certainly not the Utopists, who, since Butler, 
in the nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries alike have 
continued to plan Utopia in the old manner. 



























CHAPTER VII 


(1531-" 


The Influence of Socialism 


During the Nineteenth Century political Utopianism 
flourished. The writings of Babeuf, Cabet, Saint-Simon, 
Fourier, Proudhon and Louis Blanc in France, of Owen and 
the Chartists in England, of Marx and Engels in Germany, 
had spread the doctrine of Utopian social reform far and 
wide. It is beyond the limits of my study to discuss these, 
but there are a few general ideas which passed from them 
into the literary Utopias which I wish to describe in this 
chapter. First of these ideas is the theory that histor¬ 
ical processes were tending inevitably in the direction of 
socialism through the conflict of classes. The second is 
that labor is the sole source of value and wealth. From 
this follows the third principle that all men who work 
have an equal right to enjoy the fruits of industrialism. 
Fourth is the idea that the economic structure is the basis 
of all other institutions in society. And the fifth, which 
follows thrs, is that if the economic order could be 

justly organized, untold subsidiary blessings would result 
for the human race." 5 " 

Most of these ideas had roots far in the past, but the 
nid-lineteenth Century added two new features. The Darwin¬ 
ian theory of evolution could be applied to historical pro- 
(1) Sidney Hook disputes the view that Marx thought com- — 

munism would mean human happiness. Vide Toward the 

Understanding of K ar ^- Marx. pp. 98-101. 



















- 







' 






(154. 

cesses, and could conveniently be used to show that society ' 
was progressing slowly toward a collective system. Again, 
industrialism and science had made such gigantic strides 
that there seemed no good reason why they should not ult¬ 
imately usher in the Age of Gold. In every field the same 
general attitude prevailed, namely, that an improvement in 
physical environment would automatically improve the human 
race. We may not feel as confident of the claims of 
science and of unending social progress as ¥/ere the Vic- , 
torians hut the attitude was very widespread. We may have 
little faith in Marx*s "antitheses” and his historical 
determinism, hut faith in them was strong enough to produce 
the Russian Revolution, and Marx's philosophy, with varia¬ 
tions, still animates the communists, anarchists and syn¬ 
dicalists of the present day. 1 

One literary result of this mountainous accumulation 
of theory came from across the water: Edward Bellamy's 
Looking Backward, 2000-1887 . It was only one of the flood 
of Utopian romances which were written in America in the 
last two decades of the Nineteenth Century. Populism had 
run its brief career in this period, and the first serious 
conflicts between labor and capital in the United States 
may be held responsible for the efflorescence of literary 

Utopias. "The booksTT says Bernard de Voto, "were invariably 

(I) Vide Laidler - A History of Socialist Thought ; ' 

Russell, Proposed Roads to Freedom; etc. 

















(155 



written by literals - men whose interests were with the dev¬ 
eloping Trusts hut whose sympathies were with the exploited. 


The teaching of them was that accumulations of capital were 


had hut that strikes were simply horrid.” 1 In these hooks. 


which were usually socialistic, the 'Vocabulary, ideology. 


2 


and methods of the proletariat are studiously avoided'.’ 



Bellamy’s work follows these general features, and we have 
included it in our study for two reasons, first, because 
of the reply it evoked from William Morris in his News from 
Nowhere , and second, because of the influence it, and similar 
writings had upon the thought of H. G. Wells. 

Adopting the Marxian theory of the concentration of 
capital, Bellamy outlines how the state at length "became 
the one capitalist..... the sole employer. The epoch of 


trusts had ended In The Great Trust.” (p.56.) Bellamy 
discards all cyclic theories of history, as well as the 
anarchist doctrine of violence, and asserts that the 
"natural evolution" of industrialism had produced, quite 
peacefully, the new Utopia of mankind. The world’s people 
had finally entered upon their ultimate historical period, 
and "an illimitable vista of progress" was spread out 
before them. The wishful thinking and emotional intensity 



of a traditional Utopist thus suffuse the whole book. 


_ The novel is simple in structure, Mr. Julian West 

(1) Mark Twain’s America , p. 275(note) 

(2) Ibid. p. 273. 




































■ 








' 




















- 

< , 






. 

. ‘ ' ■ . -• .. .. ■; . ,■ . 





























( 156 . 


sleeps in a hypnotic trance for 113 years and wakes up in 
Boston in the year 2000. He relates his experiences much 
in the old manner of a voyager, although there is a thin 
stream of sentimental romance running through the economic 
dissertation. The romantic element "dates” the hook quite 
as much as do the proposals for social reconstruction, for 
the soul of the middle-class eighties speaks throughout. 

Julian West discovers that astonishing industrial and 
scientific advance had completely transformed his native 
city. Magnificent buildings, clean, efficient factories, 
and beautiful parks were the new social surroundings of man. 
Gone was the old squalor of industry, gone the old wasteful¬ 
ness. People all lived in comfort, for the labor problem hac 
disappeared, and economic peace had created a new law-abiding 
polite and virtuous citizenry. There was no economic greed, 
no political corruption, no debilitating financial worry. 

After the change there had ensued "an era of mechanical 
invention, scientific discovery, art, musical and literary 

!;;i' : li (; 

productiveness, to which no previous age of the world /had 
offered/ anything comparable." (p.161). There had been, in E 
fact, a Renaissance of the human spirit. 

What was responsible for this marvellous transformation?, 
State control of production and consumption. The whole laboi 
force of the nation was organized into an "industrial army," ■ 













tiie idea of universal military service "being applied 

to labor. The period of industrial service for every man 
was from the ages of twenty-one to forty-five; after that 
every man might retire. Machinery and science, and perfect 
organization had prodigiously multiplied efficiency. More¬ 
over, since the State directed distribution, thousands, who 
under the old system had been middle men, were available for 
the productive industries. Increased production under state . 
supervision ensured that there was always a sufficient supply 
of goods for all. 

This brings us to another essential point: in the year 
2000 everyone received the same income. It was assumed that 
every citizen owed to the state as much service as he was 
capable of, and therefore he had no more right to the fruits 
of production than had his less gifted neighbour. (This idea 
comes directly out of Marxism, but is as old as More’s 
Utopia .) The conception of Duty had supplanted that of desert 
and the now universal spirit of human brotherhood prevented 
any dissatisfaction from arising. Wages were paid in credit 
slips (very similar in character to those proposed by Major 2 
C. H. Douglas^), which were non-negotiable between individu¬ 
als, and could only be used for purchases from the State, 

(prices being calculated on the labor theory of value). 

(1) The conception of a "cultural heritage" to which all 

men have a natural right is also in Bellamy; it is 

a corner-stone of the Douglas System# 






















- 






This arrangement prevented any private transactions, and 
rendered impossible any accumulations of capital* Further¬ 
more, the ”credit card" was more than ample for ordinary 
needs and few people ever used it up completely! And there 
was no necessity to save, because, so efficient was the sys¬ 
tem, that twenty-four years labor provided an ample pension 
for life* The system provided too for invalids and cripples 
who, although they could not work, also received an equal 
share of the wealth* 

We need not pause to discuss Bellamy’s arguments con¬ 
cerning the incentive to labor and do good work: essentially 
the same arguments appe-ar in all radical writings from Ruskin 
to Count Kropotkin* But it is necessary to point out one 
glaring inconsistency: Bellamy says, in reply to Marx, that 
the economic motive is not fundamental. Patriotism, love of 
fame, prestige - these are greater spurs to action, "With 
us (i.e* Twentieth Century Bostonians) diligence in the 
national service is the sole and certain way to public 
repute, social distinction and official power” (p#198). 

But his whole book is based on the assumption that economic 
conditions determine human outlook* Also, his great reform 
was the result of economic self-interest, and the latter 
surely comes in for some credit* Yet in describing the new 
race of men he spirits the econo&ic motive away* It is a 




A 










(159 


widespread inconsistency and not singular in Bellamy# 

The incentive to labor is much more realistically ex¬ 
plained elsewhere in the book. In the factories were over- 
seers who had received their positions through proved qual¬ 
ities as workmen, and their duty it was to see that there 
was no lagging. Throughout the whole system, (which has at 
times the appearance of worker’s soviets), there is a pyr¬ 
amided bureaucracy, at the apex of which is the President of 
the nation. He It is, who, with his advisory boards of 
officials, (alumni of the industrial order), directs and con* 
trols the nation’s production. Laissez-faire had its draw¬ 
backs, but this complete centralization of power is what 
many in the modern world most dread. Bellamy’s state soc¬ 
ialism left dangerous poY/ers in the hands of a bureaucracy. 

There is little need for legislation in this Utopia, 
because private property has been abolished. Officials, 
then, said Bellamy, could not practice corruption, having 
nothing upon which to work. But officials who are elected, 
not by the people at large, but by the graduates of the in¬ 
dustrial army, would have tremendous power. It did not occui 
to Bellamy that real freedom might disappear in such a sys¬ 
tem. 

There is a new feature in Bellamy’s Utopia however, and 

it looks forward to Wells: the whole world has bee one social¬ 
ized, although each state is autonomous. He looks forward 








. , 





' 

, 

• . 

’ 

. 

' 
















* 


. 






' 


















( 160 . 


to the fulfillment of Tennyson's dream in Locksley Hall of a 
World State, but explains that such a change will come later' 
on. The change is significant however. All the early 
Utopias, (as indeed all the American experiments like New 
Harmony, the Oneida Community and the Brook Farm) were strict 
ly local. But after Marx's dramatic appeal in the Communist 
Manifesto of 1848, "Workers of the world, unite”, Utopia 
became a planetary affair. Shelley indeed had thought of it, 
All Utopias after Bellamy are imagined on a world basis-* - . 

In Bellamy's work, all nations are bound together in a fed¬ 
eral system with an international council; there is perfect 
confraternity and a friendly exchange of goods and citizens. 
In making it a world scheme, Bellamy arranges for the easy 
travelling to and fro of peoples, a feature that is notably 
absent from all previous Utopias, but which Wells eagerly 
takes up. Moreover by organizing this ’’planetary” federal 
state with its great council, Bellamy effectively rids the 
world of the menace of war, and it is in this feature that 
Wells takes a similar line. 

Turning from these external features let us look at its 
social results. In this ’’classless society”, (for all men, 
workers and professional men alike are equal), there is com¬ 
plete equality of opportunity. All are educated in the hum¬ 
anities, at the schools, frcm the ages of six to twenty-one, 

then, all persons serve three years at menial tasks. After 

(l) There is however only a hint of it in William Morris. - 







> 





( 161 , 


that each person selects a life work in a trade, or studies 
for a profession. Great care is taken in education to ascer¬ 
tain special aptitudes (as in former Utopias), yet there is 
freedom of choice. As physical fitness and technical train¬ 
ing are stressed, the new race goes to its work physically 
and mentally equipped. After serving the state for twenty- 
four 37-ears, all persons are free to pursue their own inter¬ 
ests or take part in government. But, (as is usual in 
Utopia) men live long and peacefully. 

It is interesting that since economic competition is 
ended, there is little rivalry in games, academics, or 
industry - just as Butler predicted. Again, since private 
property is gone, there is almost no crime(What crime 

there is, is treated in hospitals). As a natural corollary 

o 

there are few laws, and they are simple ; there are no depart¬ 
ments of state, no army, no navy, and the work of police and 
judges is very slight. And, as we might expect among Utop¬ 
ians there is no lying, and insanity is rare. The complete 
equality of the sexes has put love on a franker, healthier 
Basis, and the emancipation of women has released them from 
the tedium of their former lives. Fo comment is necessary: 
we have met all these ideas Before. 

I 

Bellamy, as a liBeral, tries hard to safeguard liberty 

in this ideal world of his, By instituting an ingenious_ 

(1) A constant claim among Utopists. 

(2) Cf. More, Swift, Lytton, etc. 











. 




















.i . • . : ) 






































scheme for the publication of hooks, hy allowing freedom 
of movement, and hy guaranteeing freedom of rel igion. 

Whether such a centralized governing body would always 
restrain a natural desire to interfere is a troublesome 
thought no Utopist must allow himself. 

The new happiness, Bellamy tells us, "finds its simple 
and obvious .explanation in the reaction of a changed envir¬ 
onment upon human nature”, (p. 276.) He describes a per¬ 
fect environment based on socialism and science, and, if its 
premises are granted, it works well. He makes assertions 
about the prevalence of liberty that one may be permitted to 
question, however, and his boast of limitless progress is 
belied on every page. We learn, for instance, that no new 
laws are necessary, as society is settled, (p. 208). A min¬ 
ister declares that "the ten commandments are well-nigh ob¬ 
solete" (p.286), and the seIf-gratulation of his sermon in¬ 
dicates that the people are well satisfied with their pres¬ 
ent moral elevation. The need of religion, in this society 
where environment seems everything, is hard to explain. In 
their literature, all substance, except "love galore"-*- is 
gone. Whatever "progress" these facts leaves room for must 
be in science and industry, for, in spite of his protests to 
the contrary, Bellamy has very effectively disposed of every 
other intelligible sort of "progress". Indeed Bellamy is 
(1) This is no exaggeration. See p.170. 










■ 

. 

■ 



. 

. 

' 










(165 


always enmeshed in the "environment” dilemma we have found 
in William Godwin; he attributes every change to environ¬ 
ment, not a new surge of human feeling, and then, after 
making human beings the resultant of exterior forces, tries 
to introduce free will again. This contradiction is as old 
as all forms of mechanistic thinking and Bellamy was not 
acute enough to notice its presence in his own theory. But 
few men of his age did notice it; even the great Thomas 
Henry Huxley never managed to rid his thinking of it. But¬ 
ler alone of the "Utopists" attacked it, but few men paid 
any attention to him. 

Bellamy’s romance was an imaginative picture of state 
socialism in practice, and it is this sort of ideal common¬ 
wealth that Gilbert and Sullivan satirized (although rather 
ineffectually in Utopia, Limited (1893). An attack on 
Looking Backward was to come from within the radical move- 
nent. Bellamy had sneered at Anarchists in his opening 
chapter and his Utopia, even if its laws were few, was not 
remarkable for zest or freedom. He had apotheosized machin¬ 
ery*, indeed the cure for social ills was simply more machines, 
tfow, for William Morris this cure was worse than the disease 
Itself, and he wrote his News frcm Nowhere as a counter¬ 


blast to Looking Backward . 








. 

- . 







(164 


In his little newspaper, The Commonweal , Morris, on 
June 22, 1889, reviewed Looking Backward and roundly crit¬ 
icized it. To entertain a hope that the great trusts or 
monopolies would peacefully and inevitably grind out human 
happiness Morris thought fatuous, and pointed out that any 
deterministic view of social history paralyzed the reform 
movements "The economical semi-fatalism of some socialists 
is a deadening and discouraging view.""** But, he remarks, 
Bellamy’s comforting theory of the great trusts is not 
remarkable in a middle class urban dweller who had no real 
historical sense. That mind, he continues, is fixed on the 
machinery of life and cannot know life itself. No more 
withering a condemnation of Looking Backward could be made 
than this. 

But it is not only Bellamy's attitude toward the method 
of reform that distresses Morris. He shows that Bellamy's 
ideas are curiously limited to urban existence: no impres¬ 
sion of village or country life is left by the book. Morris, 
who hated the industrial city, remarks that "a machine 

life /in the city/ is the best which Mr. Bellamy can imagine 
for us on all sides’’^. What Bellamy desired in fact was 
merely modern civilization with waste and poverty removed. 

Morris, who saw no particular benefit in industrialism 

(1) William Morris, Artist, Writer Socialist by May Morris 
1936. Vol II, p. 504. The whole review is reprinted in 
this volume. 

2) Ibid. II, 505. 











' 

















■* 








- 








■ 








■ - * 








1 

> 


























■ 

. 




. 

. 













( 165 . 


did not believe that machines lessened the hours of labor 
but merely the pain of labor. No man wants to work little, 
or stop producing at the age of forty-five. To believe 
this is to consider work an unpleasant and unavoidable nec¬ 
essity, which, rightly viewed,it is not. Nor is art just 
an adjunct of life, to be pursued at leisure, after work, 
but is a necessary and integral part of happiness. And 
all good work is art. 

He had still another objection to Bellamy: in the 
Boston of the year 2000, liberty was very curtailed. "The 
impression he produced”, wrote Morris, ”is that of a huge 
standing army, tightly drilled.”^ In such a centralized 
state, there would be no feeling of social responsibility; 
’individual men cannot shuffle off the business of life 
anto the shoulders of an abstraction called the state”. 1 2 
,3o in News from Nowhere Morris, in answer to Be llamy, descri¬ 
bed a decentralized, anarchically free world of happy men, 
gainfully but joyfully at work. 

But to realize fully the importance of Morris, it is 
necessary for us to glance briefly at a stream of ideas 
which flowed side by side with socialist radicalism, namely 
the gospel of Carlyle and Ruskin. Carlyle, in Sartor 
lesartus had bewailed the fact that ’’the social ides” was 

(1) William Morris, Artist Writer Socialist by May Morris 

II, 504. 

(2) Ibid, II, 507. 


















( 166 , 


extinct in England, and had turned hack in his Past and 
Present to the middle ages, and found the "social idea" 
flourishing in a Twelfth Century monastery. Preaching the 
gospel of work and the "new chivalry of labor" he attacked 
Benthamism and parliamentary government as useless weapons 
in the struggle for reform. John Ruskin, Carlyle’s great 
pupil, added to these ideas his social theory of art, and 
then assailed industrialism itself for crushing the creative 
impulses of the worker. It is beyond our topic to discuss 
the endless ramifications of Ruskin*s social theories, but 
we must look briefly at the Utopian culmination of his 
tireless reform efforts: the Guild of St. George* 

Ruskin had preached the dignity of manual labor end¬ 
lessly, and had insisted that no work was worthwhile unless 
it were good work, and had deprecated any activity that 
fjas mechanical and not thoughtful. Mechanism destroyed the 
creative mpuke , therefore all work should be performed, as 
Tar as possibly without the aid of machinery. Again, he 
believed that all effort had a just price, irrespective 
of supply and demand, and that every worker had the right, 
to labor. He did not go so far as to suggest equality of 
wages, because he insisted on the ineq.uality of men, but 
he did believe that all men should engage in useful labor 

to the extent of their abilities, 1 _ 

(i) Thpqfi idfias are scattered through Unto This hast , 

Munera Pulveris and Fors Clavigera. 












c ) r \ >W' * ■ 1 . V? < 

- - 


• 

• 








; 

f 

* 

. 

■ 

. 

< 

. 




To these radical economic beliefs Ruskin added his 
ideas on education: that every person should be educated 
according to his needs for a life occupation. But he 
emphasized, at the same time, the moral content of educa¬ 
tion, believing that good work could be done only if.the 
worker was sound in his heart. 

To give these various ideas practical expression, 
Ruskin had embarked on the famous Hincksey roadbuilding 
experiment and other small ventures, but the most import¬ 
ant was his Guild of St. George. Into this scheme he 
put £7000, with which, land was acquired at Barmouth, Wales, 
at Totley, Derbyshire, and in Worcestershire. Here Ruskin 
settled cottagers, who, subscribing to the eight articles 
of St. George's Creed, promised to obey the dictates of 
the Guild's Master, to wit - John Ruskin. The latter, 
whose ideas of government were extremely paternalistic, 
was to legislate for the cottagers. In the little rural 
communities so set up private ownership was to be abol¬ 
ished: a just and permanent rent was to be fixed for each 
holding. Furthermore - 

"Ho machines moved by artificial power are to 
be used on the estates of the society; wind, 
water, and animal force are to be the only 
motive powers employed, and there is to be as 
little trade or importation as possible; the 
utmost simplicity of life, and restriction of 
possession, being combined with the highest 
attainab ie refinement of temper and thought.” _ 

(1) Fors Clagivera II, 136. 







^ -Lbtf ♦ 


There were to he no middle men allowed, and all articles 
were to he exchanged at fixed and just prices. Moreover 
all transactions were to he completely public, and all 
accounts of the masters or overseers could he inspected 
at any time. 

The little communities were to he primarily agric¬ 
ultural, and, although each family rented its land, the 
spirit of co-operation was to dominate each little brother¬ 
hood. Healthy labor, and love, would change the character 
of the world. "The St. George's Guild”, says F. W. Roe, 
"was.,..an effort to demonstrate on a small scale what 
could he done in rational organization of country life.” 1 2 

But Ruskin went further than this. He proposed to 
regulate the lives of the cottagers: 

”The laws required to he obeyed by the families 
living on the land will he, - with some relax¬ 
ation and modification, so as to fit them for 
English people, - those of Florence in the four¬ 
teenth century. In v/hat additional rules may 
he adopted, I shall follow, for the most part, 

Bacon, or Sir Thomas More,” 

2 

to which he adds, the general dictates of Christ. The 
Ruskin system of education was to he introduced, with 
museums, and libraries of authorized hooks. Ruskin even 
went so far as to hint at the use of uniforms, and to pro¬ 
hibit newspapers. These latter regulations are of course 

the mark of a doctrinaire who thought himself especially 

(1) The Social Philosophy of Carlyle and Ruskin , 1921,p.2 r £-S 

(2) Fors Clavigera II, 137 









. 







. 















* 

■ 



. 














, 




( 169 . 


inspired to direct the lives of other men. 

It is not necessary for us to trace the collapse of 
his schemes, nor to outline Ruskin's attempts to bring 
hack hand-weaving to England. The idea of ’’Utopia” 
through revival of a medieval way of life bore fruit in 
Morris's anarchist romance: indeed Fors Clavigera is often 
an anticipation of News from Nowhere . Morris dropped the 
paternalistic element in Ruskinfe thought and substituted 
a genial anarchism, but the book breathes the spirit of 
Ruskin. News from Nowhere is an ideal realization of 
Ruskin f s doctrine of joyful creative labor. 

News from Nowhere , which first appeared serially in 
The Commonweal , in 1890,is a medievalist Utopia. It 
differs from previous Utopias in that no exaggerated 
hopes.are placed on Knowledge and Power. There are no 
great scientific laboratories, no highly organized central 
executives, for this Utopia is a collection of little 
rural communities, which are pretty well self-sustaining. 
Of all the Utopias in English literature Morris's ideal 
state is the most vital. ’’ News from Nowhere ”, says Paul 
Bloomfield, "breathes a wonderful humanity. In this 
respect no other Utopia compares with it.” 1 Except pos- 

sibly More's Utopia, which Morris greatly admired 2 , no 

(1) Paul Bloomfield - William Morris , 1934, p. 289 

(2) See the introduction to his edition of More. Re-, 
printed in May Morris's William Morris, Artist Writer 
Socialist, I, pp. 289-292 













' ! , 

* 

•3 

! ' 

' 

■ 

■ 

* 

. ‘ . i 


■ 











(170 


previous Utopia had "been able to produce any impression of 
warmth, and vigour, Morris* s picture is full of the joy of 
living. Sunshine, laughter and gaiety, the exhilaration 
of the English countryside, the thrill of muscular effort - 
these things are present on every page. More than any other' 
Utopia it appeals to human desires and aspirations. 

Cast in the form of a dream of the Twenty-First 
Century, Morris* s picture nevertMess belongs to the class 
of writings which have a nostalgic "backward look" to the 
joys of a departed age. The thrill of creative activity, 
which Ruskin found in medieval times, Morris found there 
also, and it is the medieval joy in building a barn or a 
cathedral, in illuminating a text or putting up a stack 
of hay, that he everywhere describes. No man really wants 
to be freed of labor by the machine, but wants ever to 
engage upon tasks which call forth his imagination and his 
manly vigour. Therefore, Morris*s Utopians have dispensed 
with all machines except those which perform disagreeable 
tasks involving no creative effort. Ruskin would have 
entirely approved. Morris tries to create the impression 
of medieval happiness in handicrafts and in building; 
whether this joy ever really existed widely is another 
question. 

Although Morris disagreed with the Marxists about the 
ultimate organization of society, he adopted one of their 










(171 


principles: the theory of the class war. Accordingly, a 
whole chapter entitled, "How the Change Came'; is devoted 
to a description of a General Strike of all workers, fol¬ 
lowed hy a two years’ civil war. Morris knew that the 
attempt to overthrow capitalism would he resisted hy 
violence, and he did not shrink. He had himself taken 
part in the Trafalgar Square episode of 1887, and foresaw 
continual strife between the owning and dispossessed 
classes. But his revolution was successful, and the "Swind¬ 
ling Kens" of London were cleared of the financiers. A 
great cleansing of misery followed, in which the squalor 
of slums was wiped out. Cities melted away and their pop¬ 
ulations flocked to the country to dwell on farms or in 
small towns. The London docks disappeared, for England 
dropped the pretence of being the market of the world; 
the great manufacturing towns of the Midlands were destroy¬ 
ed. A new era of communistic anarchism was ushered in. 

"Morris", says Montague Weekley, "inevitably approached 
social problems from the standpoint of art" 1 , so it is not 
surprising that much emphasis is laid in Hews from ITowhere 
upon the architecture of Utopia. Like Ruskin, Morris 
believed that no art could be produced unless people had 
beautiful surroundings. Like Ruskin, he had an intense 
hatred for the "Gothic" restorations of Gilbert Scott. 


(1) Montague Weekley - William Morris, p. 88 











’ 




I 

* 














: 

. 



■ 
















, 











- 










V -L f Z • 


So, in his Utopia, country dwellings were trim and clean, 
’’some of them of old "brick.. . .hut more of timber and 
plaster” (p # 25), and in the style of the fourteenth 
century. Public buildings were ’’very handsomely built and 
ornamented..../in/ a splendid and exuberant style of arch¬ 
itecture, which.seemed...to embrace the best qualities 
of the Gothic of Northern Europe with those of the Sara¬ 
cenic and Byzantine, although there was no copying of any 
one of these styles, (p. 26) Amid beautiful buildings 
and the glory of nature, Morris’s peasants lived and 
worked and died. 

In a trip up the Thames, which occupies most of the 
latter part of the book, we learn that the Cockney villas 
of the Nineteenth Century have disappeared to be replaced 
by little cottages or big country dwelling houses. Old 
cast iron bridges have been replaced by stone; locks that 
remain on the river are built unobtrusively so as not to 
disfigure the landscape. And on both sides of the river 
lie little farms which are pastoral paradises. 

The Great Change had completely transformed the econ¬ 
omic life of the people. There was now no private property 
and no money: as a result there were no rich or poor. Every- 
one had a right to whatever was produced. The system was 
simple: all goods were to be had at the stores ( tended 
by children, incidentally), and there one could go and 










get what one wanted. No inferior goods were produced, and 
there was always a surplus. Moreover, since greed had dis¬ 
appeared, no laws were needed to prevent grabbing. This 
is exactly the sort of communism that Sir Thomas More had 
suggested. 

The workers ply their trades either individually or 
in "banded workshops", but no steam power is used. "This 
is not an age of inventions", says one of the characters. 
"The last epoch did all that for us, and we are now content 
to use such of its inventions as we find handy", (p. 198) 
Nothing that can be produced by hand is left for a machine. 
Handicrafts prevail everywhere, and everyone is happy 
in his work. "Glass blowing", says one, "is rather a 
sweltering job; but some folk like it very much indeed; 
and I don’t much wonder: there is such a sense of power, 
when you have got deft in it, in dealing with the hot 
metal." (p. 53) That is the spirit of all the workers; 
even roadmenders go at their work with a right good will. 
Many people are engaged in putting up buildings and con¬ 
structing stone bridges, for since everyone works, there 
is ample surplus labour power for public works. In such a 
world, where suitable occupations are found for everyone, 
work is no evil, and idleness does not exist. "We live 
amidst beauty without any fear of becoming effeminate", 
says a character, "....we have plenty to do, and on the 





* 





















• 




. 





• 







' 

. 

. 

' 

• • 





(174 


whole enjoy doing it", (p. 84). 

Like all Utopians, Morris*s people are healthy, 
beautiful and long-lived; they live on fresh vegetables 
and fruits, and dress in gay fourteenth-century costumes. 
From early sunshiny morning in the hay fields, to the 
dinners in the public dining halls at night, they live a 
boisterous merry life. Among them is a perfect spirit of 
brotherhood and equality: there is no jealousy for place , 
and no servility. Most of these are usual Utopian features, 
but Morris somehow gives them living, breathing reality. 

The customs of the people have undergone a profound 
change, particularly marriage. Since Morris believed, 
like a Marxist, that marriage was an expression of private 
property, he grants to his Utopians a kind of free assoc¬ 
iation between the sexes. Separation is easy, and there 
are no divorce courts to bicker over settlements. The path 
of true love never did run smooth, and there are heart¬ 
breaks in Utopia, but so realistic are these people that 
they attach little' value to sentiment. Of such things, one 
person says, "We.have ceased to be artificially foolish." 

(p. 67). Individuals are no longer stretched over the Pro¬ 
crustean bed of custom, and incompatibility leads to no 
endless drudgery of despair. As a hater of feminism, 

Morris restores to women their inalienable right to keep 






’ 



Louse and "bear children; it is their specialized function, 
he says. This would have pleased Ruskin,who believed a 
woman's place was in the home, but the vague free love 
might have troubled him. A mother is prey to no sordid 
anxieties about the future of her children: neighbors appar¬ 
ently co-operate in the rearing of all the community's 
offspring. 

As for the children themselves, they often live a wild 
bird-like existence in the woods. They are taught to swim, 
and to cook, to thatch and "keep shop”, but formal educa¬ 
tion is unknown. Early bookishness is greatly discouraged, 
and there is no interest in history since there is no civil 
strife. 1 Yet the wonder of it is, that children read by 
the age of four, and early learn French and German in the 
little communes. Moreover they pick up Welsh and Irish 
"very quickly, because all their elders knov/ them", (p.33). 
This sounds to c/6, but in Morris's scheme, no 

mathematics is taught and the sciences are not even men¬ 
tioned. Little education is needed in his decentralized 
Utopia. 

Their system of life -has made them a frank, unaffected 
people, who live together with no friction. As for their 
dwellings - "You must understand therewith", the stranger 
is told, "that though separate households are the rule 

amongst us, and though they differ in their habits more 

(1) This idea Is in nearly all Utopias from Bulwer Lytton 

forward. 









( 176 . 


or less, yet no door is shut to any good-tempered person 
who is content to live as the other house-mates do". 

(pp. 75-6). Morris will not tolerate Fourier's phalang- 
steries, hut he arranges for banquet halls at which all who 
care to may eat.^ In the houses, as Ruskin would have 
wished, are beautiful pictures dealing with medieval leg¬ 
endary subjects, and the furniture is highly ornamental, 
(there was no Nineteenth Century comfort). These last two 
features are of course explainable by Morris's own life. 

In this Utopia, as in Shelley's dreams, there is no 
government in the ordinary sense. After delivering a pole¬ 
mic against government by privileged classes, Morris des¬ 
cribes his anarchist ideal. The disappearance of private 
property ended civil and criminal law. Now, crime is treated 

p 

as disease^ in some instances, in others,the transgressor 
is left to his own remorse. There is no wrangling of 
politicians, and, whatever deciding on public matters is 
needed, is done by the very democratic little village Mote. 
But personal freedom is in no wise restricted by law, and 
it is not necessary, for a reformed social order has trans¬ 
formed the character of men. So we come round to the old 
theory of Utopia again. 

There is not much to add, except that Morris does hint 

that the whole worId has become socialized, (p. 114). No 

(1) A constant Utopian characteristic. 

(2) Cf. Lytton, Butler, etc. 










































. 







• 


, 



. 















, 










longer do rival nationalities and races contend for world 
dominion, as old fashioned patriotism has gone out of 
fashion# Instead, as in Shelley’s Prometheus , man "sceptre¬ 
less, uncircumscribed and free" has become a citizen of the 
world, owing allegiance only to his fellow man# The cos¬ 
mopolitanism of Shelley worked its way into the Utopias of 
Bellamy and Morris alike# 

It would be easy to pick holes in Morris’s lovely 
picture of the future, and it seems not quite handsome to 
do so# But his Utopia is more "escapist" than any except 
Shelley’s or Hudson’s# He deliberately shut his eyes to 
some of the implications of industrialism, refusing to 
recognize that if machinery were abolished, half of the 
people of the civilized world would starve# Again, he did 
not meet the population question squarely: "the population 
is pretty much the same as it was at the end of the nine¬ 
teenth century; we have spread it, that is all"# (p. 86). 
Sven if population had not increased (which seems an un¬ 
likely contingency), and even if it were spread out, it is 
hard to believe that England could be self-supporting, but 
we have Morris’s word for it that there is no foreign trade. 
And it is this fact more than any other which takes away 
all that might have been convincing in Morris’s News from 
Nowhere. 


Both Bellamy and Morris inherited something from Marx, 












and both used as much radical doctrine as suited their per¬ 
sonalities. Their Utopian pictures were, as I have tried 
to show, dictated by their personal feelings: Bellamy spoke 
as a conscience-stricken middle-class liberal, Morris as a 
rebel artist. One was content with the machinery of civil¬ 
ization, the other was not; one found Utopia in the Great 
State, the other in decentralized communities. And these 
ideas have found their way into modern Utopian writings. 

An example of ’’decentralization" is found in G. K. Chester¬ 
ton’s writings (as for instance in his fantasy of local 
patriotism, The Napoleon of Netting Hill .) The "World State" 
and intensified "scientific advance" are found throughout 
the voluminous writings of H. G. Wells. 

But, great as is the contrast between the two men, they 
agreed on one point: a reformed economic environment would 
change the character of men. It was this mechanistic 
theory of character that dominated, as we have seen, all 
the Utopias of the nineteenth Century. There was one 
exception, however, and it stands apart from all the rest, 

A Crystal Age, by W. H. Hudson. To it we shall turn in 


the next chapter 







( 179 . 


CHAPTER VIII. 

A Romantic Interlude. 

In the eighties, when the Social Democratic Federation 
was debating its method of attack on the capitalist system, 
when anarchists and communists were making their first ill- 
starred public demonstrations, there appeared a little 
Utopia which was quite remote from the janglings over the 
creed and dogma of Socialism. That work, written by one 
of the rarest spirits in English letters, W. H. Hudson, 
was called A Crystal Age . It appeared in 1888, just 
between the Utopias of Bellamy and Morris, but, so un¬ 
touched is it by the theories in those books, that it might 
have been composed in a different epoch. For it belongs, 
not to the passing gospel of revolutions but to the time¬ 
less body of Utopian and frankly '’escapist” literature. 

It bears upon it admittedly the imprint of Shelley's 
thought, but its spirit is as free and vagrant as if it 
were a new creation under heaven# 

A Crystal Age was not a reform proposal to the English 
public, but a curious enquiry as to what would be an "ideal" 
state of life. Quite candidly it is a dream romance, a 
fantasy of the future. 

"Most amusing", Hudson says in his preface, 
speaking of previous Utopian writers, "are 
the dead ones who take themselves seriously, 
whose books are pulpits quaintly carved and 
decorated with precious stones and silken 
canopies in which they stand and preach at 
their, contemporaries." (p. vii). 








(180 


He knows that his own dream can never come true, that "the 
wish cannot induce belief"; he knows also that "the ending 
of passion and strife is the beginning of decay." (p. viii) 
We remember that in The Purple Land (1885) he had declared 
that no man really wanted a Utopia, "where there is no 
folly, crime or sorrow", and that he ha ted "all dreams of 
perpetual peace, all wonderful cities of the sun." (p. 338) 
The Utopian state he said v/as "unnatural, unspeakably re¬ 
pugnant - the dreamless sleep of the grave is more toler¬ 
able to the active, healthy mind than such an existence." 
(p. 338). So A Crystal Age was composed, not with the 
hope of shadowing forth an era of bliss to come, but with 
the purpose of describing, half-longingly, a dream of a 
happy world. 

For Hudson, one of Nature's unbetrayed, that dream 
would always be a "picture of the human race in its forest 
period", (p. viii). Cities, those hideous agglomerations 
of modern life, were very distressing to Hudson's sensitive 
nature, so he imagines his Utopia as a land of beautiful 
rolling country, a forest world with shady trees, 
gaily plumaged birds, and lithe, free, graceful animals. 

His traveller, who awakes mysteriously in the world of 
aeons hence, remarks that "there was one large house or 
mansion in sight, but no town, nor even a hamlet, and not 
one solitary spire", (p. 5). As in Shelley's Utopias the 








animals themselves have taken on a higher consciousness, 
and live in peace, with something like intelligence to 
guide them# All through the hook we are made aware con¬ 
stantly of the ’’sweetness and light” that comes to man, 
not (as Arnold would have said, through culture), hut 
through harmony with the natural world# Eating their 
supper under the starry sky, sleeping in airy rooms looking 
out on the moon and the silent trees, awaking early in the 
chill hut golden dawn for a cold plunge into the early 
morning river water, then away to the fields with a song,-- 
this is the life of the forest Utopians# 

The people themselves are exceedingly beautiful and 
physically fit, and are clothed in kilt-like dresses of var¬ 
ious hues# Their clothing was of lovely materials hut 
simple, and differed little for the sexes. The Father of 
the House alone wore a dark red skull-cap and a rohe of 
deep ye How or rhubarb color# The traveller remarks on 
’’the beautiful character" of the people, "their crystal 
purity of heart and the religion they professed.” (p.247-8) 
Among these people, as among all Utopians, lying was con¬ 
sidered a crime, as was any foolhardy action which might 
endanger the health. " Mens sana in corpore sano " might 
he a fitting motto for their laws# 

Believing that all contemporary reform was a foolish 
misdirection of effort, Hudson had little faith that a 






( 182 . 


reformed environment would improve the race of men. "We 
have not found out the secret of happiness", he reflects 
sadly, "and all our toil and effort is misdirected; and 
those who are seeking for a mechanical equivalent of con¬ 
sciousness, and those who are going about doing good, are 
alike wasting their lives", (p. 295). Any lasting reform 
must come from the individual heart. But while he thus 
discarded Godwin’s metaphysics, Hudson nevertheless adopted 
from Shelley the belief that reason, by asserting its rule 
over passion, could alone solve our problems. "We seek", 
he makes one of his characters say, "no other support in 
all our sufferings and calamities but that of reason only", 
(p. 197), and this idea runs all through the book. Even 
sexual passion, we learn, has at last been subjected to the 
cool reasoning powers of man. God they look upon as a kind¬ 
ly father who has ordained all things wisely even though 
sometimes his ways are hard to understand. "All the know¬ 
ledge we seek", says the Father, "the invention and skill 
we possess, and the labour of our* hands, has this purpose 
only" (p. 78) - to know God aright. For only a true har¬ 
mony with the Almighty can bring equanimity* 

It was here that the early races of mankind went 
wrong. In their insatiable desire for knowledge, in their 
lust for dominion over the natural world, they interfered 

with the law of Nature and perished. 




* 1 

■ 

T 












5 

- 





, 

* j 

j 











(183 


"Politics, religions, systems of philosophies, isms 
and ologies of all descriptions; schools, churches, 
prisons, poorhouses; stimulants and tobacco; kings 
and parliaments; cannon with its hostile roar, and 
pianos that thundered peacefully; history, the press, 
vice, political economy, money, and a million things 
more", - all these had disappeared in "a sort of 
mighty Savonorola bonfire", (p, 293-4), 

Like Shelley, Hudson banishes our traditional culture and 

institutions and their attendant vices, (This is as we 

have seen a common feature of Utopias), Only a small 

remnant of the human race survived this Armageddon, but 

the chosen few began a way of life which shall suffer "no 

second desolation", 

"The sounds of joy and melody, which were silent 
shall be heard everlastingly," says the Father, 

"since we had now continued long in this mind, 
seeking only to inform ourselves of /God’s/ will; 
until as in a clear crystal without flaw shining 
with colored light-^-, or as a glassy lake reflecting 
within itself the heavens and every cloud and star, 
so is he reflected in our minds." (p, 81), 

The influence of Shelley in this conception of Utopia is 

thus exceedingly evident, 

Shelley counts for much more however: there is no 

formal religion, no conception of private property or 

money, and no government in our sense, Hudson’s Utopians 

are vegetarians, and like Shelley’s people they have a sort 

of "free love’J in which,all passion has been scotched by 

reason. Man lives on perfectly friendly terms with the 

animals, (even the horses come joyfully to work and need 
(1) Cf. Shelley’s Adonais : 

"Life like a dome of many-colored glass, 

Stains the v/hite radiance of eternity." 












. 








1184 


no guiding at the pious 1 ) , birds flit about the tables for ) 
crumbs, and dogs have become almost human in their service 
and love of their masters. There are other Shelley influ¬ 
ences, the complete freedom of the individual, the absence 
of formality and of any ideas about vogue and fashion. In¬ 
stances could be multiplied, for Hudson has made a living 
Utopia out of Shelley's vague, if brilliant, attempts. Life 
is lived in a perfectly natural way, all traces of our old 
civilization having disappeared. Hudson's book is thus a 
belated example of primitivistic Utopia. 

As for their way of living, all members of each small 
community lived in a great House resembling a noble ruin, 

which, unsurrounded by gardens, lawns or hedges, had lasted 

2 

for many ages, and was constantly repaired. Within the 
Bouse were spacious galleries and halls where painting and 
sculpture of heavenly beauty were found. There were dormi¬ 
tories and eating rooms, and a great hall for communal sing¬ 
ing and reading. Most important of all was the apartment in 
which the Mother resided. To her we shall return later. 

The occupants of the House, while at home, enjoyed themselves 
in Illuminating books, in needlework,or in other artistic 
tasks. In their singing they had developed a form of word¬ 
less music such as no human being of our coarse nature 

could utter. In giving his Utopians these enthusiasms Hud- 

(1) The incident in which this is described is however a 

trifle absurd. 

(2) A reflection of the reverence for old buildings in 
certain aesthetic cults of the Eighties. 



















. 




, 

■ 










■ 











( 185 . 


son reflects of course the aspirations of some of his 
artistic contemporaries. 

Away from home, at their daily tasks, the Utopians 
tilled the soil with simple plows or felled trees for future 
repairs'to buildings. The account of their occupations is, 
however, slight; we are told that some are engaged in 
weaving and wood-carving. But they did not fatigue them¬ 
selves, or waste the summer day in labour; holidays for walk¬ 
ing and riding in the woods were numerous. "At night we 
sleep", says the Father, "in the morning we bathe; we eat 
when we are hungry, converse when we feel inclined, and on 
most days labour a certain number of hours." (p. 211). But ' 

more than that would be wasting the joy of the world. "That 

- . 

must be a dull spirit that cannot suspend its toil when the 
sun is setting in glory, or the violet rainbow appears on 
the cloud." (p. 211). Hudson has here brought to Utopia his 
own personal ideas about living a life. 

The House, as we have seen, was the communal unit. 

From it, periodically, went "pilgrims" to other parts of the 
world to learn the ways of people and to joy in the beauty 
of God's handiwork. Returning, they placed themselves under 
the rule of the Father, who directed affairs with justice 
and wisdom. It was in his power to mete out punishment, but 
the sins were few and of a venial nature, and punishment 

consisted merely of separation from the group for a few days. 
The Father 1 s commands and wishes were always obeyed without 











(186 


question, and no one considered him a tyrant. 

But there was another important personage, who was 
deeply respected: the Mother. She had, of all the Utopians, 
the greatest sympathy and kindness, and all were ready to do 
her bidding. It was she who bore the new children in Utopiq 
for all the other adults of the House were not only barren 
but devoid of physical ‘passion. It is this which causes the 
young hero (our traveller) finally to take poison in an 
agony of despair because he feels his love can never be 
returned. Population, as we have earlier noted, is the 
menace of Utopia. Godwin and Shelley solved it by the abol¬ 
ition of passion, and Hudson, recognizing the problem (p.l96)j 
solves it in the same way. ’’For the children of the house 
there could be no -union by marriage”, says the traveller, 

”in body and soul they differed from me: they had no name 
for that which I had so often and vainly declared”.(p.302). 

It was on the absence of passion that Utopia was built. 

Only after the death of the Mother, could a new one be 
elected. The chosen daughter studied in the sacred volumes 
of motherhood and learned the secrets of generation. Then 
once more the race would be replenished with new individuals 
who would take the place of those, who, after living a few 
hundred years, grew faint and faltered on the road of life.^ 
What does Hudson mean by it all? Surely they seemed 

’’like dwellers in some better place than this poor old, 

(1) The same conception occurs in Shaw f s Back to Methuselah. 












(187 


sinful, sorrowful world,” (p. 172), but Hudson looks back 
again soberly at reality. The incident of bis hero taking 
poison is an allegory of tbe story's meaning: life without 
passion is death. Ho one would deny that such a placid 
world would have many delights denied to our scarred and 
passion-torn hearts, but the hope of attaining them must 
ever remain in the misty cloud-land of dreams. Let us 
recall his early words once more: 

”Alas that in this case the ¥/ish cannot induce 
belief I For now I remember another thing 
which Hature said - that earthly excellence 
can come in no way but one, and the ending of 
passion and strife is the beginning of decay.” 

(p. viii). 


Yet such a chastening thought need never deter us from 
dreaming, in an idle moment, of a race reborn, or a world 
renewed. 

Hudson's book, frankly an escape, is quite free of that 

j * 

reforming and missionary spirit which mars the beauty of 
nearly every other Utopia, and it comes as a pleasant 
relief in a period so obsessed with proving that history 
(assisted by science and machines) was marching onward 
toward the Golden Age# A Crystal Age , like its author, 
stands apart from all others, alone, individual, sympathetic 
and intensely human# 




i 











CHAPTER IX. 


(188 


Utopia in the Twentieth Century# 

The Twentieth Century has spread out before mankind 
two very contradictory pictures of the future. The aston¬ 
ishing growth of industrialism and the dizzying advance of 
science have offered to the human race possibilities of 
physical comfort, widened enjoyment, and freedom from 
disease, such as no dreamer of a thousand years ago could 
have conceived. But there is another picture. Industrial¬ 
ism can, under a tightening financial control, grind out 
nothing but misery for growing numbers of the world’s 
creatures, and science, as the servant of fractious and mili¬ 
tant nation states,has the ability to wreak havoc and des¬ 
truction such as no prophet of the Apocalypse would have 
had the courage to forecast. On the one hand is the intox¬ 
icating dream of ever-increasing freedom and individual 
self-realization, while, on the other looms, threatening and 
malignant, the spectre of regimentation, serfdom, and des¬ 
pair. World peace and economic co-operation are the pro¬ 
phecies of those who view the future with optimism, but 
some,whose "realistic" turn of mind inclines them to pes¬ 
simism, forsee nothing but horrible international and class 
conflicts^, the result of which will be the wiping out of 
what we are now pleased to call civilization. 

In the writings of H. G. Wells, that indefatigable 














. 


























( 189 . 


champion of the Utopian World State, this double picture is 
always represented. Like an Apocalyptic visionary, Wells 
does not hesitate to describe, in gruesome detail, the horrors 
of Armageddon, but the ultimate Utopia is always confident¬ 
ly proclaimed. Following the example of Bacon*s hew Atlan ¬ 
tis , (which Wells always mentions with respect), he dreams 
of a time in which the world, under the constructive design¬ 
ing of technicians, will be guided by the discoveries of 
science. If to science are added universal education and 
world-wide socialism, the foundations of Wells’s Utopian 
thought are complete. It would be impossible to treat here 
in any detail the various Utopias pictured by Wells, so we 
shall outline briefly their general characteristics and then 
turn to discuss his most important contribution to Utopian 
thought, written early in his career, A Modern Utopia . 

In the course of forty years Wells employed a great 
variety of forms for his Utopian writings, ranging from 
fantastic romances to fictitious memoirs and imaginative 
history. In his first works he played with ideas of the 
fourth dimension, as in The Time Machine (1895), and he 
employs a "space-time" trick to transport his visitors to 
a better world in A Modern Utopia (1905) and Men Like Gods 
(1923). Utopia might also be ushered in, (for fictional 
purposes), by miracle, so in his romance In the Days of the 
Comet (1906) he imagines a world transformed by the brush 










. 

. 

, 

. • 

, 

. 

. 

- 

. 

. , 

■ 

> 








(190. 

of a comet f s tail. But Wells also saw the latent imagina¬ 
tive possibilities in the Marxian theory of society, and in 
The Sleeper Awakes (1910)-*-, he composed a fantasy on the 
development of finance capital. To this was added,in The 
World Set Free a forecast of the enormous destructive power 
of war materials, (particularly atomic homhs), and a picture 
of the chaotic international conflict toward which the 
world is drifting. And in The Shape of Things to Come (1933) 
he combined these elements to describe the great cyclone of 
wars which await us. To all of these writings, with the 
exception of The Sleeper Awakes , there is appended a picture 
of the Utopian World State which will rise, Phoenix-like, 
out of .the ruins. 

fells, whose imagination is very fertile when he treats 
of wars and revolutions loves to linger over the details of 
the transitional period. He accepts, as did Morris, the 
theory that men must fight for Utopia. But really his wars 
are just an effective device for dispensing with, once and 
for all, the decadent capitalistic regime. Having disfigur¬ 
ed it beyond recognition Wells outlines the process of re¬ 
organizing and "tidying up" the world. In this, his stories 
all have certain similarities. Impressed as he is with the 
tremendous importance In the World State of transport and 
communication, he has the airmen take control. In The Shap_e_ 

of Things to Come , for instance, the Trans port Union assumes 

(1) Originally published in 1899 as When t he Sleeper Awake .g.. 

lx was revised in 1910. - 






















(191. 

the duty of painfully (yet autocratically) building the 
tumbled world together again. In many of the books the 
world's reformation proceeds from the deliberations of a 
great council of men of good will. 1 The Assembly of Bris- 
sago in The World Set Free is an example. Later, presumably, 
this council dissolves, and the care of the world's peoples 
is handed over to a group of councils, each with a special 
field (e.g. scientific research, economics and finance, 
social -problems, etc.). It is all really a modernized 
version of Bacon's House of Saloman . In The Shape of Things 
to Come a body of stern technicians reorganizes life on this 
planet, and in A Modern Utopia a class of intellectuals or 
"voluntary nobility”, the Samurai, direct the social pro¬ 
gress of mankind. Wells never ceases to argue, that while 
the political life of the world should be democratic, the 
important things should all be left to "men who can". 

The actual Utopias themselves have also many similar¬ 
ities. In the first place, Wells insists that Utopia must 
be "planetary" - a World State, a World Republic, a World 
Federation, call it what you will. This idea traces back 
as we have seen through Marxism to Shelley and others. In 
this unified world, which will be a loose federation, Con¬ 
trols will be set up, to govern and assist scientific and 
industrial advance, and to solve the problems of "social 

nucleation". All of these Councils or Controls will be 

(l) This council of technicians is Wells's substitute for 

the Marxian "dictatorship of the proletariat". 












- 

T 


r 

, 

■ 

. ■ . . ' 


. v! ■ 


. 


■ 


























■ > , J 










. 











I j.yz. 


centralized, and their duty will he to clean up slums and 
filth, huild new factories and model homes and apartments, to 
root out disease - in general to improve the living con¬ 
ditions of mankind. Under "the organization of plenty” 
poverty will disappear, education will he free to everyone. 
And the results for the human race will he astonishing. 

Old hatreds and local patriotisms will disappear, and the 
squabbles over religion will die, a new lingua franca 
(basic English) will unite all men as brothers, and under 
the stimulus of equal opportunity the "efflorescence” of 
the arts will he dazzling. A new people, physically beau¬ 
tiful and with great mental powers,will supplant the grubby 
race of men we kno?/. With poverty and disease eliminated, 
with the tortures and anxieties of economic insanity gone, 
crime will grow steadily less, and the span of life (exhil¬ 
arating and tireless) will grow longer and longer. We have 
of course met these ideas many times already: 7/ells merely 

puts them in modern clothes. 

It would be well to note one important characteristic 
of Wells’s writing: his pre-occupation with the physical 
aspects of life. He writes enthusiastically and very imag¬ 
inatively of new technological processes, swift methods of 
transportation, medical discoveries and standardization, 
seeing in all these advances a widened opportunity for men 
to live life more abundantly. Adopting the mechanistic 










(1S3 


theory of environment which was so common in the Nineteenth 
Century, he effectively rids the world of discomfort and 
disease. Now the Twentieth Century has realized that in¬ 
creased physical comfort may not bring happiness at all, 
and that freeing man from the ordinary "difficulty" in 
living, shortening his hours of labor, may only mean list¬ 
lessness and ennui. To rid the world of effort and pain may 
also deprive the human race of effort and aspiration. But 
this Wells refuses to believe, so great is his obsession 
with the material aspects of Utopia. 

If this were all Wells had to say we might dismiss his 
work quickly, but in one of his earliest and best books on 
this subject he did grapple with the problem of freedom, 
effort and change. This book, which Wells called A Modern 
Utopia , easily surpasses anything else of a similar nature 
that he has written, indeed the other works are only gar¬ 
rulous, if imaginative, demonstrations of' the theories it 
se ts forth. 

In A Modern Utopia (in which by a '’space-time” trick 
an ideal world physically identical with our own, is assumed 
to exist on a planet out beyond Sirius), Wells tries to lay 
the foundation for a practicable Utopian state. He limits 
his dream to a life ’’conceivably possible”, and, saying 
good-bye to all fantastic imaginings, he restricts himself 
to dealing with people in all their idiosyncracies and 











(194 


individualities. Human beings must not be treated as uni¬ 
form bricks or as guinea pigs, but as "unique” experiments 
in a biological process. "All through this Utopian excur¬ 
sion”, he warns the reader, "...you shall feel the thrust 
and disturbance of that insurgent movement”, (p. 14)... 

”that ineluctable marginal inexactitude which is the myster¬ 
ious inmost quality of Being”, (p. 15). Then, gathering 
vehemence as he proceeds, he cries, "Being, indeed! there 
is no being, but a universal becoming of individualities, 
and Plato turned his back on truth when he turned towards 
his museum of specific ideals", (p. 15). Attacking the con¬ 
ception of an "ideal” state as something changeless and 
eternal he asserts that Modern Utopia "must be not static 
but kinetic, must shape not as a permanent state but as a 
hopeful stage...” (p. 14), and must be flexible so as to 
allow, for all 'the multiform activities of men. It is here 
that all the early Utopias went wrong; in their uniform and 
characterless buildings, in their treatment of human free¬ 
dom as something "relatively trivial” (p. 22), they forgot 
the ceaseless effort of man to individualize. How shall 
Utopia guarantee the freedom of Man? 

Perfect freedom, in an ideal sense is impossible, and 
all liberty Is a compromise. 

"It follows, therefore, in a modern Utopia... 
that the State will have effectually chipped 
away just all those spendthrift liberties that 
waste liberty, and not one liberty more, and 









(195 


so liave obtained the maximum general freedom.... 

In this Utopia of ours there may be many pro¬ 
hibitions, but no indirect compulsions... and 
few or no commands”, (p. 24). 

But these are mere generalizations. What concrete liberties 
does he mean? First of all freedom of movement: in the 
Modern Utopia, travel (so restricted in early Utopias) is 
in the common texture of life. For this Wells postulates 
World Peace and wonderful systems of transportation, 
beautiful highroads, swift electric trains and airplanes. 
Furthermore, man must be free, at the dayfe end, from the 
surroundings of his place of labor, so the industrial areas 
are located far, far away from the homes of men. Again, 
there must be privacy in Utopia. More's ideal state meant, 
he said, "intolerable continuity of contact”, (p. 25). 
Therefore Wells provides for private dwellings, where every 
man may be alone if he so desires. And personal morals must 
be free of restriction, except where excesses harm the free¬ 
dom of others: a man may be punished for drunkenness, al¬ 
though moderate drinking is looked upon as the individual's 
own affair. These ideals are thus almost identical with 
the principles of Nineteenth Century Liberalism. 

In Utopia, "economics” will have become transformed 

into "sociology”, and the World State, as in Bellamy, directs 

the production of goods 1 , and the organization of labor. 

It owns all land and power, maintains order, directs public 
(1) He permits individual enterprise in this" book, (pu 63) 

but in The Shape of Things to Come Prohibits it. 














* 


» *■ * ' . ■ 














. 




. 








* 

• ; * 
















. 








■ 

■ 

. 

- 
















works, administers justice, takes care of children, super¬ 
vises public health, controls coinages, weights and measures 
and subsidizes research* These are very considerable powers 
to hand over to the state, but Wells permits "personal” 
property, and allows it to be bequeathed. Moreover the 
State protects individuals with sickness, old age, and death 
insurance. The State has more powers, yet the net result 
is greater freedom. 

But generalizations are dangerous things and though it 
is easy to wish away patriotisms, loyalties, and economic 
greed, such a State may be the instrument of oppression. In 
The Shape of Things to Come , an intermediary council did 
regiment human beings in a perfectly calculating way, and 
early in A Modern Utopia , Wells stumbled into a dangerous 
admission: ”If we are to have any Utopia at all, we must have 
a clear common purpose, and a great and steadfast movement 
of will to override all... incurably egotistical dissentients’.’ 
(p. 89). But this opens up a horrible prospect. Twenty 
pages earlier Wells had said "the State is for Individual¬ 
ities. The State is for Individuals, the lav/ is for freedom, 
the world is for experiment, experience and change: these are 
the fundamental beliefs upon which a modern Utopia must go.” 
But the later remark enables us to see what Wells really 
neans - experiment, yes, but in the general direction and 
within the limits which the World State prescribes. 
















( 197 . 


For, in spite of his genial generalizations,he can mean 
nothing else. We are reminded that in The Shape of Things 
To Come , all people had been made extroverts hy the new 
educational conditioning, and that Dr. Raven’s memoirs had 
spoken thus of the transitional tyranny: "...It is just 
because of their stern and thorough cleansing that we can 
now live in freedom." (p. 402} ♦ In A Modern Utopia , Wells 
also said "It is manifest this Utopia could not come about 
by chance and anarchy, but by co-ordinated effort and a com¬ 
munity of design." (p. 89). Wow, "co-ordinated effort and 
a community of design" may mean regimentation and the dis¬ 
avowal of freedom. This is only one of dozens of examples 
where Wells’s glib generalizations are a woolly integument 
for cloudy wishful thinking. 

So the theory explodes, and perhaps Plato was right 
after all. The weak, who are, it must be admitted, merely 
Wellsian "individualities", must go to the wall: "there must 
be competition in life of some sort, /to determine/ 
who are to be pushed to the edge." (p. 95). We are reminded 
that in Men Like Gods the undesirable new arrivals were 
incarcerated and then stamped out. The state will enforce 
cleanliness, and it will segregate the weak, the criminal, 
and the dull (V. #2), by the very necessary practice of 
"social surgery". Wells recognizes the danger of a harsh 
administration but re-assures himself that "in the case 











. ' ... , ) 
■ ■ ; - 


. 









































(198 


of a Utopia one assumes the best possible government, a 
government as merciful and deliberate as it is powerful 
and decisive”. Plato, whom he derides, had assumed no 
more than that! It is of little use for Wells to comfort 
us by saying there would be no death penalty, just steril¬ 
isation for "segregated failures” (i.e. criminals); and it 
is idle for him to promise us freedom of occupation. He 
may make provisions for idlers (V. #2), and declare that 
"from leisure, in a good moral and intellectual atmosphere, 
come experiences, come philosophy and the new departures.” 
(p.107). We know that in his world the "new departures” 
would take their own chances with a far wider tyranny than 
we now know under our hit-and-miss society. 

But Wells struggles on with this interminable question 
of the rights of individuals as opposed to the rights of 
the State. He spends a great deal of time discussing 
marriage. Insisting that individual biological experiments 
are necessary, he rejects the idea of state breeding (though 
he had, as we have seen, sterilized the criminal and dull). 
He tries to use another blanket generalization: "...Compul¬ 
sory pairing is one thing, and the maintenance of general 
limiting conditions is another, and well within the scope 
of State activity.” (p. 128). "General limiting conditions” 
is a harmless looking phrase for state interference. .As 
for marriage itself, the state would insist that contracting 






(199 


parties lie healthy, and free from transmissible diseases* 
because children were the state’s concern. (Moreover age 
limits are set for marriage). He re-assures us that private 
morality is no concern of the state, and that a man and 
woman may enter on a partnership on their own terms. But 
it is hard, in this case, as in all others, to form any 
inviting or concrete picture of his pleasant generalities. 

There follows a section on the mechanical and scienti¬ 
fic blessings of Utopia, but we shall not pause over them: 
it is assumed, as with all Utopists, that these things bring 
happiness. We are concerned rather with the Samurai, ’’the 
voluntary nobility”, the intellectuals, the technicians, and 
politicians who direct affairs. They live a severely reg¬ 
ulated life (at their own wish, and in exchange for power!), 
abstaining from tobacco, narcotics and alcohol. The Sam¬ 
urai control the State and all wealth, but by their vows 
they may not avail themselves of any of the coarser pleas¬ 
ures wealth can buy. They are then, the ideal administrators 
that current periodicals endeavour to persuade us exist in 
the Communist bureaucracy of modern Russia. But there is no 
denying that the Samurai have a vast power in their hands. 

We have come a long way from the engaging generaliza¬ 
tions of the bookfe opening pages. Wells wanted liberty 
above all things, and then provided liberty in all the 
fields where it is unessential; he wanted change, and then 









(2U0, 


carefully prescribed the direction and the limits within 
which change could take place* So perhaps his was not a 
kinetic state after all. 

The Wellsian Utopia with all its physical improvements 
and added comfort may not confer real benefits on humanity* 
Man does not live by bread alone; physical comfort and 
freedom from pain do not constitute the whole of happiness. 
They may be desirable, but the price may be too great. More¬ 
over, all Utopistsfind it necessary to break with the past. 

We are reminded of Morris*s contempt for history and Bel¬ 
lamy’s attitude of despising previous civilization. Wells, 
in The Shape of Things to Come does much the same, ’’None of 
us can realize”, writes his Dr. haven, ’’the value of that 
'disentanglement* from tradition, because now we are all dis¬ 
entangled.” (p. 362), Wells's Utopians have a contempt for 
the petty emotional disturbances of their historical pre¬ 
decessors (as illustrated in literature), since emancipa¬ 
tion has freed the Utopians of all that nonsense. Their 
life is lived on a different plane, and, says Wells, a better 
cne. But is it? Aldous Huxley, scoffing at the idea that 
nan can or should rid himself of past culture, thought that 
the Utopia of H. G. Wells was too contemptible to be worth 
attaining. It is to his book that I wish now to turn my 


attention 










: 










' 


’ 

■ 

. , V , 

| 

. . 

; 








XZUI 


It lias earlier been noted in this study how very great 
is the similarity between The Coming Race and Brave New 
World (1932), I think it is beyond doubt that Aldous 
Huxley borrowed some of his ideas from Lord Lytton. Brave 
New World is an attack on Utopists in general and H. G, 

Wells in particular. By satirical reference to the Nine 
Years War, to the use of "anthrax”.bombs, and to the "cam¬ 
paign against the past", Huxley has his eye almost certainly 
on Wells's The World Set Free , and in his elaboration of 
mechanical contrivances he is thinking of Wells's pictures 
of the future, "We always throw away old clothes", whispers 
a hypnopaedic machine to the little children, "Ending is 
better than mending". We recall that Wells is constantly 
harping on this theme. And the instances could be multi¬ 
plied indefinitely, for Huxley has deliberately used Wells's 
own words to accuse Utopia. Calmly and relentlessly, but 
with a passion for damaging detail, Huxley builds up his 
brilliant, satirical, and yet horrible attack. 

On the fly-leaf, he quotes from Nicholas Berdyaev a 
few sentences which form a fitting motto for his own book: 

"Les utopies sont realisables. La vie^marche 
vers les utopies. Et peut-tFtre un^siecle 
nouveau commence-t-il, un siecle ou les 
intellectuals et la classe cultivee reveront 
aux moyens / d'eviter les utopies et de retourner 
a une societe non utopique, moins *parfaite' et 
plus libre." 
















. 

. 



■;.; - , ■; r .. r ^ 










(202 


One has only to glance through The End of Our Time to real- ) 
ize how strong is the influence of Berdyaev on Huxley*s 
thought, hut that is "beyond our field. For Huxley shows 
not only that in a "perfect” society real liberty would he 
extinguished, hut that all artistic impulses, all religious 
aspirations, all capability of feeling anything intensely 
would he gone. Moreover the victory of the collective 
principle in society would, Huxley tried to show, destroy 
forever the principle of personality in society, of person¬ 
al creative initiative, and of personal responsibility. 1 
Having once been swallowed in the maw of a tremendous 
machine, the individual would he crushed, - Wells every- 
¥/here admits that "big" personalities on the old style would 
disappear. As for freedom, initiative, art and religion in 
the Socialistic World State,- Wells had tried to answer 
these objections in as early a book as Hew Worlds for Old 
(1908), and from his own point of view he succeeded com¬ 
pletely, The difficulty is of course, as with some other 
theorists,that his conception of liberty is a restricted 
one. 

Huxley sets us down in the World State of 632 A.F. 

(in the year of our Ford), and an exciting world it is. 
Tremendous factories and public buildings on the skyscraper. 
plan, myriads of recreation grounds for all classes of peoplp : 

hatcheries, nurseries and conditioning centres for young 

(1) I have merely paraphrased here Berdyaev’s The of Our 

Time, p. 53, to show how completely*Huxle y agrttfffr t—— 

1*0 •’rTnrr, -Hoorno nf T 3 -viQTTQ T.Tqui -- 









■ 

















' 





( 203 . 


"babies, gigantic "feely" theatres, - these are the first 
things that meet our gaze# Back and forth between the con¬ 
tinents ply great and incredibly swift air-liners carrying 
human "entities" in quest of pleasure. The whole world 
has been astonishingly organized by the great Controls, 
and the two thousand million inhabitants of the planet live 
in a society made as completely efficient as Wells oould 
ever imagine. 

"Community, Identity, Stability" - this is the motto 
placed over the Central London Hatchery and Conditioning 
Centre; it might well be the motto of the whole society. 

5To longer are human beings born in the old erratic vivi¬ 
parous way, for that would be a menace to social stability, 
but now the- science of ectogenetics is able to produce new 
standardized individuals in the laboratory. In their test- 
tubes as Alphas, Betas, Gammas or Deltas, the embryos are 
treated pre-natally to bear prescribed characteristics in 
life. Deltas are drenched with solutions to prevent their 
nentalities from developing, because Deltas perform the 
nenial tasks, while the Alphas, the future administrators, 
are given the very best hereditary germs and pre-natal 
environment. Moreover, since it is necessary to create as 
many identical persons as possible for standardized occupa¬ 
tions the "Bokanovsky" process has been used to produce 
as many as ninety-six identical tv/ins. "Bokanovsky* s 




. 


■■ 

■ 

,, 

* . ' 

, 

t 

. 








(204 


Process”, says one of the Directors, ”is one of the major 
instruments of social stability.” (p. 6), for it could pro¬ 
vide a perfect caste system. 

But the Controllers, feeling that no effort must he 
lost in stabilizing society, do not stop at such a simple 
arrangement. Alphas, Betas, Gammas and Deltas are several¬ 
ly taught by hypnopaedia and by treatments in the Neo- 
Pavlovian Conditioning Booms, to respond in perfectly 
predictable ways to every situation in life. The Deltas, 
for instance, are conditioned to hate books and flowers, 
because, as they are predestined to be machine workers, it 
would do no social good to make them students or aesthetes. 
Ml children are made to order, in intelligence and physique 
and in emotional responses, so that no matter what their 
subsequent position in life may be, they will never attempt 
do subvert, in thought or deed, the beneficient World State. 
Huxley sees quite well that to attempt to limit initiative 
in one direction only (i.e. in economic enterprise} is 
nonsense; creative activity could upset social stability. 

So people are conditioned to like, their happiness. In their 
sleep children are taught that "everyone is happy now”, and 
that science is a lovely thing, and that "everyone belongs 
to everyone else”, this latter moral dictum implying that 
promiscuity is essential to a happy life. 

As children grow up, they are distributed to various 
schools where they learn just the bare essential knowledge 






. 









" \ 


f 


» 









\<ZUD 


that will make them efficient in the little social slot 
prepared for them. History is never taught, nor is the 
literature of the past, for those things are now unnec- 
cessary and foolish. Reading, (a solitary mode of pleasure) 
is assiduously discouraged among these new extroverts, and 
should any child show signs of introvertive tendencies he 
is immediately treated "by a psychoanalyst. "No social 
stability without individual stability", remarks Mustapha 
Mond in his terse way. 

For the Nine Years War and the great Economic Collapse 
had brought man to the crossroads where he had to choose 
between World Control and destruction. (p. 56). This is 
the dilemma fife 11s had so often forecast, and Huxley adopts 
it, showing that the first steps necessary in setting up 
a Wellsian Utopia were the formation of a caste system by 
intelligent Alphas, who quite callously introduced ecto- 
genetics, hypnopaedia, and the education and occupational 
predestination we have just described. How did these new 
adults live, working in their predestined grooves? 

After spending the day in laboratory, office, factory 
or machine shop, the employees were whisked away, in 
helicopter or airship, to play Electro-Magnetic Golf or 
Reimann-surface tennis, and from thence to a meal of syn¬ 
thetic food, and to the "feelies”, then on to a night club 
to dance to the bewitching sensuous melodies of Calvin 








( 206 # 


Stopes and his Sixteen Sexophonists,* or to revel in the 
effects of the Scent and Colour Organ with its synthetic 
Music# Above all, wherever they went, whatever they did, 
they must consume, consume, - what was the sense of climb¬ 
ing to the top of Skiddaw, if society could not benefit 
in a material way? Again, wherever they went they must not 
be alone, for loneliness and solitary pleasure were crimes 
against morality# 

Living a life of orgiastic sexual promiscuity (since 
knowledge of contraceptives was imparted in all the schools) 
these Utopians went from pleasure to pleasure, from the 
first day of erotic play as naked children in the State 
nurseries until the day they died. And should a trouble¬ 
some thought intervene between the vibro-vacuum massage 
of the morning and the last flicker of exhaustion at the 
day's end, there was always ’’soma”, divine soma, the nar¬ 
cotic of which ’twas said, that "One cubic centimetre 
cures ten gloomy sentiments". Should life become monoton¬ 
ous, or the pace too slow, one could always procure V.P.S# 
(Violent Passion Surrogate) and experience vicariously, in 
a grand intoxicating catharsis, the simultaneous emotions 
of anger, fear, jealousy and revenge. Life could never be 
dull when Science could thus rescue man from all his mental 
miseries5 Very effectively has Huxley described Wells's 
world v/here sorrow and pain are banished away. 











< 
















. 








. 




. . * 















. 

v. ;3 ■' ' ' . 








: 






. 

. 

1 

. 









( 207 , 


In this world where Ford has become the deity and the 
sign of the T 1 has replaced the sign of the cross, Ford’s 
Day Celebrations, Community Sings, and Solidarity Services 
have replaced religious ceremonies. Bacon had spoken of 
rites in honour of science, and here Huxley describes a 
possible form of the celebration. In a wild orgy, the cele¬ 
brants of Ford’s imminent coming, dance and chant the Soli¬ 
darity hymn: 

’’Ford, we are twelve; oh make us one 
Like drops within the Social River, 

Oh, make us now together run 

As swiftly as. thy shining Flivver.” 

Henry Ford, Huxley believes, is the symbol of all modern 
Utopian thinking: comfort, and cheap mass production of 
quickly consumable goods. Ho wonder he is deified as the 
Savior of Mankind, and that the Social Solidarity Services 
are sung in his honor. 

The denizens of Brave New World (all with standardized 
names like Marx, Rothschild, Trotsky, Bradlaugh, Diesel, 
Deterding, Engels, Bakunin, Watson and so forth) are com¬ 
pletely conditioned to love the World Order without murmur. 
Unorthodoxy is looked upon as a threat not only to the 
life of a mere individual but to Society itself. High art, 
as in Bulwer’s The Coming Race , is impossible. ’’That’s 
the price we have to pay for stability”, remarks Mustapha 

(1) In memory of the Model-T Ford Car. 













Mond, a Controller. "You've got to choose "between happiness 

i 

and what people used to call high art. We've sacrificed the 
high art. We have the feelies and the scent organ instead." 
(p. 260). Art arises out of suffering and aspiration, hut 
in Utopia these things do not exist. As for science, its 
activities (as in Bulwer) are limited to social needs. Pro¬ 
gress, as an ideal, has been discarded, the search for truth 
and beauty abandoned. "Our Ford himself", says Mustapha 
Mond, "did a great deal to shift the emphasis from truth 

and beauty to comfort and happiness. Mass production deman- 

■ 

ded the shift. Universal happiness keeps the wheels stead- 

■ 

ily turning: truth and beauty can't." (p. 269). The dead 
end of industrial Utopia, says Huxley, is just this: a use¬ 
less spineless humanity wrapt in universal ease. Industr¬ 
ialization of life has gone too far already; God forbid 


that it should realize Wells's mechanical visions. 

As for high religion and spiritual self-abnegation, 
they belong nowhere in Brave Hew World . 

"Civilization", declares Mustapha Mond, "has 
no need of nobility or heroism. These things 
are symptoms of political inefficiency. In a 
properly organized society like ours, nobody 
has any opportunities for being noble or heroic. 
Conditions have got to be thoroughly unstable 
before the occasion can arise." (pp. 279-290). 

In Utopia, therefore, there are no divided allegiances, and 

no temptations. "You're so conditioned that you can't 

help doing what you ought to do." (p. 280) "But", replied 

the Savage, who came to see the Brave Hew World, "I don't 










(209 


want comfort. I want God, I want poetry, I want real danger, 
I want freedom, I want goodness, I want sin.” (p. 295). 

For without these things there.is no life. A few indivi¬ 
duals in Brave Few World, (Bernard Marx and Helmholtz Watson 
for instance) do protest against living a made-to-order 
existence, and they are sentenced to perpetual exile in 
Iceland and the Falkland Islands. And the same fate be¬ 
falls anyone who tries to introduce an innovation in bio¬ 
logical theory, or a piece of writing that may contradict 
the World State philosophy. 1 The rest of the population 
live on in bliss with the constant and ever changing 
forms of amusement from Centrifugal Bumble-Puppy and 
Hide-the-Zipper when they are children, to Obstacle Golf 
and Escalator Fives when they are grown. Comfort, health, 
and a ceaseless round of pleasure have scotched philosophy 
and religion. 

The picture is over-drawn of course, but Huxley lays 
his finger on the central point in all of contemporary 
Utopian thought. Wells, the great doctor of our valetud¬ 
inarian civilization, aims to make life easier for the human 
race. He tries to break the bonds of traditional culture, 
an4 like an Apocalyptist, fashion a new heaven and a new 
earth. Huxley merely pushes these ideas to their logical 
conclusion to show that life, without hardship and suffer¬ 
ing, without art born of torment and trial, is no life at 

(1) In these two instances Huxley is obviously girding 
at contemporary Russia. 















(210 


all. Grant eugenic improvement of the breed, grant pro¬ 
pagandist education, grant scientific world control by a 
group of Alphas, and what is the result? Not vigorous human 
beings, but flabby automata; not creative exhilaration, but 
spiritual death. 

It is a truly alarming prospect, and, so completely 
does Huxley accept the mechanistic theory of environment 
that he, unlike the skeptical Samuel Butler, believes "the 
Utopias are realizable”, on these terms. The book in its 
own way is as complete a capitulation to Watson*s behav¬ 
iorism as was Bulwer-Lvtton*s to Godwinism. Both Brave 
New florid and The Coming Race are the protests of artistic 
temperaments against regimentation, but neither book is 
an effective answer to Utopianism. For in the last anal¬ 
ysis the only valid reply to Utopianism as practicable 
political or social theory is the appeal to the disillusion¬ 
ing record of history: mankind does not ever thus transform 
himself, nor is it in his power thus to break his bonds 
with the past. 












, 


. 

■ 


t) , , 








. 


. 


: 




















. , 

* 

















(211 


CHAPTER X . 

C one lus i on. 

Looking Lack over the long procession of literary 
Utopias from Sir Thomas More to H. G. Wells, the observer 
is impressed first by their inherent similarity# A "Utopia 
is after all just a literary contrivance to express in read 
able form a sublime discontent with the existing social 
order, and to outline, in contrast, an ideal state# By 
postulating a world renewed the author is able to lay bare 
with sometimes startling emphasis the evils of prevailing 
institutions. Pictures of a primitivistic paradise and 
of the World State are, in their very conception, at least 
alike in this: they are both "implied criticisms" of 
society# The restless imagination that gave them birth, 
with its soaring idealism and reforming intensity, with 
its longing to take refuge in a world delivered from sin 
and sorrow, is always the same, whatever form the picture 
of Utopia may take# 

But, as we have tried to demonstrate in dealing with 
each Utopia, there may be very great differences between 
the pictures themselves. Each "ideal commonwealth" is a 
reflection of the age in which it was written, and in each 
may be found not only a portrayal of one social attitude 
of the times but also of some of the little crazes and en- 

thusiams of the moment# Utopias are a sort of silent com¬ 
mentary on the social history of the race# 







. 


. 

. 



. 

. 




(212 


1 

One notable change that took place in the evolution 
of Utopia however may he traced to the growing political 
consciousness of men. The Hebraic conception of a perfect 
state after the troubles of this world are over, and the 
Medieval idea of an "Earthly" Paradise, at length 

gave way, except for the primitivistic revival of the Eight¬ 
eenth Century, to Utopias which were political proposals. 
Utopia first made its dramatic appearance in this guise 
during the Puritan Revolution of the Seventeenth Century, 
and since the opening of the Industrial Era, political and 
social proposal has been its chief role. Several things 
contributed to this. The general relaxation of religious 
belief deprived man of the Utopian hope in an afterworld, 
and a "perfect state” had somehow to be realized in the 
actual world. Democracy too, I think, has left the way 
open for demagogues and doctrinaires with Utopian visions, 
and sometimes wild experiments get a brief trial. Again, 
exploration of the world's unknown territories finally 
discouraged the setting up of a Utopian state in the wild¬ 
erness, and insurgents had to make the best of the home¬ 
land. The new frontiers usually spawned little religious 
communities, but these died away when civilization en¬ 
circled them. It is interesting to note in this regard 
that the "locale" of Utopia in literature was gradually 
pushed westward until it had nowhere to go. We have 
remarked earlier that the geographical designation of 


i 





















. 

, 

* 

, 

, 

. • J. 1 . 






U13. 

Utopia was usually a remote and unexplored region. In¬ 
creased knowledge about far away lands forced the literary 
creator to place his Utopia in the future. And it is a 
curious reflection that political Utopianism, since the 
French Revolution, follows a parallel course. The dis¬ 
appearance of small "local" Utopias in favor of a "world 
organization" shows also a similar parallelism. 

As for the Utopias themselves, they show one general 
defect, and that is over-simplification of the wrongs of 
the social order. Agreeing almost unanimously that man 
had the ability to free himself of his troubles and to 
improve his own nature, the Utopists usually produced a 
specific which would effect a miraculous change. In 
More it is communism and rational religion; in Bacon, 
science. Hartlib placed his faith in a ridiculously simple 
economic reform, and Gott in Protestantism and education, 
while Harrington made elaborate claims for representative 
institutions and a simple plan for agrarian reform. Swift, 
in the next century, declared for the application of reason 
to human affairs, and the Romantic enthusiasts, adding 
sentiment to reason, believed that the abolition of insti¬ 
tutions would bring back the Golden Age. nineteenth Cen¬ 
tury dreamers conceived of a democratic industrial para¬ 
dise, (except for Morris and Ruskin who reacted against 
machinery), and in our own times, science, education and 



















( 214 ^ 


a collective society are said to be capable of liberating 
us from want and adversity* But just as the Marxian econ¬ 
omic analysis of social history is too simple to enlist our 
sympathy, so do we hesitate when confronted by a scheme 
which proposes, by applying a simple remedy, to cure all 
the sicknesses of an intricate and complex organism like 
human society* The Utopist usually selects one salient 
instinct or activity of man, and organizes all the rest of 
life about it in a beautiful system, forgetting that in 
the process he has distorted reality* 

We may trace in the Utopias a gradual abandonment of 
the "ethical" method of reform. Man, less religious than 
before, less convinced of his cosmic destiny, gradually 
transferred the onus of salvation to external 
conditions. This shifting of responsibility from the 
individual to the social organization is one of the most 
insidious developments of modern Utopian theory, for 
it leaves men an easy prey to bureaucrats; it destroys that 
individual responsibility which was the basic principle 
of Seventeenth Century democracy* The mechanistic assump¬ 
tions which underlie contemporary Utopianism have released 
man from the "troublesome" necessity of improving himself 
or his own condition, and have effectually weakened his 
inner core of responsibility* 

The vision of Utopia has continually changed its 











(215 


emphasis with the times, and it has been colored, as we 
have seen, hy the little personal idiosyncracies of each 
writer. It is a platitude therefore that all Utopias 
are not achievable simultaneously. Some critics assert 
that Utopists are the real prophets of the days after to¬ 
morrow, and they point triumphantly to instances, some of 
which we have noted, of the realization of Utopian dreams 
in actual fact. Utopian writers, says Prof. J. 0. Hertz- 
ler, are in the very vanguard of progress and have con¬ 
tributed to social change.^- How it may be true that in 
some cases the logic of events has vindicated aspects of 
Utopian writing, but to declare that these results are 
traceable to the Utopists is making a claim for propagandist 
literature which is very dubious and extremely difficult 
to demonstrate. Eertzler's view of the subject is domin¬ 
ated by his own over-belief in progress; indeed it is not 
too much to say that his tacit assumption is that society 
is more Utopian today than it was yesterday. If the 
"survival” of ideas is to be made the test of their vali¬ 
dity, then we are forced to accept the view that all of 
our present institutions are somehow superior to any 
in the past. But surely this is a ridiculous proposition. 

It must not be forgotten that fer more Utopian projects have 
been shattered than have been realized in fact, and it is 

safer to assume that these survivals are hi storical coinci - 
(1) See his History of Utopian Thought / Chaps. VII. VIII, IX 1 







- 

, 

, 


. 




* 

. 

. 

7 

■ 

' 

* 



















(216 


dences which owe their existence to independent and unfor- 
seen forces, as well as to Utopias* In other words, the 
honors must at least he divided* 

Tradition, which is so scurvily treated hy Utopian 
writers, gets its revenge in the end, for in the long run 
it is subsequent tradition that vindicates Utopia* In 
nearly all of the Utopias we are informed that men have 
cut themselves free of the accretions of culture and tra¬ 
dition, of the institutions and laws of corrupted regimes, 
and have begun afresh. Sometimes this is accomplished 
by the destructions of Armageddon, and sometimes by found¬ 
ing Utopia in a secluded region, where men may enjoy the 
negative advantages of Isolation. The modern communist 
proposes in the same way to destroy all the evidences of 
"burgeois" culture and to inaugurate a new proletarian 
tradition in a classless society. The effacement of tradi¬ 
tion is essential to Utopia. But it is obvious that history, 
a tissue of past influences, does not operate in such a con¬ 
venient way: the collapse of a tradition, as in the case of 
Rome, usually means the end of a civilization. And the 
Utopists cannot stand apart from tradition, for they too 
are creatures of their epochs. Thus, in dreams, they com¬ 
bine many characteristics of their own times and a variety 
of aspirations, only some of which are pregnant with results 1 

for the future* But it is subsequent tradition which 




(217 


vindicates those of their manifold schemes that do survive. 
The proposals that are blown upward into the realm of Limbo 
are merely those which have no place in the march of 
historical events. Utopists therefore have no monopoly of 
the gift of prophecy# 

There is one other limitation to the prophetic char¬ 
acter of Utopias. Because they have been written 
as complete pictures of a better world, they suffer from 
the paralysis of permanency and changelessness. H# G. Wells 
has tried to release Utopia from the curse of motionless 
stability, but he is only able to substitute a world in which; 
the character of change itself is canalized. The classic 
objection to Utopia, as expressed by Lord Lytton and Aldous 
Huxley, is that in such a condition of inertia, men would 
die of boredom. But there is, I think, a more fundamental 
difficulty. Granted that a certain herd instinct impels 
men at times to seek a collective security, there is also 
another impulse, equally potent, to separate from the mass, 
to individualize, to become different. Human society often 
resembles a restless scurry of atoms which will not confine 
themselves forever to a delimited sphere of activity, and 
Utopia is often an attempt to blind the eyes to that anar¬ 
chic activity. Freedom, in any society, may be only an 
illusion, but it is an illusion that must never be explained. 
And this is what the Utopian dreamer tries to do# 









(218 


We may confidently expect that Utopias will continue 
to he written in the future# As long as old institutions 
exercise a cramping effect on human desires, as long as 
oppression and injustice heat classes of men into undigni¬ 
fied servility, as long as sorrow and disease afflict the 
human frame, men will dream of deliverance in a better 
world. Just so long too as there is a hatred of compla¬ 
cency and self-satisfaction, so long as there is a sense 
of spiritual unfulfilment, of moral or social sin, Utopias 
will he written# For Utopia, someone has remarked, is not 
a social state hut a frame of mind# It is an idealistic 
expression of the undying determination to relieve unnec¬ 
essary suffering and humiliation, to mitigate the pain and 
struggle of an imperfect world# 





T£T97 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


The following is a list of the principal works 
consulted in the preparation of this S'tudy. 


1« Primary References 


Bacon, Francis 

- Hew. Atlantis (1629). Reprinted in 

Ideal Commonwealths, ed. H. Morlev 
11895, 1901). 

Bellamy, Edward 

- Looking Backward 2000 - 1887. (1887). 
Reprinted, Boston, 1929# 

Butler, Samuel 

- Erewhon (1872). Reprinted in the 
Traveller's Library* 

Butler, Samuel 

- Erewhon Revisited (1901). The same. 

Gilbert, W. S. 

- Utopia, Limited (1893). In Original 
Plays Third Series. London, 1928. 

Godwin, 

Bishop Francis 

- An Account of the Voyage of Domingo 
Gonzales to the World in the Moon (1638) 

Harleian Miscellany, Vol.8, London,1746 

Gott, Samuel 

- Nova Solyma, or Jerusalem Regained 
(1648) 2 vols. ed. W. Begley, New York 
1902. 

Harrington, James 

- Oceana (1656) Reprinted in Ideal Com- 
monwealths, ed. H. Morley (1895,1901) 

Hartlib, John 

- A Description of the Famous Kingdom 
of Macaria (1641) Harleian Miscellany, 

Vol. I, London, 1746. 

Hudson, W. H# 

- A Crystal Age (1888). Reprinted in the 
New Reader's Library. 

Hume, David 

- Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth (1742) 

In Essays, Moral, Political and Liter- 
ary, Edinburgh, 1804. 



































( 220 . 


Huxley, Aldous 
Lytton, E. Bulwer 

More, Thoma s 

Morris, William 

Shelley, Percy B. 
Swift, Jonathan 
Wells, H. G. 


2 . 

Beer, M. 

Berdyaev, H# 

Bloomfield, P. 
Brailsford, H. H. 


- Brave Hew World , London, 1932 

- The Coming Race . (1871) Reprinted 
Boston, 1803. 

- De Optimo Reipuhlicae statu, deque 

nova insula Utopia (1516) Tra ns1a t- 

ed hy Ralph Rohynson (1551). Pub¬ 
lished in The Utopia of Sir Thomas 
More , ed. J. H. Luptcn, Oxford, 1895 

- Hews from Nowhere (1890) Reprinted 
in Pocket Library Edition, London 
1920. 

- Poetical Works , ed. Buxton-Forman, 

5 vols. London, 1908. 

- Gulliver*s Travels (1726) Bohn's 
Standard Library, London, 1905. 

- The Time Machine (1895) Reprinted 
in Essex thin-paper edition, 

London, 1926-7. 

- g/hen) The Sleeper Awakes (1899,1910) 
The same • 

- A Modern Utopia (1908) London. 

- In the Days of the Comet (1906) 

Essex thin-paper edition. 

- The Viforld Set Free (1914) The same 

- Men Like Gods (1923) London 

- The Shape of Things to Come (1933) 
Hew York. 


condary References 

- History of British Socialism , 2 vols 
London 1929. 

- The End of Our Time , translated by 
Donald Attwater, London, 1935. 

- William Morris , London, 1934. 

- Shelley, Godwin and their Circle . 

Home Univ. Lib. 1913. 



































(221 


Brinton, C. 

Campanella, T# 

Chambers, R. W. 
Cole, G. D. H. 
Dowden, E. 

Durant, W# 

Eddy, W. A. 

Fairchild, H. N# 
Fairchild, H. IT# 
Godwin, William 

Gooch, G. P# 

Gooch, G# P# 

Gordon, G# 

Harris, J. F# 
Hertzler, J. 0# 

Hollis, C# 

Hook, S. 


- Political Ideas of the English Rom ¬ 

anticists# Oxford, 1926. 

- City of the Sun , in Morley's Ideal 
C ommonwe a1ths # 


- Thomas More , London, 1935# 

- Robert Owen , London, 1930# 

- The French Revolution and English 

Literature' , hew York, 1914. 

- The Story of Philosophy (Chapter on 
Bacon] Hew York, 1S2S# 

- A Critical Study of Gulliver's 

'Travel's. Priiiceton Univ. Press, 

1923# 

- The Noble Savage , New York, 1928# 

- The Romantic Quest , Hew York, 1931# 

- Political Justice , 4th Ed. 1842; 
and a reprint of the Essay on Pro¬ 
perty, ed# H. S# Salt, London, 1929. 

- English Democratic Ideas in the 

XVII Century (1898) Edited by E# 

Laskin, Cambridge, 1927# 

- Political Thought from Bacon to 
Halifax# Home Univ. Lib. 1914. 


- Shelley and the Oppressors of Man ¬ 

kind , London, 1922. 

- Samuel Butler , London, 1915# 

- The History of Utopian Thought , 

New York, 1926. 

- Sir Thomas More , London, 1934. 

- Toward the Understanding of Karl 
Marx , New York, 1933. 




















































( 222 . 1 


Laidler, H. W. 

- A History of Socialist Thought, 

New York, 1927. 

Laski, H. J* 

- Political Thought in England from . 

Locke to Bentham. Home Univ. Lib. 

1920. 

Love joy, A. 0. 
and Boas, G• 

- Primitivism and Related Ideas in 
Antiquity. Baltimore, 1935. 

MacGillivray, j, r # 

- The Pantisocracy Scheme and its 
Immediate Backgrounds, in Studies 

In English, Univ. of Toronto Press 


1931. 

Morris, May 

- William Morris, Artist Writer 
Socialist, Vol. II, Oxford, 1936. 


Mumford, Lewis - The Story of Utopias, New York, 

1922. 


0* Re illy, J. B. - The Utopia of St. Thomas More 

Catholic Truth Society, Toronto, 
1936. 


Plato 

- The Republic, trans. Davies and 
Vaughan, London, 1929. 

Critias, trans. B. Jowett, in The 
Dialogues of Plato, vox. iv. 
Timaeus, the same. 

* 

% 

CD 

o 

W 

- The Social Philosophy of Carlyle 
and Ruskin, London, 1921. 

Ruskin, John 

- Fors Clavigera, 4 vols. in Illus- 
trated Cabinet Edition, Boston.n.d. 

- Munera Pulveris. The same. 

- Unto this Last. The same. 

Rus sell, B. A• 

- Proposed Roads to Freedom, New York 
1919. 

Sargent, D. 

- Thomas More, London, 1936. 

Shafer, R. 

- Christianity and Naturalism, New 
Haven, 1926. 

Shaw, G. B# 

- Back to Methuselah, London, 1921. 






































(223 


Tawney, R. H. - The Agrarian Problem of the 

Sixteenth Century , London, 1912. 

- Religion and the Rise of Capital ¬ 

ism , London, 1929. 


Weekley, M. - William Morris , London, 1934. 

Wells, I-I. G. - The Salvaging of Civilization, 

1921. 

- Hew Worlds for Old (1908). Re¬ 
printed in Constable * s Popular 
Series, London, 1919. 















































