
For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


0 1620 3069199 0 


STUDIES ON 

4-(or 5-) AMINOGLYOXALINE 


John A. Nelson 



































©X MB BIS 

HBMISSIIMJS 













STUDIES ON 


4-(or 5- ) AMINOG-L YOXALINE 


John Archibald Nelson B.Sc. 


A thesis submitted from the Department of Biochem¬ 
istry in large part fulfilment of the requirements 
for the degree of Master of Science at the University 
of Alberta 1941. 








ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

I gratefully acknowledge my indebtedness to 
Professor G. Hunter for his invaluable guidance and 
assistance throughout the progress of this inves¬ 
tigation. 












TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Introduction .. 1 

Experimental ... 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-) Acetylamino- 

glyoxaline . 7 

Preparation and isolation of 4-(or 5-) 

Aminoglyoxaline . 17 

Reagents .. 17 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-) Aminoglyoxaline 

Dihydrochloride .. 18 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-) Aminoglyoxaline 

Picrate .. 22 

Conclusion .••••.•••• ... 27 

Bibliography .. 28 















Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/studieson4or5ami00nels 




INTRODUCTION 


In 1893 Wulff decomposed guanine by heating it 
in a sealed tube with concentrated HCl. The re¬ 
action yielded only the end products of hydrolysis 
and may be represented by the following equation: 
C 5 H 5 N 5 0 47H 2 0—> 4NH 3 ■+ CgHgNOc. + 2u0g + UHgOg 
guanine glycine formic acid 

Fischer in 1910 hydrolysed guanine by reflux¬ 
ing it for 30 hours with concentrated HCl. He 
obtained a 50Jb conversion to xanthine. The re¬ 
mainder was unaccounted for. 

Xanthine as a hydrolytic product is itself 
broken down by HCl to ammonia, carbon dioxicie, 
formic acid, and glycine as ultimate products. 

Only partial decomposition takes place at 180°C. 

For complete hydrolysis the heating must be car¬ 
ried on for several hours at 2£0-230°C (Schmidt 
1883). 

The problem of guanine hydrolysis was further 
studied in this laboratory by Hunter (1936). It 
was shown that when guanine was autoclaved with 
3.4N. HCl at 158°C for 1.5 hours the main reaction 


was: 






- 2 - 


H-E-C=0 


E-E-C=0 




Hp 0 


0=C C-NvH 

I 1 >- 

H-E-C--Jr 


guanine xanthine 

Proceeding alongside this reaction is the cleav¬ 
age of the pyrimidine ring with the production of 
4-(or 5-) guanidinoglyoxaline with the elimination 
of the carbon atom in position 6 as COg 


H-E-C=0 

I i 

HoE-C C-E^H 

A 1 

e -c-ir 


H-N H 

II I 

HoE-C C- 

2 I I 

H-N-G ■ 


-N~H 


-E 




C-H 


guanine 


4-(or 5-) guanidinoglyoxaline 


Hunter accounted for all the guanine hydrolysed 
in terms of its decomposition products, and in 
addition to xanthine and the new substance 4-(or 5-) 
guanidinoglyoxaline, he also isolated small amounts 
of glycine guanidine and glycocyamine. 

Further study of the base 4-(of 5-) guanidino¬ 
glyoxaline showed that on alkaline hydrolysis with 
Ba(0H)g it yielded the corresponding carbamido 


derivative. 
































- 3 - 


H-N H 


0 H 


II 




HpN-C G 

2 I I 


H-H-C 


1\T—TT 



4-(or 5-)guanidino- 
glyoxaline 


4-(or 5-) carbamido- 
glyoxaline 


Glycine was obtained as the end product of 
hydrolysis of both these compounds. Changes be¬ 
tween these compounds and glycine were obscure, 
but it was fairly certain that one of the inter¬ 
mediate products was 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline. 

When attempting to prepare 4-(or 5-) amino¬ 
glyoxaline from the corresponding nitro compound 
Fargher (1920) postulated the changes as follows: 


H-C —-H-tt 




H-C-N-H 



0 gK-C——K 

4-(or 5-) nitroglvoxaline 


4-(or 5-) amino- 
gloxaline 


4-(or 5-) hydroxygloxaline 



4-glyoxalone 



C“0 


OH glycine 


































- 4 - 


with cleavage of the ring as indicated, 

Weidenhagen and Herrman however regarded the 
decomposition of the aminoglyoxaline as more likely 
to be according to: 


H-C- 




HpN-C- 


-N 


/ 


C-H 


2H 9 0 


4-(or 5-)aminoglyoxaline 


H-C-HHg 

H 2 H-c-ra a 

amidine 




HCOOH HgO 

formic acid 


Ho C-Iv Ho 
& j Ci 

G-0 t 2IW, 


OH 

glycine 


Fargher and Pyman observed a strong nitro- 
prusside test in the reduction mixture of 4-(or 5-) 
nitroglyoxaline, which test they supposed was 
attributable to 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline. In the 
early stages of this work this was doubted as it was 
thought that the hypothetical hydroxyglyoxaline or 
the glyoxalone would be more likely to yield a 
positive nitroprusside test, than the aminogly¬ 
oxaline. Hunter and Hlynka (1937) however showed 
conclusively that the diazo and the nitroprusside 

















- 5 - 


tests were given by only one substance which could 
not be other than the 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline. 
Furthermore, all attempts to find evidence of the 
existence of the 4-(or 5-) hydroxyglyoxaline or 
the 4-glyoxalone met with failure, so that we are 
disposed to discard the Fargher scheme of breakdown 
in favor of the Weidenhagen and Herrman hypothesis 
of amidine formation. Indeed we have some evidence 
in favor of the existence of such a compound, or 
one closely related to it. This is to be found in 
the observation of a characteristic green ninhydrin 
test described by Hunter, and obtained in the hydro¬ 
lytic products of 4-(or 5-) guanidinoglyoxaline. 

It is then likely that the analagous compound or 
one closely related to it is responsible for the 
green ninhydrin test observed. 

m H 

1 i 

HgBf-C C-HHg 

H-l--C--HHg 

That the glyoxaline ring was broken before the 
appearance of the green ninhydrin test appeared to 
be born out by the fact that it was not associated 












- 6 - 


with a positive diazo test. 

Hunter and Hlynka were able to prepare rela¬ 
tively pure solutions of 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline 
and by their synthesis of 4-(or 5-) carbamido- 
glyoxaline by the action of cyanic acid in such 
solution established the existence of the substance 
and its properties of yielding both diazo and nitro- 
prusside tests. However they did not succeed in 
isolating this amino compound. 

The problem which forms the subject of this 
thesis is the synthesis and isolation of 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline, and a study of its properties. 






- 7 - 


EXPERIMENTA1 


Synthesis of 4-(or 5- ) Acety1aminoglyoxa1ine Due 
to the failure of other workers to isolate 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline M. M. Pecket devised a simultan¬ 
eous reduction and acetylation method for the 
direct production of 4-(or 5-) acetylaminoglyoxaline 
from the 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline according to 


H-C-N-H 


OgN-C-H 


H-C-N-H 


3H< 


/ 


C-H 


4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline 


Acetylation 


H 2 N-C-N 

4- (or 5- ) amino¬ 
glyoxaline 


H-C--M 


/ 


C-H 


H-N-C-N 

I 

c=o 

I 

ch 3 

4-(or 5-) acetylarnino- 
glyoxaline 


Hunter and Pecket (unpublished) were able to 
isolate a small amount of crystalline material that 
was probably the substance sought. It gave an 
intense red diazo test. Preliminary attempts to 























- 8 - 


hydrolyse this compound to the free base failed. 

The 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline used for the 
synthesis of the acetyl compound was prepared by 
T. H. Evans. 

1 gram of 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline was sus¬ 
pended in a solution of 50 ml. of acetic anhydride 
and 20 ml. of glacial acetic acid and run slowly 
from a dropping funnel into a cold solution of 12 
grams of SnCl^-gHgO in 40 ml. of acetic anhydride 
and 20 ml. of concentrated HCl. This was carried 
out in an atmosphere of nitrogen. As the 4-(or 5-! 
nitroglyoxaline suspension was added the tempera¬ 
ture rose to about 90°C at which temperature it was 
kept until the reaction was complete as fudged by 
the diazo test (usually 1.25 hours). The best 
temperature for the reaction 80-90°C was decided 
upon after several small scale trial runs. 

When the reaction was complete the straw 
yellow solution was cooled to 0°C and neutralized 
with 40?£ NaOH (10 fo I\ T aOH was used as the end point 
was approached). The precipitated tin hydroxides 
were centrifuged off and washed five times with 
150 ml. portions of distilled water. 













.. 

. 





















* / • 




• •• >• .. - ; • 










. 








- 9 - 


The clear supernatant solution and washings 
were combined and made slightly acid with H 2 SO 4 . 

To the acid solution was added 25 fo HgfCgHgOg)^ in 
just sufficient quantity to react with all the com¬ 
pounds in the solution. The solution was then 
brought to neutrality with Ba(0H)g and the precipi¬ 
tate was removed by centrifugation. After washing 
the mercury precipitate several times with water it 
was suspended in 200 ml, of .051. HgSG^ and treated 
with HgS. When the reaction was completed the HgS 
was centrifuged off and washed with water saturated 
with TigS at least four times using 150 ml. each time. 
The clear supernatant solution and washings were 
evaporated in vacuo to about 500 ml.. 

This acidic solution was treated with 25^ 

AgN 0 3 in a slight excess. (To test for an excess of 
AgNOg a few drops of the solution were mixed with 
a BafOHjg solution on a test plate. A dark brown 
precipitate indicates an excess of silver). The 
precipitate, mainly AgCl was centrifuged off and 
washed with 100 ml, volumes of water four times. 

The supernatant solution and washings were combined 
and made distinctly alkaline with Ba(0H)g, This 














s :i ■ v ■ 

















. 


. 








. 

■ 

. 









- 10 - 


second precipitate which contained the glyoxaline 
was centrifuged off and washed four times with 
•05N. Ba(OH) £ . The silver precipitate was sus¬ 
pended in 150 ml. of 0.1N. HgSO^ and treated with 
HgS until all the silver was in the form of Ag 2 S. 
This precipitate was removed and washed with 100 ml. 
portions of water saturated with H 2 S, The washings 
and supernatant were combined and concentrated to 
ab out 50 ml.. 

The concentrated solution was then treated with 
cold saturated Ba(0H) o to free it entirely of sul¬ 
phate and barium ions. 

The neutral solution was concentrated to 10-15 
ml. in vacuo and bleached with charcoal. On concen¬ 
trating the colorless solution to 2-3 ml. white 
crystalline material came out of solution. This 
was purified, not very satisfactorily, by crystal¬ 
lization from 9 7^ dioxan. Crude yield 50^5 of the 
theoretical. M. P. 226°C uncorrected. An elemen¬ 
tal analysis carried out on this material through 
the kindness of Dr. Stanley Cook of Ayerst, McKenna 
and Harrison, Montreal, showed the following 







- 11 - 


results: H 5.70$; C 48.77$; N 34.32$. The formula 
C 5 H 7 N 3 0 requires H 5.64$; C 48.00$; H 33.59$. There 
is little doubt that the material was 4-(or 5-) 
acetylaminoglyoxaline. 

This material gave an immediate and very in¬ 
tense red color with the Koessler and Hanke diazo 
reagent. The 4-(or 5-) acetylaminoglyoxaline is 
insoluble in diethyl ether, acetone, and dry diox- 
an, while in water it is extremely soluble. In 
methyl alcohol it is relatively soluble and this 
solvent could have been used for recrystallization 
of the compound. It forms a crystalline picrate 
in the form of needles. M.P. £08°C. A diamond¬ 
shaped flavianate is also formed. M.P. £60°C. 

Various attempts were made to hydrolyse the 
compound. After standing at 20°C for 5 hours in 
33ST. HCl and 611. HgSQ^ no free base had been formed. 
The diazo test became less intense but no sign of 
a blue diazo test was obtained at any time during 
hydrolysis. Complete destruction of the compound 
occurred in 5 hour's at 50°C under the above condi¬ 
tions as was shown by the diazo test which was 
negative after this time. On boiling the material 







for one hour with cold saturated Ba(0H)g a slight 
amount of the free base was formed but in quanti¬ 
ties too small to isolate. This was shown by a 
diazo test and a permanganate nitroprusside test. 

Besides the above methods of hydrolysis acetyl 
determinations were carried out by hydrolytic means 
according to the method of Pregl for the determina¬ 
tion of N acetyl compounds. 

This required the preparation of p-toluene 
sulphonic acid. The method of H. Meyer, as is given 
in "Laboratory Methods of Organic Chemistry" by 
G-atterman page 193, was used. This necessitated a 
special apparatus so that direct sulphonation could 
be Car nut. 



40 ml. of concentrated 



toluene were heated to 


In a 0.51. flask 



boiling on a sand bath. 
The water formed during 


sulphonation and some of 


the toluene distilled 


over and were condensed 


and collected in a trap 



































- 13 - 


When the trap filled to the overflow the toluene ran 
back to the reaction flask. When the volume of 
water reached 18 ml. the reaction was stopped by 
cooling. 

12.5 ml. of water were added to the flask. 

This caused the material to hydrate and solidify. 

This hydrated material was pressed on a pad of fil¬ 
ter paper to remove excess toluene and o-toluene 
sulphonic acid. The p-toluene sulphonic acid was 
dissolved in a minimum of hot water and 3 volumes 
of concentrated HCl were added. The p-toluene sul¬ 
phonic acid crystallized out on cooling and was 
collected in a sintered glass funnel. 

The acid was redissolved in hot water and boiled 
with charcoal. The clear filtrate was concentrated 
in vacuo and the p-toluene sulphonic acid was crys¬ 
tallized out on the addition of 3 volumes of con¬ 
centrated HCl. After about 5 recrystallizations 
from concentrated HCl most of the black decomposi¬ 
tion products were removed. M.P. 105°C. 

This p-toluene sulphonic acid was dissolved in 
water to make up a 25$ solution for the hydrolytic 


determinations. 








- 14 - 


The acetyl determination wa3 carried out accord¬ 
ing to the method of Pregl. Unexpected results were 
obtained in that the valves were twice too high for 
those required for acetyl by the formula C^H^N^O. 

An explanation for this behavior was sought 
and it could be explained on the assumption that the 
glyoxaline ring broke during hydrolysis to give for¬ 
mic acid according to the following equation: 


H-C-M 

jp -H H 2 0 CHg + HCOOH + ENHg + 


H-N-C- 

I 

0-0 


0 


OH 


CH, 


4-(or 5-) acetylamino- acetic formic 

glyoxaline acid acid 


EgC-BHg 

r 


OH 


glycine 


This breaking of the glyoxaline ring was shown to 
take place as no diazo test could be obtained from 
















- 15 - 


the residue in the flask, 

A qualitative test for formic acid was carried 
out on the distillate with ammoniacal silver oxide 
and with alkaline KMnO^. Both of these reagents 
were reduced by some constituent in the distillate 
and since formic acid was the only reducing acid 
which could be present it was assumed that this 
constituent was formic acid. 

The formic acid was determined by making the 
distillate from an acetyl determination alkaline 
with 5 ml. of 5N. NaOH and adding an excess of 
standard KMn0 4 . The solution was heated at 90°C 
and held at this temperature for 15 minutes. At 
the end of this time the solution was neutralized 
with HgS0 4 and 5 ml. of ION. HgSO^ were added in 
excess. To this acid solution was added standard 
Na^CgO^ in a slight excess. The excess oxalate 
was then titrated back to the first pink color with 
KMn0 4 . 

To the residue in the hydrolysis flask 2-3 ml. 
of 40 6 /o NaOH were added and distillation was carried 
out at a pressure below 15 mm. of Hg while heating 
the flask at 100°C. For this distillation the U- 
tube in the acetyl apparatus containing KHgPO^ was 















- 16 - 


removed. The ammonia distilled over was collected 
in standard 3ST/70 HCl and was determined in the 
usual way by back titration with N/70 NaOH. 

Glycine was shown to be present in the final 
residue, after the removal of all the NHg, formic 
acid and acetic acid, qualitatively, by Engel*s 
method. The residue was made slightly acid and 
a crystal of phenol was added and then a small 
amount of NaOCl. A blue color was obtained indicat 
ing the presence of glycine. 

The results obtained were calculated on the 
basis of the radical from which they were formed. 
Acetic acid as acetyl 33.71 fo; formic acid-C—H 
10.7^; ammonia as 24.2$. The formula 
requires: acetic acid as acetyl 34.4$; formic acid 
as £ C—H 10.4$?; ammonia as NgH 24.2$. These figures 
give the hydrolytic products as 1 mole of acetic 
acid, 1 mole of formic acid, and 2 moles of ammonia 
Since glycine was shown to be formed there must 
have been 1 mole of it formed. These figures are 
in agreement with the above equation. 










- 17 - 


Preparation and Isolation 
of 4-(or 5-) Aminoglyoxaline. 

Since all attempts to hydrolyse the 4— (or 5-) 
acetylaminoglyoxaline to obtain the free base in 
any quantities failed, it was necessary to use 
other methods to prepare this compound. The method 
elaborated for this purpose is described below. 

The following reagents are required. 

Reagents : 

(a) It was necessary to prepare 4-(or 5-) nitro- 
glyoxaline. This was done by the method of Fargher 
and Pyman with modifications by T. H. Evans (unpub¬ 
lished) and by the writer. 

50 grams of powdered tartaric acid were nitrated 
with 216 ml. of fuming OTOg and 250 ml. of concen¬ 
trated H2SO4. After standing at 0°C for 12 hours 
the dinitrotartaric acid was filtered off in a 
sintered glass funnel. The dinitrotartaric acid was 
dissolved in 300 grams of ice and water and cooled 
to -10°G. The acid was neutralized with concen¬ 
trated NH4OH and then an excess of 150 ml. of EH4OH 
was added keeping the temperature at -10°G. To 

this solution 150 ml. of 40 % formaldehyde was added 














- 18 - 


keeping the temperature below 0°C. After 12 hours 
the solution was acidified to Congo red paper with 
concentrated HGl. The free glyoxaline 4:5 dicarb- 
oxylic acid precipitated out and was filtered off. 

The dicarboxylic acid was decomposed to glyoxaline 
which was subsequently nitrated by the method of 
Fargher and Pyman. 

(b) Sodium amalgam was prepared by dissolving 3 grams 
of sodium in 97 grams of mercury. The sodium was 

cut into small cubes of about 2 mm. sides. These 
small cubes were submerged one at a time beneath the 
mercury. After the sodium was added the semi-solid 
amalgam was ground up in a mortar and stored in a 
glass stoppered bottle. 

(c) Pure picric acid was prepared from the commercial 
product by the method of Folin and Poisy as given 

in "Practical Physiological Chemistry" by Hawk and 
Bergeim. 

(d) Mercuric acetate solution was prepared by satur¬ 
ating a solution of S8 ml. anhydrous methanol and 

2 ml. of glacial acetic acid with mercuric acetate. 
Synthesis of 4-(or 5-) Aminoglyoxaline Dihydro ¬ 


chloride As 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline is very easily 








- 19 - 


hydro lysed especially in acid solution, the follow¬ 
ing method is designed to avoid fission of the 
glyoxaline ring by hydrolysis thus anhydrous reagents 
are used throughout and all solutions were kept in 
the temperature range of 0°C-10°C. 

1 gram of 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline was sus¬ 
pended in 150 ml. of methanol and cooled to 0°C in 
an ice bath. When the temperature was at 0°C and 

all the air expelled from the flask by bubbling 

\ 

nitrogen into it, 50 grams of sodium amalgam were 
added. The suspension was then stirred vigorously 
with a motor to keep the amalgam from settling to 
the bottom of the flask. When reduction was com¬ 
plete as judged by the diazo test, (usually 15 min¬ 
utes), the dirty bluish solution was decanted off 
and the remaining amalgam was washed 3 times with 
15 ml. portions of methanol. 

To the alkaline solution was added sufficient 
of the acidic solution of HgfCgHgOgJg in methanol 
to completely precipitate all the material from 
solution. The precipitate was centrifuged off and 
washed with 200 ml. of water. This removed more of 








.. ) ' 











- 20 - 


the impurities than washing with methanol alone. 

As a mercury salt the glyoxaline is relatively 
stable in aqueous solutions* Then the precipitate 
was washed three times with 150 ml. portions of 
methanol after which it was assumed that all the 
water was removed. The precipitate was then sus¬ 
pended in methanol and dry HC1 was bubbled in until 
the mercury suspension tended to settle out rapid¬ 
ly. HgS was then bubbled into the suspension until 
all the mercury was precipitated as HgS. During 
this treatment with HCl and HgS the suspension was 
immersed in an ice bath. The HgS was centrifuged 
off and washed four times with 150 ml. portions of 
methanol. The supernatant solution and washings 
were combined and evaporated in vacuo to about £0 
ml.. The concentrated solution was filtered through 
a sintered glass funnel into a 3 cm. side arm tube. 
The dark brown solution was then concentrated in 
vacuo to 5-6 ml. and treated with dry HCl at 0°C 
until precipitation was complete. The crystalline 
material was then collected in a Schwinger*s vacuum 
filter and washed with several small portions of 
cold methanol solution and finally with cold pure 














- 21 - 


diethyl ether. 

The orude 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline hydro¬ 
chloride was dissolved in a minimum volume of oold 
methanol and reprecipitated by the addition of an 
equal volume of pure diethyl ether. The grey 
crystalline material was collected in a Schwinger 
vacuum filter and washed with several 0.5 ml. por¬ 
tions of one to one ether methanol solution and 
then with pure diethyl ether. The filtrate and 
washings were then treated with an equal volume of 
diethyl ether on which treatment a second crop of 
crystals came down. These were also filtered off 
and washed with 3:1 ether methanol solution and 
then with pure diethyl ether. M.P. 184°C uncorrected. 
Yield 30$ of the theoretical for the dihydrochloride. 

Nitrogen and chloride determinations were carried 
out on several samples of this material. The re¬ 
sults obtained on two samples were as follows: 

I: N 26.83$; Cl 44.90$. 

II: M 26.83$; Cl 45.47$. 

The formula C2H5N3 2HC1 requires K 26.93$; and Cl 
45.48$. 

A pure preparation of the substance is not easy 






-2S- 


to obtain. When its methanol solution is evapor¬ 
ated crusts of crystals of cube and spar shape 
progressively form on the sides of the tube. When 
a drop of the saturated solution is put on a micro¬ 
scope slide beautiful spars showing strong 
pleochroism under crossed Nicols make their appear¬ 
ance. The microcrystalline material, formed rapid¬ 
ly on the addition of excess ether, carries with it 
considerable pigment. Excess HCl should be present 
during recrystallization. 

Synthesis of 4-(or 5-) Aminoglyoxaline Picrate In 

the preparation of the 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline 
picrate the nitroglyoxaline was reduced as above 
and mercuric acetate was added. After washing the 
mercury precipitate as above it was suspended in 
150 ml. of methanol and 3 grams of purified picric 
acid were added. The glyoxaline was then freed 
from the mercury with HgS and the HgS formed was 
removed by centrifugation and was washed with four, 
150 ml# portions of methanol# 

The supernatant solution and washings were com¬ 
bined and concentrated in vacuo to 20 ml.. This 


was filtered into a sidearm tube and concentrated 




















- 23 - 


to a volume where small needles were beginning to 
crystallize out (as could be seen under the micro¬ 
scope). The precipitated material was filtered off 
and washed with two 1 ml. portions of cold methanol 
and then discarded. The filtrate and washings were 
concentrated to about 0.5 ml. and the crystalline 
material was collected in a sintered glass funnel. 
This material was washed several times with benzene 
to remove the excess picric acid and then with two 
0.5 ml. portions of cold ethanol. 

The resulting material was redissolved in 
absolute ethanol. The ethanol solution was con¬ 
centrated to about 0.5 ml. and the needle-like 
crystals were filtered off and washed twice with 
.5 ml. portions of cold absolute ethanol. The yield 
of pure substance was 25$ of the theoretical. M.P. 
194°C uncorrected. 

Picric acid determinations were carried out on 
this material using nitron to precipitate the picric 
acid according to the method of Cope and Barab. 

The result was 57.88$ picric acid. The formula 
( 03115 ^ 3 ) 2 *C 5 H 3 N 3 O 7 requires 58.1$ picric acid. 






































■ 








- 24 - 


Various acids besides picric acid and HCl were 
tried for the salt formation with 4-(or 5-) amino¬ 
glyoxaline. Some of these were: flavianic acid, 
p-phenolsulphonic acid, citric acid, tartaric acid 
and benzoic acid. None of these acids formed salts. 
This was probably due to the fact that these acids 
were added to the solution after the mercury glyox- 
aline precipitate had been decomposed with HgS. All 
attempts to isolate the hydrochloride or picric 
under these conditions likewise failed. 

In this synthesis and isolation it is important 
to keep the time of preparation to a minimum. It 
can be carried out in 6 hours. If the solution is 
allowed to stand under HgS too long after the HgS 
is precipitated almost complete destruction of the 
4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline results. At all time*the 
temperature should be kept below 10°C. 

No silver fractionation was carried out while 
isolating this material as excessive destruction 
takes place. This is probably due to the fact that 
HNOg was liberated which oxidizes the 4-(or 5-) 
aminoglyoxaline. 

A methanol solution of 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline 






- 25 - 


piorate was treated with KCNO and glacial acetic 
acid. To 100 mg of the picrate in 10 ml. of methanol 
were added 0.5 grams of KCKO and 2 ml. of glacial 
acetic acid. After standing at room temperature 
for four days the blue diazo test was completely 
replaced by a bright red test indicating the synthesis 
of 4-(or 5-) carbamidoglyoxaline (Hunter and Hlynka, 
1937). 

4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline dihydrochloride 
and picrate are readily soluble in water, methanol 
and ethanol. They are insoluble in benzene, acetone, 
and diethyl ether. The latter two reagents can be 
used to precipitate these salts from their methanol 
solutions. 

4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline dihydrochloride 
and picrate give a brilliant blue color with Koessler 
and Hanke diazo reagent in quantities as small as 
are visible to the eye. In this respect it behaves 
like 4-(or 5-) guanidinoglyoxaline (Hunter 1936). 

It also gives a positive Rothera test with sodium 
nitroprusside in coneentrations as small as for the 
diazo test. The guanidino compound does not give 
this test. By means of these two tests it is pos- 





- 26 - 


aible to distinguish between 4-(or 5-) amino 
glyoxaline and 4-(or 5-) guanidinoglyoxaline 






- 27 - 


CONCLUSIONS 

4-(or 5-) acetylaminoglyoxaline has been pre¬ 
pared by the reduction of 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline 
with simultaneous acetylation of the product. The 
composition of the product has been confirmed by 
elemental analysis and by a quantitative study of 
its products of hydrolysis. 

4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline has been prepared by 
the reduction of 4-(or 5-) nitroglyoxaline with 
sodium amalgam in methanol solution. Methods for 
the isolation of two of its salts, the dihydro¬ 
chloride and the picrate have been described. 

The isolation of 4-(or 5-) aminoglyoxaline 
offers a new and highly reactive glyoxaline for 
chemical and physiological study. 















. 





. 













BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Cope and Barab (1917) 

J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 

51. 

504 

Engel (1875) 

Berichte 

8 , 

699 

Fargher (1920) 

J. Chem, Soc. 

111 , 

669 


J. Chem. Soc. 

115. 

217 

Fischer (1910) 

Berichte 

£3. 

805 

Hunter (1936) 

Biochem. J. 

30, 

1183 

-. (1936) 

Biochem. J. 

30, 

1189 

- and Hlynka (1937) 

Biochem. J. 

31, 

488 

Xoessler and Hanke (1919) 

J. Biol. Chem. 

39, 

49 7 

Meyer (1923) 

Ann. 

433. 

331 

Pregl Quantitative Organic Microanalysis(Blaekiston) 

p. 197 

Rothera (1908) 

J. Physiol. 

37, 

491 

Schmidt (1883) 

Ann. 

217. 

308 

Weidenhagen and Herrman ( 

1935) Berichte 

68_, 

2205 

Wulff (1893) 

Z. Physiol. Chem. 

17, 

473 





































