




e 


mmssiwis 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/surveyofgermanspOOgerw 





of fl fla ifiL- 

Department of Modern Languages 

A SURVEY OF THE GERMAN- SPEAKING 
POPULATION OF ALBERTA 

A thesis submitted to 
The Committee on Graduate Studies 


by 

Elizabeth Barbara Gerwin 


Edmonton, Alberta, 


April 1938 
























































• • ■ - ■ 




























References Consulted 


1. Canadian Census 1931, and 1936 Census of PrairAe 
Provinces* 

2 . Records of Companies Branch, Department of Education, 
Department of Public Health and Deaprtment of 
Public Welfare of Alberta Provincial Legislature. 

3. Robert England. The Central European Immigrant^in 

Western Canada. Macmillan Pub. Co. 1929. 

The Colonization of western Canada. 
King, London. 1936. 

4 . Kate A. Foster. Our Canadian Mosaic. YWCA • 1926. 

5. C.B. Sissons. Bi-Lingual Schools in Canada. 

J.M.Dent and Sons, Toronto. 1918. 

6. C.M.MacInnes. In the Shadow of the Rockiest 

Rivingtons* London* 1930. 

7. John Blue. Alberta Past and Present* Pioneer 

Historical Publishing Co., Chicago. 1924. 

8 . Leibert, Rev. Morris W., Bruederfeld and Brueder- 

heim. Extracts from the 
Report of an Official 
Visitation, 1896. 

Moravian Publishing Concern, Bethlehem, 
Pennsylvania, 1896. 

9. R.E.Zuar. Chronik des Deutschtums in Alberta, 

Heft 1, 1934. national Publishers Ltd., 
Winnipeg, Manitoba. 

10. Jahrbuch 1937 der Allgemeinen Konferenz der L enno- 
niten in Canada* D.H.Epp, Rosthem, Saskatchewan. 

11. Die siebente Vertreterversammlung der mexmonitischen 
Ansiedler Albertas am 15 und 16 Juli, 1937. 

D.H.Epp, Rosthem, Saskatchewan. 

12. Die Mennoniten Gemeinde in Russland 1914 bis 1920. 

Kommissions-Verlag, 

Heilbronn am Neckar 1921. 

13. John Horsch. The Hutterian Brethren 1628 - 1931 . 
Mennonite Historical Society, Goshen, Indiana, 1931- ' 

/ , / 







/ 




. . 




- s .. 




• • ‘ ' • . f l 

I [ r f 

■ 


♦ . : -V. : . 

, 














14 . 

Bertha W. Clark. The Hutterian Communities. 

The Journal of Political Economy. 

Vol XXX11 No. 4, August 1924. 

15. Lydia Mueller. Der Kommunismus der m&hrischen 

wiedertaufer, Leipzig. 1927. 

16. Edna Kells. Hutterite Commune. Maclean*s Magazine, 

March 15, 1937. 

Everard 

17. -£dw«*r«L Clarke. Hutterite Barm Colonies Thrive. 

Calgary Daily Herald, Saturday, 

May 27, 1933. 

18 . Einige Fragen mid ihre Beantwortung fur die 
reifere Jugend. Die Hutterischen Era der in Minerika. 






COOT ENTS 


Introduction 

Page 1 

Chapter 1. 

Historical Review* 

12 

Chapter 11 

0 ccup at i ons • Survey • 

68 

Chapteijm. 


Religious Affiliations 

91 

Chapter 1Y 


Organizations 

106 

Chapter Y. 


Citizenship 

123 


Chapter YL. 

Maintenance of the 

German Language 143 

Chapter Yd* 

General Conclusions 176 

Appendix of Photographs* 





A SURVEY OF TILS GhLJ.T/SPEAKING POPULATION 

OF AL33ATA 


Introduction 

Several reasons determined the choice of 
the German-speaking people of Alberta as a topic 
for postgraduate research at the University of 
Alberta. It becomes increasingly evident that the 
facts concerning various immigrant contributions 
and the language situation in this province have 
never been gathered together, hasty generalizations 
and often entirely unwarranted opinions are the 
bases of conclusions formed with regard to these 
matters and the real material, contained here and 
there in statistical records and in the minds and 
lives of the people themselves, is seldom if ever 
sought out and consulted. Should officials of 
public administration wish to include a thorough 
consideration of human factors such as language, 
customs and creed in their policies, they would 
find themselves confronted with a project which 
involves a great deal more time than is at their 
disposal* the facts are scattered here and there 
in any number of sources and to obtain and compile 
them is not the work of a moment. 









2 . 

The Department of Modern Languages and the 
University itself are in some ways directly 


affected by the linguistic situation in the 
province and have seen fit to allow a survey of 
this kind to be made under their direction. 


The largest non-British group in Alberta is 
comprised of those whom the Census terms "of German 


origin". The following are the figures of stated 
origins for Alberta appearing in the 1936 Census 


of the Prairie Provinces 

: # 

British 

400,135 

German 

90,961 

Ukrainian 

63,073 

French 

39,800 

Norwegian 

28, 435 

Swedish 

20,089 

Polish 

24,060 

Dutch 

12,977 

Russian 

12,678 

Indian 

12,009 

Smaller groups 

68,548 

Total 

772,782 


he number of German birth was 7529 and of German 
citizenship 3229. The number who gave their 
mother tongue as German wss 74,587. The object 


# Twenty-three Bulletin© of this Census have been 
distributed to date. Other figures and tables have 
been based on the Dominion Census 1931, which is now 


in the last stages of completion. 












of this survey is to estimate the group consciousness 
of settlers of German speech, their contribution, 
the results of methods of settlement followed* to 
propose a policy to follo^w in assisted internal 
resettlement or in the event of recurrence of a 
large influx of Gemman-speaking people into Alberta* 
to observe the state of preservation of the German 
language and the reasons determining it, and finally 
to present the case for making German available in 
more of Alberta* s schools since it is included in 
the curriculum, 

A University of Alberta Research Scholarship 
made it financially possible for me to visit German 
language settlements in the Peace River district and 
in northern, central and southern Alberta. I had no 
difficulty in gathering information and was made 
welcome both by virtue of my German-Canadian parentage 
and because I have some knowledge of the German 
language, literature and music. 

An explanation of terminology should be given 
here, to make clear the fact that it is the linguistic 
group and not the origin group which has been studied. 
The Canadian Census uses an "origin” classification 
for which the population is asked to state i/s "racial" 










4 

origin as derived from the male line of descent. 

This data is deemed useful for purposes of inter¬ 
preting the history of the flow of immigration and 
tracing the progress of the assimilative process. 

The term "racial origin" as used hy the census ALWAYS 
connotes the original geographic habitat of a 
population group, USUALLY implies a distinct culture 
and OFTEi a definite biological strain^ the divisions 
are: British races, European races, Asiatic races 
and Various, with subdivisions based in the main on 
political boundaries. In view of the fact that mos£ 
reputable biologists regard race as a purely biolo¬ 
gical concept, and that as a biological classification 
race has no necessary connection whatever with 
geographical or cultural aspects of civilisation, 
the term race has been avoided in this survey in order 
not to employ it with other than biological significance 
The Census admits the practical difficulty in the 
classification by "racial origins" with regard to 
linguistic significance. This is particularly true 
of German, for people Whose language is German are 
included under Roumanian, Austrian, Polish and 
Hussian "races". A classification by mother tongue 
showed 63,410 persons in Alberta in 1931 whose mother 
tongue is German, yet only 48,594 of these were 





5 

included in the "German origin" classification. 

Cultural significance with respect to people of 
German speech can best he represented by reference 
to birthplacd and citizenship. 

Hence the terminology of this survey includes 
Reicisdertsch: immigrants of German citizenship; 

German Canadian: naturalized Reichsdeutsfch; 

Russian German, Polish German, Austrian German, 

United 3tates-born German, etc: immigrants born in 
Russia, Poland, Austria, United States etc whose 
mouther tongue is German qualified as nat¬ 

uralized or alien); Canadian-born of German-speaking 
parentage: children of the above. The following 
figures for these groups in Alberta were obtained 
from Table 62, Vol.1V of 1931 Census: 


Reichsdeutsch 4534 

German Canadian 3587 

Total German born 8121 
Russian German 10129 

Polish German 4111 

Austrian German 1537 

United State s-born German 758 6 


Canadian-born of G/spkg. yerwtape 27935 

59419 

The addition of smaller groups born elsewhere than 
the above brings the total number whose mother tongue 
is German to 63,410 for Alberta 1931. 









6 

The following table reveals their proportion 
to the total population of Alberta classified by 


birthplace; 



Mo, in whole 

Birthplace No 

. German 

mother tongue 

of Alberta 

Canada 

27 

935 

425 

867 

British Isles 


96 

106 

781 

" Possessions 


45 

1 

984 

Austria 

1 

537 

4 

083 

Belgium 


38 

1 

528 

C zecho Slovakia 


411 

4 

496 

Finland 


3 

1 

330 

France 


54 

1 

759 

Germany 

7 

78S 

8 

121 

Holland 


72 

2 

466 

Hungary 


465 

4 

367 

ItAly 


9 

2 

321 

Jugoslavia 


233 

1 

231 

Poland 

4 

111 

31 

756 

Romania 

1 

638 

8 

202 

Russia 

10 

129 

15 

561 

Scandinavian Count. 


103 

21 

965 

Ukraine 


72 

1 

767 

Other European Countries 

1 

013 

2 

683 

Asiatic Countries 


2® 

4 

121 

United States 
Elsewhere 

7 

586 

51 

78 

959 # 
257 

63 410 

731 

605 


# Of these 14 387 gave their origin as German, 


Through introductory work with maps of the 
province and census tables stating origins of the 
population by municipalities I determined the 
approximate locations of the people who had stated 
themselves to be of German origin, A Census map of 
the province with a table of percentages 












7 

for the largest" origin M groupe in the seventeen 
census divisions of Alberta is here included, although 
the linguistic significance of this table cannot 
be accepted in its entirety. I then visited com¬ 
munities from the Peace River district to Lethbridge 
and Medicine Hat and became interested in the settle¬ 
ment of the province, the historical backgrounds of 
the immigrants and how they faced the problems 
which have confronted them since their arrival.. The 
widely differing types of German-speaking settlers 
and their corresponding religious organizations was 
at once apparent. I set out to determine the time 
of arrival, the experience and the outlook of the 
people I met and gradually found myself able to 
anticipate the replies to my questions, without the 
assurance of these personal interviews, informal, 
unexpected and brief as most of them were, the views 
expressed here would lack the human basis upon which 
I have tried to found them. I therefore acknowledge 
a great debt of gratitude to several hundreds of persons 
who courteously and willingly advanced information. 

On the other hand I acknowledge the valuable assistance 
and insight gained from statutes, books and articles 
which are the results of research and of administrative 





policies dealing with problems arising out of 
immigration. 

Census map of Alberta. 


















































































































































































































9 


"origin" 

Largest IHUIgXXKX groups in each census division, 
(deduced from 1931 census) 


Piyj-.BipR. 1 

(28 849 pop) 

fiiXifiion. 2 

(67 186) 

British 

52% 

British 

54% 

GSRMAN 

22% (62 33) 

GERMAN 

(6083) 

Scandinavian 

9% 

Scandinavian 

6% 

Iiussian 

6% 

Czechoslovakian 4% 

French 

2% 

Dutch 

3% 



French 

3% 



Indian 

3% 



Italian 

2 1/8 % 



Polish 

2 1/2 % 



Hungarian 

2 1/2 % 

Division 3 

(15 066) 



British 

42% 



GERMAN 

17% (2688) 



Scandinavian 

14% 



Russian 

7% 



Dutch 

4% 



Division 4 

(29 067) 

Division 6 

(26 651) 

British 

65& 

British 

68% 

Scandinavian 

10% 

GERMAN 

14% (3763) 

GERMAN 

9% (2623) 

Scandinavian 10% 

Russian 

3% 

Russian 

4% 

French 

3% 



Division 6 (140 6241 



British 

63% 



GERMAN 

8% (10669) 



Scandinavian 

6% 



Russian 

3% 



French 

2 1/2% 















10 


Division ? 

(38 106) 



British 

56% 



Scandinavian 

14% 



GERMAN 

13,./ (5182) 



Branch 

6% 



Division 8 

(61 016) 



British 

62% 



Scandinavian 

17% 

Division 9 

(24 503) 

GERMAN 

14% (8586) 



Polish 

2 1/2% 

British 

66% 

French 

2% 

Scandinavian 14 v 

Dutch 

2% 

GERMAN 

7* (1812) 

Indian 

2% 

Finnish 

6% 

Division 10 

(53 049) 

Division 11 

(126 832) 

Ukrainian 

41% 

British 

58% 

British 

31% 

GERMAN 

12% (15382) 

GERMAN 

6% (3380) 

French 

6% 

Polish 

6% 

Ukrainian 

6% 

Scandinavian 

5% 

Scandinavian 

5% 

Division 12 

(13 815) 

Division 13 $24 936) 

British 

50% 

French 

25% 

GERMAN 

10% (1467) 

Ukrainian 

25 % 

Scandinavian 

10% 

British 

20% 

Polish 

6% 

Indian 

7% 

Ukrainian 

5% 

Scandinavian 

7% 



Polish 

&% 



GERMAN 

3 1/2% (868) 

Division 14 

(39 508) 

Division 15 

(13 664) 

British 

33.3% 

British 

33.3/(? 

Ukrainian 

25% 

French 

25% 

French 

13% 

Indian 

16% 

GERMAN 

7% (3154) 

Scandinavian 

6% 



Ukrainian 

5% 



GERMAN 

5% (639) 

















11 


Division 16 

(27 945) 

Division 17 

(5 788) 

British 

60% 

Indian&Kskimo 60% 

Scandinavian 

15% 

British 

20% 

GERMAN 

10% (2854) 

Frenhh 

6% 

French 

6% 

Scandinavian 

4% 

Polish 

6% 

Ukrainian 

4% 

Ukrainian 

5% 

GERMAN 

3% (168) 

Indian 

6% 



Cities with 

over 10 000 population (1931) 

• 

m 

Edmonton (79 197) 

Calgary (83 761) 

British 

70% 

British 

78% 

GERMAN 

6% (4983) 

GERMAN 

4.6% (3761) 

Ukrainian 

«.#% 

Scandinavian 

4% 

French 

4.5% 

French 

2% 

Scandinavian 

3.6% 

Hebrew 

2% 

Lethbridge 

(13 489) 

Medicine Hat 

(10 300) 

British 

69% 

British 

70% 

Austrian 

6% 

GERMAN 

14% (1477) 

GERMAN 

4% (54 5) 

Scandinavian 

3% 

Scandinavian 

4% 

Russian 

3% 



French 

2% 












12 

Chapter 1. HISTORICAL REVIEW 

The Era Before Land Settlement 
A backward glance over the history of the territory 
which is now known as the Province of Alberta reveals 
that it has its beginnings ia the era of the Indian, 
the fur trader and the explorer. During this era 
tribal rule and company rule were supreme. The 
movement of the buffalo and fur bearing animals, 
wars between Indian groups, rivalry between the 
Hudson 1 s Bay and North West Trading Companies and 
the added competition with the American trader in 

the south were the factors which determined the measure 

o 

of the white man's development of the country. 
Colonization was at that time rendered impossible 
by trade monopolies, lawlessness and isolation. 

The slow westward movement of Canadian settlers, 
following rivers and trails, would naturally reach 
the region of Alberta last, so that what settlers 
there were in the southern part during pre-railway 
days were mainly American emigrants. 

The Prairies became part of the Dominion of 
Canada in 1870, after two important issues had been 
cleared. 1) The Hudson's Bay Company surrendered its 
monopoly of rights in Rupert's Land in return for 
three hundred thousand pounds in money, together with 




« 




■ 




13 


some 50*000 acres in the vicinity of its posts and 
1/20 of all lands that might be laid out for settle¬ 
ment in the next fifty years. 2)The hopes of the 
United States for the annexing of Selkirk, Saskatchewan 
and Columbia to the Union were crashed with the Riel 
Rebellion of 1869-70. Thus Canada under Sir John 
Macdonald was able to satisfy itself that the Territories 
were being taken over "in good order" and hence assume 
the task of developing the vast area between the 
Red River and the Rocky Mountains. 

The whisky trade and epidemics of smallpox, the 

first of which occurred in 1780 with subsequent outbreaks 

spreading over a period of ninety years, followed by 

the sudden disappearance of the buffalo in the early 
^ eighteen 

i eighties played havoc with the Indians, pitiably 
reducing their prestige as well as their numbers. 

A mounted police force was established by Act of 
Parliament in May 1873, whose duty was to keep order 
in the Canadian West. It established Fort kacleod 
and two other forts in 1874, and Fort Oalgary in 1875. 

It dealt severely with the whisky trade and faced all 
new problems which developed (such as horse-stealing, 
cattle-killing, incendiarism and undue use of weapons) 
with the steadfast purpose of establishing control of 

. 











14 

,*rime in the whole of the west. Indians, ranchers, 
settlers and miners soon owed much to its protection. 

During the 1870s a series of treaties between the 
Dominion Government and the Indians resulted in the 
surrender of the Indian territory in the organised 
districts and helped to cldar the way for an era of 
Land settlement and further of development of mines. 
Before the completion of the transcontinental line of 
the Canadian Pacific Railway which reached Calgary in 
L883 Alberta was, however, totally unconscious of 
any great future agriculturally. With the influx of 
population which the railway brought in to see the 
territory, its agricultural possibilities were recog¬ 
nized and ideas for its future formed. 

Ranching was for many years the chief new develop¬ 
ment in Alberta. "After 1880 the number of stockmen ## 
steadily increased. A few small ranchers established 
themselves that year in different parts of the country. 


## C.H. Maclnnes. In the Shadow of the Rockies, p.208 












15 

while the big companies were either in process of 
formation or busily engaged in buying cattle. By 
1884, forty-one companies and private individuals 
held a total of two million seven hundred and eighty- 
two thousand six hundred and ninety acres in Southern 
Alberta, mainly in the foothill region from Calgary 

south to the boundary line. Of these six were one- 

d 

hundred-thou sari-acre leaseholds, and ten were fifty- 
thousand, In addition to the leaseholders, there 
were also many cattlemen who ran their stock loose 
on the open range, A beginning had been made not 
aniy in Calgary, high Eiver and kacleod districts, 
out also in the Lethbrigge area, and west of kacleod 
on the north, middle and south forks of the Old kan 
iiver.,, H 

Between 1884 and 1894 the Canadian Pacific 
hailway and the Dominion Government, by terminating 
i.arge leases of grazing lands and restricting fufcther 
leases, supported the cause of agricultural settle¬ 
ment and embarked upon a policy which was destined 
to reduce the ranching industry to its present small 
proportions and to induce thousands of homesteaders to 
break and till the prairie and parklands of Alberta, 

On the decline of the ranching industry C,k,kaclnnes 

















16 


states: # 

"Indeed it was largely chance that enabled 
this industry to last as long as it did. The comple¬ 
tion of the Canadian Pacific hailway, which was 
ultimately to prove the means to its extinction 
because of the easy access it provided to the home¬ 
steaders, at first brought great prosperity. For 
several years after 1885 the total number of farmers 
was insignificant. This was due to a variety of causes, 
among which not the least important for some time was 
the fear of an Indian rebellion, resulting from the 
rising of 1885, Further, the belief based largely upon 
Palliser's report as well as upon those of later 
visitors to the country, that Southern Alberta was 
largely an arid waste, also did something to discourage 
settlement. Incidentally, the ranchers did their best 
to support this theory, for they, like the Hudson's 
Bay Company before them, though for different reasons, 
were averse to the country being filled up with home¬ 
steaders, The lack of adequate transportation facili¬ 
ties away from the main line of the Canadian Pacific 


# C.M. Maclnnes. In the Shadow of the Rockies. p24S-9 









17 

Railway, also discouraged farmers. The policy 
of the Railway Company itself further retarded immi¬ 
gration! as it preferred to hold its own lands until 
most of the free Dominion lanu had been disposed of, 
in order to obtain a good price. This policy however, 
by leaving vast areas of vacant land along the main 
line, led many prospective settlers to return to their 
homes in the East or the Old Country, with the impression 
that it was desolate. Lastly, the acquisition of large 
tracts of land by immigration companies that were in 
reality worthless speculating ventures also hindered 
settlement. 

ft But despite all,. .immigrants steadily came 
in until the small trickle of the late ‘eighties had 
beoome a vast torrent in 1905. On the whole, it was 
probably a good thing for the country that the ranch 
should yield place to the farm. Ranching was a wasteful 
method of live-stock production, which rendered much 
good farm land useless. But while this is so, it is 
nevertheless very much to be doubted whether the Ca2R- 
nadian Government was wholly wise in its cynical disre¬ 
gard of the ranchers' interests. After all, however waste¬ 
ful tiieir method may have been, they had done great things 
for the country, and had made it not only fit to live 





18 

in, but famous in many parts of the world* Moreover, 
many areas were now set aside for homesteads which 
should have been left as grazing grounds for steers, 
and undoubtedly some place for a ranching industry, 
on a fairly extensive scale, should have been found in 
the new province of Alberta*' 1 

Disposal of Land* 

"ith the period of land settlement begins the role of 
the German-speaking people in the historical drama of 
Alberta's Advertising propaganda, land- 

hunger, thirst for adventure and dissatisfaction under 
restricted privileges and opportunities in the older 
countries brought them to the West* 

Preparatory to their coming the Dominion 
Lands Act of 1872 was passed and a system of land 
survey worked out* 

The Dominion Lands Act has resulted in the 
disposal of the organized territory of Alberta by the 

following methods* 

1* Half-breed scrip. 

2. Hudson's Bay reservations* 

3. Reservations for the support of education. 

4. Military bounty lands. 

5. Homesteads and preemptions. 

6. Grants to railway companies. 

7* Sales to colonization companies* 

8. Sale or lease of grazing lands* 

9. Sale or lease of mining lands. 

10. Sales not exceeding one section, at cost of $1 
pier acre, to private individuals. 

11* Grants to original white settlers who were born 












19. 

in the North ^est Territories or were resident prior 

to July 15, lOo. 

12. Indian reservations, 

13. Soldier Settlement grants. 

# The land was surveyed "fa. ranges, running 

north from the 49tM parallel and numbered westward 
from a meridian line .Each range, which is six 
miles wide from east to west, is divided into town¬ 
ships containing thirty-six square miles, or twenty- 
three thou shad and forty acres of land, in addition 
to read allowances. The townships, which are numbered 
north from the boundary line, are divided into sections 
each of which contains six hundred and forty acres. 

The sections are numbered consecutively, beginning 
with the south-east corner of the township, and thence 
to the south-west corner, then back along the second 
line from west to east, and westward along the third 
row, and so on. Thus, section one is in the south¬ 
east corner, section twelve immediately above it, 
section thirteen immediately above that and section 
thirty-six in the northeast corner. For the sake of 
convenience, each sectionis subdivided into quarter- 
sections which are referred to as south-east, south¬ 
west. north-east and north-west. The result is that 
by description of a quarter-section, the number of 
a section, township, range and meridian, its exact 
locality on the map can at once be discovered. 

"Each township contains six roads running 
north and south, and three running east and west. 

While this arrangwent may leave much to be desired 
in the realm of aesthetics, it is at least convenient 
and the absolute chequer-board appearance of the 
country is to some extent relieved by variations 
caused by rivers and other topographical features. 

The adjustments rendered necessary in the townships 


# C.M.MacInnes. in the Shadow of the ^ockies. p.254 












20 . 

by the curvature of the earth are provided for by 
correction lines, which produce alight breaks in the 
road along the township line every twenty-four 
miles north.” 

It is 1.) Hudson Bay, 2) railway and 3) colo¬ 
nisation companies 1 lands, in addition to 4)homesteads 
and preemptions, which have been taken up and worked 
by settlers of Gennan speech. To some extent military 
bounty lands have also been acquired by them as a 
number purchased South African scrip after it was made 
negotiable. This scrip entitled volunteers domiciled 
in Canada who served with the British forces in South 
Africa during the Years 1899-1902 to be entered for 
one-half section of available homestead lands, subject 
to the usual homestead regulations. 

1) Hudson's Bay Company lands included 

over two and one-quarter million acres in Alberta* 

Sections 8 and 26 in every fifth row of townships and 

of 

Section 8 and 3/4^Section 26 in each and every other 
township were reserved for this company by provision 
of the Dominion Lands Act. 

2) Grants of lend to railway companies amounted 
to over thirteen million acres in Alberta when they 
ceased in 1897. Active settlement of these lands did 
not take place until tha beginning of the present centuy 

3) Between 1881 and 1886 Colonization com?- 











21 

panies were allowed to purchase large tracts of unapprp- 

priated Dominion lands situated over twenty-four miles 

north of the main line of the Canadian Pacific Hailway 

and at least twelve miles from any northern railway 

line. "Two plans were adopted: # 

Plan No. l~Odd numbered sections were sold at $2 
per acre payable in five years. In return the companies 
agreed to place within five years from the date of 
purchase, two settlers on each section. The settler 
received 160 acres as a homestead and the right to 
purchase the adjoining quarter at ip2 per acre. At the 
end of the five-year period the company received a 
rebate of one-half the original purchase price of the 
odd numbered sections. 

Plan No.2—To encourage settlement by capitalists who 
desired to cultivate larger farms than under the first 
plan large tracts in Class D(over 24 miles noifth of 
the CPR transcontinental line and 12 miles from branch 
lines) were sold at $2 per acre cash upon condition that 
the colonization company would agree to place 128 
settlers in each township within five years. If this 
condition was fulfilled the company received a rebate 
of one-half the original purchase price. By the end 
of 1883 over 26 companies were operating in the Ncrth 
West Territories and had purchased 2,973,978 acres of 
land from the Government for the sum of ^867,465. 

An inspection of 12 out of the 26 indicated that 664 
heads of families had been attracted to the country by 
the coi^anies. This method of settlement was never popular 
with the people of v<*estex*n Canada." 

4) The greater part, however, of Alberta's farm lands 

were first acquired by the method of "filing on homesteads 

by the settlers themselves upon their arrival in the 


# John Blue .Alberta Past and Present, p 200 
















22 

country. Hcttstead rights were stated as follows in 
the Dominion Lands Act fcf 1872: Section 33. "Any 
person who is the head of a family, or has attained 
the age of 21 years shall be entitled to be entered 
for one quarter section or less quantity of unappro¬ 
priated Dominion lands for the purpose of securing 
a right in respect thereof. " The age limit has been 
lower in ALbertaj ^r. John Blue states (1924): 
"Regulations governing homestead entry remain sub¬ 
stantially the same as those first issued in 1870. 

Every male person over 18 years of age who is a 
British subject or declares his intention to become 
such is entitled to obtain entry. jrpon payment of a 
fee of $10. A widow having minor children of her own 
dependent upon her may make homestead entry. 

Application must be made by the applicant in person 
atlthe Dominion Land Office or sub-office in which the 
land is situated. Entry by proxy is permitted only 

in the case of a father, son, brother, or sister." 

Patents have been issued for homestead lands 
upon fulfilment of residence requirements spread over 
three consecutive years, the tilling of a stated number 


# Alberta Past and Present. pl99 











23 

of acres (thirty and less, varying with the district), 
and the receipt of Canadian citzenship papers* 

Rresmption fcights gave a prior claam. 
to the purchase of an adjoining quarter section 

to successful homesteaders during the periods 1871-90 

and 1908-14* In the latter period the area in which 

pre-emptions were granted was restricted to the central 

part of the province, where summer-fallowing was 

a regular practice and larger acreage was required. 

Here the homesteader paid $3 per acre for his adjoining 

quarter section. 

Thus 160 acres or, with preemptions, one Half- 
section was judged to be sufficient land to nourish 
one settler and his family. This has proven to be not 
enough in most parts of Alberta, as is shown by the 
movement of the settlers. Parklands, many acres heavily 
treed, were preferred by the greater number of the 
early comers, it being generally recognized that irri¬ 
gation would be necessary in the prairies of southern 
Alberta. 

These are the factors which affected the 
acquiring of land by immigrants of all speeches. The 
number and places of settlement of German speaking 
immigrants follows a consideration of the method and 
reasons concerning their immigration. 










24 

Immigration 


The immigrants which Canada has preferred first of 

all are British. Secondly she has preferred SmUutam 

Europeans on the grounds that these care readily 

assimilable with the British. Thirdly she has selected 

who are linguistically and 

south-eastern Europeans, 

culturally farther removed from northern Europeans 
(those of German speech to some extent excluded) 
and slower to be assimilated. 

Pre-war immigration *laws were neceasily 
lax. The United States was a formidable competitor in 
the attraction of settlers and Canada was generally 
considered as second choice despite the glowing terms 
used by her Continental agents in inducing emigrants to 
proceed to her shores. Immigration was most ardently 
wooed from the beginning of the Laurier Government in 
1896 with **r. Clifford sifton as minister of the 
Interior, until the period of the Great War, in an 
effort to populate the vast territory of the Canadian 
West. Immigration was to provide means and willing 
hands for its further industrial development as well 
as revenue for the railway systems which had already 
invested huge sums in opening up the territory. 

In addition to representatives of Canadian Companies 





. 






✓ ^ r • / / / ✓ ,► . V - . ✓ X /. 
















■ 






... 


* 


It . ■ .' :. , _ ■ . ..: 
































25 

in Europe, offices were established in the United 
States, especially in the west, and were recruiting 
settlers of various origins for Canada* Consequently 
continental and iiinerican immigration far exceeded 
British immigration during the pre-war period. Alberta 
experienced a tremendous influx of population between 
1905 and 1915. Between the years 1901 and 1914 the 
numbers of new arrivals never fell below 42,500 annually 
while annual homestead entries grew to double those 
of earlier years. Alberta*s immigration figures 
moreover compared very favorably with Saskatchewan* s 
during these years and have occasionally doubled them 
during the 25 years from the incorporation of the 
provinces up to 1930. 

Post-war immigration was encouraged on a 
limited scale until 1930, in that Canada invited the 
agriculturist but discouraged the industrialist. An 
occupational test was applied, allowing for the entry 
into Canada of: 

1) Bona fide agriculturists entering Canada to farm 
and having sufficient means to begin farming in Canada. 

2) Bona fide farm laborers entering Canada to follow 
that occupation and having reasonable assurance of 
enployment. 

3) Female domestic servants entering Canada to follow 






■ 






--- / . 


V/ •• 










■ 


























. 

■ - . , 

' 

. • . 




' 



























26 

that occupation and having reasonable assurance of 
employments 

4) The wife or child under 18 years of age of a person 
legally admitted to and resident in Canada who wa^lin 
a position to receive and care for his dependents. 

6) Any United States citizen entering Canada from 
the United States with sufficient means to maintain 
himself until he secured employment. 

6) Any British subject entering Canada directly or 
indirectly from Great Britain or Ireland, Newfoundland, 
United States, New Zealand, Australia or the Union of 
South Africa with sufficient means to maintain himself 
until he secured employment. 

Non-agriculturists were also allowed to 
proceed to Canada from the “preferred 11 countries: 

Belgium, Hollaid, France, Germany, Switzerland and 
the Scandinavian countries. Regulations as to passports 
were definite after February 15, 1923. “^11 Passports 
of alien immigrants sailing from the Continent of 
Europe must carry the vis4 of the Canadian Immigration 
officer stationed on the Continent. Until 1930 British 
immigration was definitely encouraged and regulated 
by a series of immigration agents and officers throughout 
Great Britain and Irelan) reporting to a Director ox 









27. 

Immigration stationed in London. There was no restris- 

immi grants 

tion on British immigration but were subject 

to medical examination. Norway, Sweden and Denmark had 
no Canadian Government officers, and immigrants 

proceeded to Canada ft*om these countries on the same 

terms as British, but were examined at point of 

disembarkation. They were required to be in possession 

of valid passports, issued within one year of their 

sailing. On the Continent, the Canadian Government 

maintained medical and civil officers at Riga, Danzig, 
Hamburg, Rotterdam, Antwerp and Paris.•••• Germany, 
Holland, Belgium, France and Switzerland were placed 

by the Departmental Regulation in much the same 
category as Scandinavia and the British Isles, with 
this exception, that nationals of these countries 
had to have their passports vis&d by a Canadian 
Government Immigration Officer on the continent. " $ 

The Canadian Hacific and Canadian Rational 
railways were allowed to assist agriculturists from 
central and eastern European countries to obtain 
the vis6 of the Canadian Government officers by 
issuing certificates which guaranteed them agricul¬ 
tural employment in Canada. "It was of course ## 
^Robert England. Colonization of western Canada p 33 

f »t n »* w h it 














2t 

necessary for the Railway Companies, in order to 
avoid the embarrassment of rejections at ports, to 
have their Certificate Issuing Officers examine 
prospective immigrants on the points of validity of 
passport, literacy, physical and mental fitaess, 
and eligibility within the various regulations of 
the Immigration Act." 

In 1930 the flow of immigration was arrested 
and since that year few other than dependents of 
heads of families residing in Canada and in a poiition 
to receive them have been admitted, 

European immigration has been largely unassisted 
except through lote/ered transportation costs and the 
Establishment of immigration halls at times when 
immigration was most encouraged. Private organizations 
have advanced a measure of aid, those working in the 
interests of German-speaking people being: the 
Lennonite Board and the Canadian Pacific and Canadian 
National railways through the ^eimonite Immigration 
Act; the Verein der Deutsch-canadischen Catholiken, 
tie Catholic Immigrant Aid Society, the Lutheran 
Immigration Board, the Canadian Lutheran Immigrant 
Aid Society, the German Baptist Society , the Swiss 
Settlement Society, and the Colonization and Development 
Departments of the railways both in Canada and Europe, 













When the material aid and instruction, both governmental 
and private assistance, which has been advanced to 
British immigrants is reviewed (K. England, Coloni¬ 
sation of ..estern Canada ch*4-6$ The Central European 
Immigrant in Canada ch* 2) ; the alieiWborn appear to 
have been cheaply recruited by comparison. The Iringent 
application of the occupational test during the post¬ 
war immigration period and the c^uota Laws of the United 
States have moreover resulted in Canada's acquisition 
of experienced agriculturists from continental 
European countries* 

The Background of German Emigration* 

A question of which Alberta seldom takes note, but which 
must be cleared in order to understand her German- 
speaking population is this: How is it that 73% of 
Alberta's German-speaking immigrants have never lived 
in either Germany or Austria? and since this is so, 
what is the background which they have brought with 
them? To what extant is it German? 

A glance at the size of the 

immigrant groups in the German mother tongue classi¬ 
fication of the Census 1931 establishes the validity 
of the first part of the question* 






30 


Total immigrants of German speech: 35,475. 


Born in Germany 
u H Austria 


7789 of German speech 
1537 “ « 11 

9326 


26,3% 


m 

in Russia 

10129 

n 

ii 

ti 

"United States 

7586 

ii 

ti 

n 

" Poland 

4111 

it 


n 

Elsewhere 





(Canada excluded) 


ii 

it 


26149 


u 

i« 

it 

ii 

73.7% 


The map here included has been prepared in order to 
assist in tracing the movement of German-speaking 
people in Europe. 


The district of SiebenQ^ 1 ^ 611 was peopled 


by Saxons in the 12th century and in 1880 they numbered 


200,000. There are very few from this region who 
have come to Alberta# From the 13th century onward 
Swabians migrated from southern Germany into Moravia, 
districts south and southeast of Moravia, and into 
the province of Banat formerly in southern Hungary 
but now in eastern Houmania, where they drained 
and cutivated unhealthy swampy land between the 
Ternes and Danube rivers# These movements created a total 
of 600,000 Swabians amongst the native Magyars and 
Turks in 1880. ^ince the 13th century German has also 
fceen the prevailing language along with Lettish and 
Esthonian in the larger towns of the present Lithuania, 


Latvia and Esthonia, although Germans comprise only 
































31 

about one-tenth of the population, Eastward migration 
into Galicia and Bukowina also began early and the 


population of German speech in 1880 was in these 

o 

provinces 324,336 of whom 240,000 are reported as 
Jews. A large area in the vicinity of Saratow on 
the Volga was entered by Germans in 1768 and had grown 
in 1880 to a total of over 300,000 persons, living in 
73 farm villages. Beginning in the late 18th century 
migration of Germans into the Russian provinces of 
Volhynia and Podolia, Bessarabia, Cherson and Taurien, 
the neighborhood of the city of Jekaterinoslaw in 
the south and of Tiflis still farther south in the 
Caucasus took place. 

The movement into tfolhynia is described in 
the following extract from a report of a Moravian 


minister written in iimerica in 1896: # 

!, More than a century ago there began^to flow 
from Germany to Poland, out of sections of co^untry 
long inhabited and over-peopled into a region whose 
name indicates its special fitness for agriculture, 
a tide of emigration encouraged by concessions as 
liberal as it lay within the power of papist princes 
to grant to Protestant peasants. In)turn, and for 
Like reasons, under the advocacy of adherents of the 


# Bev.k. W.Leibert. Bruederfeld and Bruederheim, 

Moravian Settlements of Russian Germans 
in Canada, p.5 




















. — - -1 

. 

; 

-■ * 







32 

Greek church, but more especially alter the abolition 
of serfdom which left vast tracts without laborers, 
a similar movement set in from, the crowded portions 
of xiussian Poland toward its neighboring, heavily 
timbered province of Volhynia—• Land which owing 
to political misfortunes had been lying there untilled 
for generations was leased to these Gentian colonists 
from Poland at advantageous rates on twelve year 
terms* Populous villages speedily sprang up where 
forests had stood, ana immense sections of this 
Russian province became almost exclusively German* 

At the eviration of the first twelve years, the 
leases for luids brought under cultivation and impro¬ 
ved* and containing the results of the settlers' 
thrift, were renewable at a smart advance, with 
prospects for purchase still in view. The course 
of colonization from Polana, Prussia, and Silesia 
continued, and with the increased agricultural 
population there rose a demand for mechanics and 
artisans and for the establishment of industries* 
ihis drew into the on-flowing, ever-widening 
current members of the Moravian Diaspora in those 
countries whence tne exodus was proceeding. *• 

Twenty-seven farai villages were peopled 

dy Germans in southern Bessarabia by the year 1880, 

thirty-three spread west of Odessa to the mouth of 

he Dniester and with thirteen north-east of these 

he total Gernan-speaking population in the southern 

territory was estimated at 150,000 in 1880* The 

vicinity of Tiflis in the Caucasus has been peopled 

by Swabians since 1820* 

Mennonites founded nine farm villages 

on the Dnieper river west of the city of Alex- 
androwsk in 1789. The largest Hexmonite settlement 
of 88 farm villages on the Molotsehna river south¬ 
east of the first nin* followed in the early nine- 













33 

teenth century* Seven other farm villages were estab¬ 
lished east of these. 

In 1770 the Hutterites, reduced to a small 
body after several earlier migrations, set out from 
Wallachia, a district lying around the city of Bucharest, 
to Wischenka in Crimea and in 1342, with the aid of 
Geraan kennonites in Russia their entire 78 families 
moved northward to better 3a nd on the IWolotschna 
river. This river empties into the Sea of Azov, which 
lies north of the Black Sea. Here the Hutterites estab¬ 
lished four villages, remained until 1874 and in the 
course of the ensuing five years remigrated to the 
Dakotas in the United States. 

Several reasons determined the eastward 
migration of all these German-speaking people through 
the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. Their homelands 
were ravaged by three major wars: the Thirty Years* *»ar 
1618-1648, the War of the Spanish Succession 1703-1713, 
and the Napoleonic Wars less than a century later. They 
were able to make arrangments with governments of 
eastern countries then desirous, as Canada has been 
in the past fifty years, of developing their lands. 

The impress Catherine of Russia (1729- 1796), daughter 
of a Prussian field marshal, is especially remembered 









34 

for her invitation to Germans > among "them kennonites, 
in 1786, to cultivate the southern _;ussian provinces* 

But colonization was not a problem of major consideration 
with European countries, and they were not allowed 
to pursue it in peace, even if they desired to do so. 
Privileges and promises to colonists were eventually 
withdrawn, with the result that not only the overflow 
from the settlements which had been formed by 
immigrants but the greater part of the settlers 
themselves left what had become for them a second 
homeland* 


Several quotations will here serve to give 
an idea of parts of this movement. 

1. The movement from Volhynia: 

# "Great difficulties had always attended 
the purchase.by German colonists of the lands cultivated 
and rendered profitable by them, how, unless the 
Greek faith is accepted it is impossible to secure 
title to any real estate, indeed, upon eviration of 
his twelve year lease, a German may now ohl^ renew 
it after adoption of the Russian religion. He may 
lease in some distant region, thickly wooded and 
thinly peopled, he may settle in some Asiatic Province, 
or emigrate to foreign parts, but as a German, or as 
an Evangelical Christian, independent, self-respecting, 

citizenship in Volhynia expires with his present twelve 
years 1 lease. Political plotting and religious bigotry 
clashing with the love of liberty and with living faith 
are thus seen to be the expelling forces, fomenting 

emigration.By governments having territory to 

develop, by corporations having lands to sell, by 


# Bev. M.W. Leibert. Bruederheim and Bruederffeld, 

or avian Settlements of German * Russians p7 











35 

companies having passage by sail or rail to offer, 
the countries of Europe.„.ore flooded with that 
peculiar type of advertising literature which puts 
people on the move in one or another direction, 

England is rivaling the United 5tfces in its tenders 
of free farms find low fares. Thus the district of 
Alberta, in the dominion of Canada, and particularly 
the Edmonton region, was brought to the notice of 
many of those Moravian Germans in Aussia who had come 
to realize that Volhynia could not much longer remain 
their home*" 

2. From the province of Banat. "Auch dort wurde es ## 
der Bevolkerung zu eng inrierhalb der seiner Zeit 
gewahrten Grenzen. Der haum fur die wachsenden 
Genarationen wurde kleiner und kleiner, bis schliesxlich 
auch die Hot, neues Lanu zu bekoiumen, zu gross wurde, 
und man si3m sehlieszlich gezwungen sah, nach 

ijisi ocilungsmoglidikeiten in irgend einem anaem Land 
sich umzusehen. Durdi die gewaltsame kagyarisierungs- 
politik, kilit&rzwang una andere Kulturunterdruckungen 
zogen es viele der dortigen deutschen Eevolkeiamg vor, 
der verlockenden, alles kogliche versprecmenden 
Einladung Canadas zu folgen und doi*thin auszuwancern." 

3. The background of kennonite immigration. 

### f, The kennonite settlements in oissia furnish 
examples of the way in Which Mennonitism applies its 
principles. Catherine the Empress gave them a great 
many privileges ana with their complete autonomy 
in such matters as local government, school control, 
and religious worship, the settlements were built 
up on traditional lines. Farm villages of from twenty 
to thirty families each grouped together were not 
unlike trie early villages established by the 
Hennonites in western Canada. The hou w ses, distinctively 
low country with shuttered, windows, barns and stables 
all under one roof, with the gkble end facing the 
street, located on both sides of the long wide 
thoroughfare lined with shade or fruit-trees, were 
typically Dutch. 

"Stretching out from the village were the 
arable farm lands and trie common pastures where the 
village cattle were herded and in some cases the 
sheep were held in common. Often trie land was divided 
for practical purposes into a number of long narrow 

^ ^.Abele. Festschrift, St. Pauls Kii^chengeineinde, 

Vibank, Sask. p2o. , 

### R.England. The Colonization of Western Canada.^ xiU ' 











36 

strips with a view to sharing the good and bad 3a nd 
where there was a difference in fertility so that 
in many features the method of sharing of land was 
reminiscent of the manorial system known in England 
and the Continent, 

"Stock raising, especially sheep breeding, 
dairying, and general farming, with some culture of 
the silk worm on mulberry trees, assumed great impor¬ 
tance during the early years of the settlements and 
considerable interest was shown in apiaries and in 
the raising of fruit, especially water-melons* Flax 
culture and weaving characterized the varied farm oper¬ 
ations from which the kennonites built up their self- 
© ntained and reasonably comfortable life. 

"As far back as 1843 there was great interest 
in scientific agriculture ana societies were formed 
for the promotion of better methods. A four-year 
rotation of crops, the erection of model school 
houses and practical farm buildings, the breeding of 
improved strains of stock, were each part of this 
effort. Whilst the organized colonies were not 
communistic, there were a great many municipal enter¬ 
prises. borne land was held in common and some villages 
had a common granary. There was a municipal ferry 
across the Ifciieper and it is recorded that even a 
municipal distillery netted a substantial profit. 

"By 1870 both the Chortitz and holotschna 
colonies had accumulateu wealth far above that of 
their Russian neighbors, while the folga colonies 
were in the pioneer stage. The Swiss in Volhynia 
were fairly well to do, but the Polish kennonites 
had not kept pace with the others. At that time 
there came a great increase in population, and the 
kennonites began to look around for land, 
early the older settlements interested themselves 
in the purchase of aaugnter colonies as an outlet 
for surplus population. 

"Some difficulty arose through the fact 
that the control of the villages sometimes fell into 
the hands of the larger land owners and the landless 
could not secure the necessary land, but on petitioning 
the Russian government this matter was adjusted. It 
is significant that in all these points history is 
repeating itself to some extent in Western Canada, 
particularly in the matter of growth of population 
and the spreading out into offshoot colonies. 

"Each village controlled its own schools, 
roads, poor relief, municipal herders, fire overseers, 










: 




. 








- 








■ i 










■ ' 

































37 

and village clerks and dealt with the question 
of land. At Jthe head of tne village was a magistrate 
called a Sch w ultz, elected by the landowners, so 
that those without real estate were penalized. 

The significance of this emphasis on the possession 
of land has had its influence upon the way in 
which the kennonite in western Canada regari land¬ 
owning as desirable. The kennonites, therefore, in 
Russia constituted somewhat of a democratic state w'Mn ™ 
autocratic Russian framework, b«Hhe carrying out of the Mennonite doctrine of non-re*tsUn. ce 
n«| opposition to the use of force had its difficulties 
and sometimes the solution was found in the appoint¬ 
ment of a non^kennonite Russian as constable. The 
schools were somewhat primitive in character and used 
as a medium of instruction Platt-Deutsch. 

"The core of the community was, of course, 
the church life, and several religious movements 
spread through the communities at various times, 
leaving in their wake differences of religious 
practice. In constquence of the peculiar character 
of the religious, economic, and social background, 
the kennonites of Russia were firmly held together 
as a group by ties of language, religion, consciousness 
of a superior culture, and by special political and 
civil privileges, but of marriage with the native 
Russians there was none. This produced an anomalous 
situation, so that the decision of the Czar in 1870 
to put an end to the highly privileged status of the 
German colonists was inevitable. The Programme of 
Russianization proposed at this time included not 
only the abolition of all military exemptions but 
complete government control of school systems in 
the colonies, the use of the Russian language 
instead of German; in short, all Germans were to 
become fully Hedged Russians. 

Unsuccessful representations were made 
to St* Petersburg and the kennonite people began 
to look elsewhere for a home with civil and religious 
freedom. H 


The following copy in full of the Order- 
in Council passed by the Canadian Government and 
delivered to four kennonite delegates from southern 
Russia who represented the section of kennonite 
emigrants who ultimately chose Canada as their future 





38 

hem* states the conditions of their entry into the 
Dominion* 


The kennonite Agreement. 


Department of /agriculture 
Immigration Branch 
Ottawa, 23rd July, 1873. 

Gentlemen^ 


I have the honour, under instruction of the 
Honorable the Minister of /igriculture, to state to you. 
in ryply to your letter of this day f s date, the following 
facts relating to advantages offered to settlers, and 
to the immunities afforded to kennonite©, which are 
established by the Statute Law of Canada, and by order 
of His Excellence, Governor-General in Council, for 
the information of German mennonites, having intention 
to emigrate to Canada via Hamburg; 

1. An entire exemption from any Military Service is, 

by law and Order-in-Council, granted to the denomination 
of Christians called M kennonites H . 

2. An Order-in-Council was passed on the 3rd of ^arch 
last, to reserve eight Townships in the Province of 
Manitoba, for free grants on the condition of settle¬ 
ment as provided in the Dominion Lands Act, that is 
to say: "Any person who is the head of a family, 

or has attained the age of twenty-one years, shall 
be entitled to be entered for one quarter-section or 

a less quantity of unappropriated Dominion Lands for 
the purpose of securing a homestead right in respect 
thereof "." 

3. The said reserve of eight Townships is for the 
exclusive use of the ^ennonites, and the said free 
grants of one quarter-section to consist of 160 acres 
each, as defined by the Act. 

4. Should the kennonite Settlement extend beyond 

the eight townships set aside by the Order-in-Council 
of March 3rd last, other Townships will be, in the 
same way, reserved to meet the full requirements 
of kennonite immigration* 

5.If, next Spring, the kennonite settlers, on 




.. 


- .- 

_ .. ~- 

* 






■ . . ■ - 

. 


i- - >*■ - - V - 

• : V:V. , ^ - ; . ' * 

- 5 ' 1 ... * 

' 

. 

: f j: . ■ i < V • ■" * • . 


fc, . , .• i - *3* f:: - -- ' ® i - ■ 

■.■ & . . --■■■• ■ 
j t;' 4 ~ - &*': ■*=■'- :--■ ■- d 

< : # «#£-■ • Pv§ll f m C 1 

: } i :■ & j f .. ' , 




■ 

- 


, - -■ 

- 

v - - , ~ _ - , 

1 . ■ ■ ■■ ■ ■ - 

; . • \ 



-w ;v - ‘ . v B 

- '*"■ .■■ 

- . 

. . 



. 


r 

v ■*.; •■::••:■:;■ - ' ' • :; W- 

, ■ i\! 


, 


- ■■W-fir-rX,*... 

- 

. • 




. 


J. •• ' v ‘ - 

J - ... '-'.Va, .V ii*-" ^ V ^ 




.. '. ... - ••. .. d 


■ 





38 

receiving the eight Township s set aside for use, 
should prefer to exchange them for any other eight 
unoccupied townships, such exchange will be allowed. 

6. In addition to the free grant of a quarter-section 
of 160 acres to every person over twenty-oneye^rs of 
age, on the condition of settlement, the right to 
purchase the remail ing three-quarters of the section 
at $1 per acre, which is the largest quantity of 

land the Government will grant a Patent for one person. 

7. The settler will receive a Patent for free grant 
after three years' residence in accordance with the 
terms of the Dominion Land Act. 

8. In the event of the aeahn of the settler, the lawful 
heirs can claim the Patent for the free grant, upon 
proof that the settlement duties for three years have 
been performed. 

9. From tue moment of occupation, the settler acquires 
a homestead right on the land# 

10. The fullest privilege of exercising their religious 
principles is by law afforded to thdMennonites, without 
any kind of molestation or restriction whatever, and 
the same privilege extends to the education of their 
children in schools* 

11. The privilege of affirming instead of making 

affidavits, is afforded oy law. 

12. The Government of Canada undertakes to furnish 
£a ssenger warrants from Hamburg to Fort Garry for 
Mennonite families of good character, for the sum of 
$30 per adult person* under eight years, half price, 
of $16 and for infants under one pear, $3. 

13. The Minister specially authorized me to state that 

this arrangement as to price shall not be disked for 
the seasons of 1874 and 1876. ^ 

n 

14. I am further tc state that if it is cliaged, 
thereafter, the price shall not, up to the ^year 1882, 
exceed $40 per adult, and children in proportion, 
subject to the approval of Parliament. 

16. The immigrants will be provided m th provisions on 
the portion of the journey between Liverpool and 











39 

CollAngwood, but during other portions of the journey 
they are to find their own provisions. 

I have the honour to be, 

Gentlemen, 

Your obedient servant, 

P .E.Lowe 

Secretary of Dept, of agriculture. 
This letter in later years occasioned much difficulty 
to Departments of Education in Manitoba and Saskatchewan 
due to a demand for separate schools with bi-lingual 
instruction. Alberta's Department of Education ha6 
however been free from trouble in this respect, for 
by the time the mennonite communities became established 
in Alberta it was understood that control of education 
is vested in the authorities of each province, and 
Alberta has always maintained the right of central 
supervision of education within her boundaries. 

Mennonites were already settled in Waterloo 
so^unty, Ontario, when emigration of kennonites 
from Russia to Canada began. They lent assistance to 
;jome of the Russian mennonites who immigrated into 


( 


Manitoba in 1874-76. The latter had their numbers 
increased through further arrivals from Russia, so 
that in 1879 thay totaled 7383. In the early 1880s 
religious differences arose and many of the more 
< onservative Old Colonis ts remigrated to Mexico. 
Within the past few months letters have been 









40 

exchanged between the Winnipeg representative of one 
of the Mexican Wennonite colonies and the Alberta 
Government with a view to opening negotiations for 
settlement of a colony in the Peace xiiver district.) 

In the 1890s an overflow from the Manitoba 
settlements moved westward to Rosthem, Saskatchewan. 
Alberta had drawn a number of kennonite families from 
Ontario, Manitoba and the United States during the 
first two decades of the present century. Post-war 
immigration, however, coming directly to Alberta, 
more than doubled the number of kennonites residing 
in the province. Considei*ation of the circumstances 
of post-war emigration follows: 

The idea of a large-scale emigration had 
long been in the minds of the -.us si an kennonites before 
final arrangements were complete, horrible incidents 
which followed the withdrawal of German troops from 
southern Russia in the fall of 1918, and tie inevitable 
catastrophes which accompany internal disru|ition f 
added to which was a famine in 1921, increased their 
desire to leave the country. Working as a body, always 
with committees to make arrangements, the uermonites 
now enlisted the aid of the Canadian Pacific Railway 
and plans were finally coc^pleted for the first body 








41. 

to proceed to Canada. They reached Latvia in the summer 

of 1923 and found to their dismay that of their 

number were rejected for trachoma, a disease of the 

eyes, by the doctors stationed at Riga in the interests 

of Canadian immigration. It then became a problem of 

where to go now. They would not return to Russia and 

they could not remain in Latvia. There seemed but one 

way open: Germany. A transmigration house (Durchgangs- 

lager) was set up by a German ^ennonite aid Society, 

where 668 of the first emigrating group were housed, 

given treatment by eye specialists, then reexamined 

by the Canadian immigration officials and sent on the 

last 3ap of their Journey. The work was repeated for 

further emigrant groups later in 1923 and in the summer 

of 1924, with the result that five-sixths of the number 

rejected upon first examination were later allowed 

expenses 

to pass. (A record compiled in 1924 states that aamniaig 
amounting to 7 cents per day per person during the period 
of inflation were met largely by capital sent from 
American Mennonites.) 

4. Hutterian migration to America. 

# ,f The two colonies Con the Molotschna), as well 
as all the other congregations of the Hutterian Brethren, 


#John Horsch. The hutterian Brethren 1628-1931. p!15 















42 

immigrated to the United States of America in the 
years 1874 to 1879, the imssian government having 
withdrmwn the grant of freedom from military and 
government service. They settled in the territory 
of Dakota, in what is now South Dakota. The first 
group, coming in 1874, comprised about 250 souls. 

Most of these decided upon tat^ommunity life of the 
old order. They organized two 'Bruderhofs, known as 
the Bon Homme and Wolf Creek Colonies, not far from 
the Nebraska border. In lo77 seventeen additional 
families came, establishing a Bruderhof at dim Spring. 
Another group came in 1879. On the whole it may be 
said that those wao had practised community of goods 
in liussia continued the same in Dakota and were Joined 
by some of the other s. About half of the Hutterian 
immigrants settled in Bruederhofs. As their numbers 
increased more 1 and was secured and new Bruderhofs 
established, until the total number in 1914 reached 
seventeen. 

"During the World War the Hutterian Brethren 
were subject to peculiarly vicious attacks by over- 
zealous local patriotic officials for their firm 
maintenance of their four-century-old position of 
non-resistance. The only conscientious objectors 
to die as a result of persecution in the camps during 
the war were two young men from a Hutterian Bruderhof, 
Joseph and Michael Hofer. After the war all but three 
of the Bruderhofs migrated to Manitoba and Alberta, 
having been promised complete freedom from military 
service by the Canadian government. M 

Further mention of the "vicious attacks'* 

referred to above is made by Bertha w. Clark : "to 

a man there was Refusal to bear arms or to do any 
kind of substitute service, to don military uniform, 
or obey military coumands when put in prison. Of course 
this attitude made them most unpopular. Their boys 
were eanong those put in solitary confinement... 
Gray-haired preachers were pulled from their wagons 
in the streets of South Dakota to have their beards 
haggled, and mobs of infuriated citizens drove off 


# Bertha W. Clark. The Buterian Communities. 

Political Economics Journal Vol.XXXll 
No. 4, August 1924. p482. 













43 

their cattle and sheep, investing the proceeds in 
the Liberty Bonds which the Brethren thought it wicked 
to buy*” 

5. The background of post-war migration from southern 
Russia. Mr. Philip Baker of Medicine Uat kindly granted 
permission to use his narrative "The Wild Life of 
Revolution", from which the following extracts have 
been taken; 

# "I was bora in the village of bunwic, about 

twenty miles from the city of Lisitchansk in South 
Russia. This part of Russia is now known as the 
Soviet Socialist Republic of the bkraine, one of the 
constituent members c£ the Soviet Socialist Republic 
of Russia. 

,f My father was a fruit farmer and was con¬ 
sidered to be well off. He fanned a plantation of 
about fifty acres of fruit trees—apples, pears, plums, 
cherries and grapes were grown in great abundance and 
shipped to Lisitchansk and Odessa. 

"..In many parts of my narrative I will 
make statements that would (if not properly understood) 
seem to show that I had a strong sense of the superiority 
of the Germans, and a corresponding prejudice against 
the Slavs... .About one hundred and fifty years ago, 
under the encouragement of the Czar of that day, large 
numbers of Germans migrated to South Russia. Since 
then fresh migrations have taken place until in 1914, 
when the war commenced, there was a vmry large popu¬ 
lation of German descent scattered throughout the area. 

In almost every district these people were outnumbered 
by the Slavs. This was true of Dunoic where I was bora, 
"The Germans were more industrious and more 
thrifty than the Slavs. They were, consequently, a 
people with a higher cultural development and com¬ 
paratively wealthy, ranking in wealth in many instances 
with theLuissian land owning class. 

"My paternal grandfather came to South Russia, 
about 1870, from a district near Berlin. My mother's 
people, also German, but with some Slavic blood, had 
been in South Russia for one hundred and fifty years. 

I am therefor, almost a pure German. This fact was 
impressed on me in my <h ildhood through the influence 
of my people's attitude to their Slavic neighbors. 

■L , . / 

















































44 

This could be described as kind, yet superior. That 
_ was a German was impressed upon me more harshly 
by the drubbings I received from thejSlavic boys 
because of my birth, I was also sent to a German school 
near our home, where we were taught in the German 
language, 

"To balance this, I have enough Russian 
or Slavic blood, through my mother, to enable me 
to understand the Russian people—their light-heartedness, 
their instability of temper, andtheir inability to 
compete on equal grounds with the Germans or Jews 
in matters of business requiring perseverance, 

"I commenced attending school in 1912 and 
continued attendance until 1916, wnen our German 
[school was closed. I was then eleven years old. 

During the next three years, I received a considerable 
amount of instruction from my par ents, but until 
was nineteen yea* s old I had not again the oppor¬ 
tunity to receive instruction from a properly qualified 
teacher. From the age of nineteen to twenty-two I 
attended a night school in Odessa maintained b y the 
Soviet. , . 

"my fatheiywas called to theWar in 1916. He 
*as wounded in November 1916. Unfit for further service, 
le was sent home in 1917. 

"During father* a absence we had a difficult 
time. We could not get our help to do much work, mother 
was not as effective as Father in keeping our servants 
at their tasks, while my older brothers were too 
young to be forceful enough. Our ready money gave out 
and we could not ship our fruit because the port of 
Odessa was closed by theu'urkish blockade. 

"We had our first serious trouble at this 
time. Our cherries were ripe. We had extra men and 
boys picking and packing the crop and we required 
money for wages. To raise this money at once, we 
had to sell the cherries, ky brother Johan, who was 
the eldest, loaded one of th^wagons. He and mother 
accompanied by my 8-year-old sister and myself, 
started for Dunsic to sell our produce. Because of 
her German descent, mother had been laughed at and 
spit upon by one man during a previous visit to 
Dunsic. She was nervous, but brave, and encouraged us 
when we spoke of a possible unfriendly reception. 

We drove into the marketplace in the Russian part or 
the village and rang thdfbell as a sign we had something 
to sell. Some peasants came along, but when th y 












45 

recognized mother, they laughed and jibed at her 
because her husband, a German, was fighting against 
the Germans* They made vile insulting suggestions 
to her, causing her much distress as she was a very 
gentle person* Some of the better persons in the 
crowd that had gathered to see the Germans baited 
now interfered, but it only made matters worse, 

Mother, my sister and I were in tears* We were humili¬ 
ated and enraged. 

"We moved our wagon to another part of the 
street but we were followed. Some boys tried to climb 
on to our wagon and my brother, who was enraged, hit 
them with a whip. This was the Spark needed to produce 
a crisis. My broths and I were beaten. Johan had 
been kicked on the head and rendered unconscious. 

Mother was Insulted still further and the Russian 
women, who had gathered, joined in the abuse. The 
contents of the wagon were scattered on the/streets 
and the containers smashed to pieces. 7 

"With the help of several men, Johan was 
placed in the^agon and I drove off. We were followed 
to the outskirts of the village by a howling mob, 
their jeering and abuse never stopping for one moment. 
We stopped about one-half mile out of Dunsic at the 
house of another German fruit farmer and got stimulants 
for Johan. He had recovered consciousness but was in 
great pain and very sick. These people were kind 'and 
gave us food. Our neighbor then accompanied us ho»e. 

M On arrival at our farm, we found the 
news of our treatment in Dunsic had preceded us and 
the cherry pickers, knowing we could not pay wages, 
had taken a large number of cherries and left our 
employment. Our old watchmen, trying to prevent them 
doing so, had been set upon and severely beaten. 

"We were a very forlorn family that evening. 
In Canada no one is cut off from his neighbors but 
with the exception of our scattered fellow Germans 
we had no one to turn to for eomfort. As a matter 
of policy at this time German families arranged not 
to be together very much because it was assumed by 
the Russians that we were gloating over the numerous 
German victories. Hews of these victories could not 
be kept from us, but as a matter of fact very few 
Russian-Germans wanted the Kaiser to win the war. 
Occasionally, when the Russians had a victory there 
would be great celebrations by the .uussian element. 

German boys had to be kept indoors at these times 























4b 

or the 1016 si an boys would thrash them umer c i fully. 

n A few days later the tax collector called 
at the farm to collect the taxes that were due. 1*1 other 
had no money. She explained that father was in the 
army and asked for extension of time in which to make 
the payment. A Canadian official under similar 
circumstances would have been at least outwardly 
courteous but not so the Russian tax collector. 

He laughed uproariously. It was considered a great 
joke that a German should be forced to fight in the 
Russian army against the Germans. What fun! He would 
grant no extension beyond the time allowed. 

"To meet this emergency a plan was speedily 
arranged. The whole family turned out and picked 
cherries. «e loaded two wagons and Johan, hdward, 
mother and I drove the twenty miles to Lisitchansk, 
where we sold the lot. We got a very small price, 
but mother was able to pay the taxes and have sufficient 
money to carry us over until the apples ripened. 

Shortly after this, fatheiyarrived home. He had been 
severely wounded and co~uld not work, but he was a 
good manager and things went better. 

"It would have been well had we been content 
to remain on our fruit farm. This we did not do.If we 
had, I believe our whole family would now be alive. 

Alas—I alone remain." 

Accounts of hapless wandering, reduced 
circumstanses, fear and death follow. 

# "Today, when I cast my mind back to this 
period, I think it strange that we did not weep. I 
cannot remember any of us weeping for weeks or months 
before this. Neither did we laugh. We were in a benumbed 
condition. Then too we were weak from want of nourish¬ 
ment. 

"Another thing that amazes me when I 

recollect the circumstances of tnis period was the 
indifference of many to the bufferings of others. 

The utmost callousness was exhibited. People would 
course on the streets for want of food, yet in 
neighboring residences there were quantities of food 
secretly hoarded. On thefetreets, people who were 


# pp.31-35 











; - - - - ' 


' 








. 

■ . 

' 






; 

v ■ 


- ' ••• ■< -- '■$ - k • 




- - • - ■ ■ ■ • " ■ •• ' 


4 


- 










* 






i * 








■ 














47 

obviously well fed 9 would jostle to one side other 
persons who, it was equally obvious, were on the verge 
of death. 

"People who were in the last stages of 
starvation were known by their appearance, especially 
the appearance of the face and abdomen. The face was 
swollen until the outline of the bones was not visible. 

I The eyes were sunken and black. The abdomen was so 
swollen that the vest could not be buttoned across. 

The skin of the hands was tight and glossy. It was 
not an unusual thing for persons such as these to 
expire suddenly. A speedy transformation would take 
place. The swollen parts would fall in and the body 
would become a skeleton without any appearance of fat. 
Just skin and bone. 

" So many people died in Lisitchansk at 
this period that the usual mthod of burial could not 
be carried out. Families had not themeans and often 
not the strength to dispose of their dead. The local 
Soviet had to send men around with wagons to collect 
the bodies. Wagons, with twenty or more bodies without 
coffins, could be seen daily passing through the 
streets on theway to the cemetery. There the bodies 
were dumped into a large trench and covered over with 
earth without ceremony. 

’The pangs of hunger forced people to adopt 
jnusual means of procuring food. The cat and dog popu¬ 
lation became greatly depleted in numbers. The family 
oet was no longer safe on thelstreet. Grass was gathered 
and cooked. Bark and leaves from trees were also con¬ 
sumed. A few weeks before we left Lisitchansk a 
hutcher was convicted of offering human flesh for sale, 
disguised of course. This case is on record. 

’Theft of food, as would be expected in 
hese circumstances, was very common. l T o food was 
consumed within view of the public street, windows 
were curtained and barricaded, in most homes, during 
meal time. 

"Large numbers of people were homeless. The 
incoming trains were crowded with refugees. On the 
roads from the north and east were hundreds of 
families and single persons trekking into the city. 

On the roads to the south and west large numbers of 
people were starting out from Lisitchansk to the 
towns and villages to the south, and I expect, 
ultimately to the Black Sea ports. 

"Public places in Lisitchansk had innumerabfe 
people lying aroundj some resting, some too sick or 












.. 















.. . . ..... .. . ; ' - ' - 

. 

. 

. - ..... - • - ■' 

‘ 

' 










* 


' 




* 

' 






































48 

weak to move on. Occasionally a dead body of a 
recently expired person would be seen; sometimes 
alone, and at other times surrounded by weeping or 

dazed friends. 

,# The parks were denuded of grass; the trees 
of leaves, and in places bark. The river banks 
became filthy from being much used as camping places. 
Sanitary arrangements broke down. Dysentry and typhus 
and other infectious diseases were epidemic. 

"We bo aided ou train about eleven a.m. We 
had some food with us and we carefully concealed and 
guarded it to avoid being mobbed.... We were on our 
way to Odessa, and, if we had only known it, on the 
way to the worst disaster of all. 

'•The train was slow ana stopped frequently. 

On a flat car next to us were three youths. They must 
have observed us eating before we went to sleep in 
the evening. Next morning we found that we had been 
robbed of our remaining food. The young men were 
also missing. Hungry and suffering from languor 
and fatigue, we travelled all day until about.f qut p.m. 
when we stopped at a large station. We were visited 
by the police, who told us that we would have to change 
to another train. They secured a flat car for us and 
I left to beg food while that others moved our belongings. 
I took my sister with me to draw more sympathy, and 
we were given enough bfead to do us for the day. 

"Shortly after return the train began 
to move .Edward was a little distance off, and he 
rushed to the train and seized the side of the flat car. 
As the speed was now considerable, he was flung 
against a beam. I assisted him into the car, where 
for a time he lay in great pain. It was evident that 
he was severely hurt. Since Father's death he had 
exhibited a great sense of responsibility. He felt 
that as the oldest member of the family, he had 
to meet his duties manfully; so he made light of 
his hurt and tried to incourage us to hopefulness 
regarding what Odessa had in store for us. 

"We arrived in Odessa on the third day and 
our arrival coincided with hottest periods of the 
late summer. Barefoot and laden with our bundles 
v/e made our way over the burning pavements to one 
of the parks. The soft earth and dry sand of the 
somewhat parched and dried-out sward of tnis park 
was very welcome after three days on the hot, dirty 
and dusty train. Here we spent the night. Next morning 
we started early to walk the ten miles through the city 












■to a region near the docks, where mother's relatives 
had lived, 

11 About mid-day we arrived at a large house 

supposed to he the home of mother's uncle. 

Poverty has a very peculiar effect when it is 
experienced hy those formerly well-to-do. A year 
before, any member of the Harms family would 
have approached this house boldly, confident of 
being the social equal of its inhabitants. This 
day we vvere abject,,• • • 

" We had arrived at the residence of 
our relations to find strangers in possession,,. 

We felt as if we were pursued by a vengeful and 
merciless fate, and that, do what we would, it 
defeated us...A kindly-faced man took charge of 
the situation. He was a friend of our uncle, and 
on learning of our relationship to his friend, and 
also of our plight, we were taken inside and given 
food. A snack at the foot of the garden was placed 
at our disposal. We at once took possession of it, 
and when darkness fell we felt more comfortable than 
for many days. 

“...Next day mother had a fever...Our new 
found friends brought us some food out of their omn 
scanty supplies and they enlisted the sympathy of some 
soldiers ffom a neighboring encampment on our behalf. 

"From the soldiers, we received more food 
and a supply of blankets... • We were becoming hopeful 
again. On the third morning Edward, who had been in 
great pain ever since he injured himself on the 
train, got up to make tea... Suddenly there is a 
crash. He has fallen to the floor...I rush outside 
for help. Soldiers are passing and two who knew 
us come in. The;y examine Edward and tell us he is dead. 

"...Mother's grief is pitiful to witness... 
The police make enquiries. Shortly an ambulance arrives. 
We are told mother is being taken to a hospital.. We 
say goodbye to her...I see her lying on the stretcher 
as it disappears into the ambulance. I see her now as 
I write this, but in memory only. In the flesh I never 
saw her again. 

“Since then I have searched Odessa. I have 
advertised. I have laoked up the record of every 
hospital. What became of this gentle loving lady— 

I have never learned. 

”A wagon has arrived at the door of our 
shack. Two rough dirty men enter. They lift Edward's 









50 

body ...What is it resting on? Surely my eyes deceive 
me. •.The wagon is three parts full of uncoffined 
bodies. Edward is to be dumped into a common trench 
like a dead rat. .The wagon moves away. For a time 
I know no more. 

"Three hours later, I, Philip lianns, fifteen 
and a half years old, small fox* my age, also my 
sister Tena harms, ten years old, found ourselves 
inmates of a large Children's Orphanage, containing 
4,000 other children and young peoplej only we were 
no longer Philip and Tena harms. We wex*e numbers 
11786 and 11787." 

Social conaitions three years later, 1923, 
are described as follows: 

# " lAmsie and Karloff combined had about 

175 houses accomodating two hundred and fifty families. 
From the North American point of view, it would be 
more correct to call the combined villages a town. 
There is little difference, however. A town in 
North America is inhabited by merchants and artisans, 
but Dunsic and Karloff were inhabited by farmers. 

‘The Russian farmers do not as a rule live 
on farms, but in villages. Often thay have to go 
five and six miles to reach their fields. At harvest 
time watchmen guard the farms. 

"To each farmhouse in the villages is 
attached a barn and other buildings. In these barns 
and outbuildings horses, cows, pigs and poultry 
are kept. A fiussian village is thus a gigantic 
farmyard..... . 

"The Germans are superior to tne/blave in 
habits of cleanliness and tidiness. The Germans 
keep their homes cleaner and more separated from 
the barns. The Russians are careless and in summer 
their homes swarm with flies. 

"When disease breaks out it spreads rapidly. 
Among Russians a large number are pockmarked showing 
the prevalence of smallpox. 

"Stealing is a great evil of the Russian 
village. Each article of property has to be carefully 
looked after or it will disappear. Crops have to be 
guarded in the fields. Russians would not believe it 
if they were told that crops are left unprotected on 
the farms of North America. They could not conceive 












61. 

a society where money is left in a milk bottle on the 
door-step at bed time and tne milkman still finds 
it there in the morning. A Russian peasant would not 
believe a statement that such is a common practice 
in North America, and would think it a great joke. 

He would call the person making such a statement 
a champion liar, and would spend Jiours telling 
fellow peasants the funny tale: peals of laughter 
would resound in all directions at the idea of 
leaving even small sums of money exposed, 

"The Revolution affected the lives of the 
youths more than the young men and young women and 
the older folk. The latter held to more or less 
ingrained habits of thought and living. Young men 
and women over twenty-five were more or less installed 
in the teachings and restraints of pre-revolutionary 
days, but boys and girls from fifteen to twenty years 
old were creatures of the new day. They heard the 
former customs derided and the right of the individual 
to do as he liked exalted as the first principle of 
the new freedom. Customs that had formerly been 
maintained were cast aside. Because it was the practice 
to do so and so before the Revolution it must be 
correct to do the opposite now. The authority of 
parents was not respected and they were only obeyed 
when they were strong enough to enforce their wishes, 
"Theoretically all young people in the 
village were equals, but youths of the 

German or Kulak class were superior because^f greater 
discipline and higher standards of cleanliness and 
refinement. These young people were at this time 
objects of scorn on the part of their peasant fellow 
villagers. Youths belonging to the Soviet openly 
jeered at the sons of dispossessed fanners and Germans, 
To them we were social and political outcasts. We 
had come down, they had gone up. It was their turn 
to crow and they made full use of their opportunities. 

"Dunsie and Karloff in common with other 
parts of Russia participated in thejfree love orgy 
that followed the Bolshevist edicts' regarding 
marriages and divorce. Few young people in Dunsie 
escaped the demoralizing influences abroad, When I 
left in 1924, this phase had to a great extent 
passed and marriage had again become the standard 
in sex relationship. I 1 , • 

"Harvest is the outstanding period of 
the year in the Sputh Russian farming community. 








52 

The staple crops are corn, wheat, oats and rye. 

Other large crops are potatoes, fruit and melons. 

The majority of peasants at the period of which I 
write still used scythes to cut their grain, but 
there were a few binders in use. When the cutting 
and winnowing were completed, the bundles were 
brought from miles around into the village for 
threshing. One village contained three thresuing 
outfits and for weeks the threshing continued 
daily. About twenty bundle wagons ana about forty 
people were required to keep each machine in constant 
operation. About one-third of the helpers were 
women. After threshing, the grain was put in sacks and 
carried on the backs of men to the barn of its owners. 

The straw was saved for fodder and winter bedding for 
the stock.... 

"The head of the Dunsic Soviet was a native 
of Kiev, Alfred Deit by name. He was a very busy man 
and within the Soviet rules, a very just one. These 
rules of course took no notice of tne interests of 
non-members of the Bolshevist party where these interests 
clashed with the policy of the Soviet. Members of 
the Soviet were more sympathetically treated than 
were non-members." 

# "The political situation in Odessa was 
peculiar when compared with Canadian City Government. 
Odessa was ruled by a local Soviet Council and the 
Communists wnich this Soviet represented were a 
minority of the people. In 1024, the Communists 
were very active, ho effort was spared to procure 
new members for their organization. They made a 
special effort to get young men. The arguments held 
out at their meetings as to why we should join 
I would summarize as follows: 

1. A good school with technical training was assured. 

2. A job would always be available. 

3. A Communist always had the preference over tuose 
mho were not Communists for - ordinary or skilled 

work. 

4. A person who was not a Communist could not be 
appointed to any public or administrative office. 

"The majority of the people were very 
tenacious in resisting these inducements and counter 
arguments were advanced as follows: 

1. I do not believe Consaunism is the best form of 














53 


Government, 

2. Communism won't lust. It will crumble from within, 
when a more settled Goverxxment takes office, 
Communists will be outcasts because of the crimes 
committed by the Communist party. 

3. Communism overlooks ability and places in office 
agitators and incompetent people. 

4. If you become a Communist you can't change back 
without being punished as a traitor. 

I steadfastly refused to join the Communists." 

"In July, 1927, my savings amounted to 
the equivalent of *400 in Canadian money. I found 
that this was sufficient to take me to alberta, 
Canada, to Olga. 

"I applied for a passage to tne agent of 
the Canadian Pacific Hallway and with his aid, a 
passage was arranged and a passport secured. These 
arrangements occupied some months. In October, 

I left Odessa by the North Railway Station. A large 
crowd of my friends came to bid me farewell. The 
wistful faces of several young men who would have 
been glad to come with me, gave me a pang. "Philip" 
said one lad, "I am going to starve myself to get 
money to follow you." 


These long accounts are included as a method 
of approach to a fuller understanding of the reasons 
for emigration of German-speaking people to Canada. 
Summarized, these are: 1) Impossibility of attaining 
free titles to land in thefolder countries. 

2) Lack of opportunities for the advancement of 
families. 3) Desire to escape military service. 

4) Dissatisfaction with political and economic 
conditions in the older countries. 5) Desire for 
religious freedom. 6) Over-population. 7) Letters, 
Advertising propaganda, cinemas picturing a new 



































' 



















type of life. kany were disillusioned upon their 
arrival in Alberta but the majority have stayed. 

Other opportunities in the United States, British 
Columbia, or even their homelands fchve caused 
some to leave Alberta. 

In Russia the German immigrants kept their 
language and were anti-Russian. Indeed their unwilling¬ 
ness to be assimilated there is the main reason for 
their being here. In Alberta, where representatives 
of these groups were nixed with others in one great 
opportunity-seeking hodge-podge, the forming of 
communities and church congregations has to some 
extent served to segregate them, but the very fact 
that they have inevitably come into contact with 
one another makes it possible to point out, in a 
general way, the manner in which various German¬ 
speaking groups estimate each other, 1. " Per Schwab© ", 
the southern German whose industry and "Diekkopf igkeit" 
have turned so much unproductive land into vast 
fields of grain, is regarded witn fond amusement by 
all Got man-speaking people including himself. He 
is the butt of a tremendous number of jokes, but, 
like Jock the Scot and Pat the Irishman, does not 
mind others having a laugn at his expense. 













55 _ 

2. Between the Volga German and tine Volnynia-Ger^man 

the difference is rather marked. The Volga-Germane 

are more typically southern German and the Volhynia 

and Polish-German more typically northern. The 

difference is claimed to be as great as that between 

the southern Englishman anti tne Irish* Their dialects 

of German differ; children who hear only the Volga- 

German dialect at home are said to find it almost 

impossible to follow High German at church services f 

and the VoUiynia-German dialect, while nearer in 

approach to standard German, is riev«r VWe. less a 

marked cli a|e«L+;. If their dialects differ*, so do their 

characteristics. In his religious attitude the Volga- 

German is as strictly conservative as the Scotch 

Presbyterian. He knows his Bible and his hymns. *ith 

regard to education it is the Volhynia-German who is 

more progressive and sends his children on to normal, 

Commercial school and University. The Volga-German Jgsfo. 

is a more athletic type. This is noticeable in Calgary 

where Riverside school invariably takes a leading part 

in athletic contests due mainly to the large number 

of children of Volga-Germans who attend there. Two 

young men of the same descent and from the same city 

have risen to fame in the ranks of professional 





~ 











^ 








' 


.' ■. - ' J - •■.- . : 




.. .• . 








, ■ ■■ . : ■ • • - " - • -• ■ 




■ • ^ •• 


' 












- 


. •• -. 


' 












... v- - ■. 


• - •' - •• • - 






- • . . • ' ' 





. .• ■ - • ■ • ■ ■ . •: '■ - 1 


... -• - ■■ - ; 






. . ..... ".i. '■ • - -> >. v 













50 


hjockey* In both groups the majority are still on the 
land, yet a fairly large number belong to Edmonton's 
and Calgary^ laboring classes. 

3. Among the recently immigrated Polish-Germans there 
is a significant egression which is often used: 

"Der dumme Deutsche, der sagt was er denktl" — 
a discouraging and not highly enviable attitude towards 
straightforwardness. 4. The heichsdeutsch and the 
German-Canauians are definitely regarded as being 


superior in the eyes of the Canadian, who bases his 
judgment mainly on education and standard of living. 
The Keichsdeutscher regards the huseian and Polish- 
German, culturally speaking, somewhat in the light 
of a "poor relation". Yet he acknowledges a distant 
kinship whenever he thinks of "wir Deutechen im 
Ausland". On the other hand there are those who 


have jumrgrcited from Germany anu have developed, 

agriculturally speaking, 

^ an inferiority complex towards their Russian-German 


neighbors, who have been in the business longer and 
may have used this advantage as a level'. 

5. The American-born German is recognized au one who 


speaks "die echo nste Lengevitch". he is likely to 


speak this way: "Geh und fix die Fence. Oh, du 
muszt zur Town gehen? Veil, vergess' die kail nicht." 



















* 




* 


' 


. ... . •... ...• - - ' ' ■ • : : 

















. 




. 






. 







. 








. ■■ - ' • - . 


- . 













57 

6. The Mennonite wants peace above all* he wants 

a 

land or profitable work, i Ui chance for his children 
and a chance to help needy Mennonites* he wants 
everyone to profit by his experience and to take 
his stand for peace. The progressive Mennonite is 
a brother to all and zealous in his quest for right 
living. The conservative Mennonite feels misunderstood 
but is convinced that he is less wicked than the 
movie-going, jazz-humming, fashion-mad, irreligious, 
drinking, smoking,dancing, gambling world. 

7. The Hutterite is equally other-worldly, but will 
have none of the Mennonite until the latter shares 
his point of view with regard to the community of 
goods. Conversion can only be in one direction— 
away from public life where temptations of the flesh 
have constantly to be met with and are too often 
overwhelming, and into the brotherhood where the 
short earthly span may be passed in comparative 
simplicity,peace and happiness. 

These are characteristics which apply 
to German-speaking people who live in Alberta. 














t*s 

I am unable to give minutely accurate figures 

for Geraan-speaking immigration from year to year, 

but bave taken the liberty of interpreting all the 

data which I co3Hd gather in compiling a tolerably 

accurate estimate. The following table has been 

worked out with the aid of information collected from 

personal and written accounts in addition to that 

collected by the census. It has to do with the time of 
4 largest £ immigrant groups of 
arrival of tiie^German-speaKing people resident in 

Alberta in 1931. heedless to say there have been others 

not included in these figures, who did not remain 

permanently in Alberta ana still others who have died here. 


Year of Arrival Russian-bora Ger-born bs-bom polish-born 


before 1901 

1100 

630 

530 

300 

1901 - 10 

2500 

1260 

3100 

800 

1911 - 15 

1550 

1200 

1450 

493 

1916 - 20 

650 

100 

1450 

10 

1921 - 25 

1700 

850 

500 

300 

1926 - 31 

2700 

3500 

600 

2100 

Total 

in Alberta 1931: 

10129 

7789 

7586 

4111 


% of 

total immigration 

(Alberta) 

before 1901 

3.6 

2.7 

2.6 

1.5 

1901 - 10 

2.6 

1.7 

3.3 

.9 

1911 - 15 

2.7 

2.24 

2.6 

.9 

18 16- 20 

1.2 

.52 

4.3 

.02 

1921 - 25 

5.6 

2.9 

1.6 

.96 

1926 - 31 

2.4 

4.3 

2.8 

5.5 

Of Total immigrants 
in Alberta 1931: 

3.4 

2.66 

2.58 

1.3 
























' 




' 








■ 

















59 

Arrival of German-speaking linmigrante • 

A group of German-speaking people were settled in 
the vicinity of Pincher Creek as early as 1883, Where 
they formed a Lutheran congregation soon after 
their arrival* Among the Lormons or Latter Day Saints, 
who first entered Alberta in 1887, German extraction 
was high and German families of this religion have 
since joined the original koriaon communities established 
in souther^n Alberta. In 1888 land was taken up in 
a township west of Red Deer by German-speaking fam¬ 
ilies and in the following year larger German language 
communities appeard in southern Alberta, in the 
Dunmore, Gleiehen and Seven Persons districts. The 
vicinity of Edmonton drew about two hundred families 
from the southern communities and with them many new 
arrivals, so that in the course of the next three 
years the foundations of today's foremost German- 
speaking farm communities were laid at Josephsbuig, 
Beaver Hills, BrQderheim and Bruderfeld, Stony Plain, 
Rabbit Hills, Leduc, Wetaskiwin and Bashaw. Every 
train brought newcomers who gladly joined them in 
homesteading and lost no time in filing on the rich 
meadows and brush-covered acres situated within 
reasonable distance of the projected railroads. 

The Calgary-Edmonton line had been built to 














60 

Strathcona between the fall of 1690 and August 27, 1891. 

The Canadian Northern line from Grandview, Manitoba, 

was completed to Edmonton in 1906 and the Grand Trunk 

Pacific line was opened for traffic between Winnipeg 

and Edmonton in September 1909. 

The town of Strathcona, on the south side 

of the North Saskatchewan river, was separated from 

Edmonton on the north bank by a distance of three 

1912 

miles and it was not until that these 

two points were connected by railroad. Stage-coach, 
ferry, Red River cart of Prairie Schooner, oxen, 
horses, steamers all served as means of transportation. 
Dog teams still came to Edmonton in the winter months 
and the Indian travoie as well as their stampede- 
ponies were familiar to those homesteading in the 
neighborhood of Indian reserves. Hardships, monotony 
and isolation have had their effect upon the lives 
of the agricultural trailbreakers, yet many look 
back fifty years, forty years and thirty years with 
a feeling akin to longing, not for recapitulated 
youth but for the outlook which was youth* s at tliat 
timej the more leisurely ana less involved life 
when one had time for one*s neighbors, when there 
were less luxuries to covet and the measure of one * s 









■ . 

' 








- 




/'/ As • - / */■■•/• / - £ f 


■ 










. 











- 




. 




.. ... C v* • - ■<. 

■■ ’■» ■ ' 'l. 











61 

success was almost, guaranteed by the measure of one^ 
willingness to work and to make sacrifices. This 
outlook, and the assurance that the path they were 
following would lead somewnere, has been intruded 
upon, for they now feel that it is in danger of 
being completely obliterated. 

Early immigration had come to Canada 
by way of the United States, The ensuing years 
under the Sifton policy of encouraged immigration 
and a more direct method of disposal of lands 
brought doubled and trebled German-speaking immigration 
into Alberta. Communities in thejudiiionton district were 
extended and new ones established as the total 
homestead entries mounted from year to year, settlers 
arrived in the Kosental and Liwassin districts east 
of Stony Plain in 1898. The next four years saw 
Spruce Grove, Golden Sjpike, Gnadenthai west of Ledue, 
Clover Bar east of Edmonton and the area east of 
Lake Wabanun populated to sJgreat extent by German- 
speaking people. Influx into the Wetaskiwin and 
Bashaw areas also increased. ~ ~ In southern 
Alherta German-speaking homes were established in It02 
in Vulcan and Champion districts fifty and sixty 
miles north of Lethbridge. From this date urban 






; ., .. . 




■. < , ■ ■; 










.v~V 




■ 








■ 

. • • - '■ ■ .. r ' - • 

. ■■■■.'■■ ' - - ' ' ■ : . 

■ • - ' • ■ • | • . 






,, . r ... . ... ■ : - 

♦ 1 ■ 










... . ....... . ...... 














■ 









62 

population of German speech also increased in 
Calgary and Edmonton, Calgary receiving an influx 
of hussian-Germans from the Volga district in 
the years between 1906 and 1912. 

Beginning in 1903, Ardrossan east of 
Edmonton and townships west of Ponoka gradually 
heard more German spoken by incoming settlers. 

In 1904 settlement was pushed westward and eastward 
of the Wetaskiwin area, anu German-speaking immigrants 
from Europe grouped about Pigeon Lake wnile others 
from the Dakotas entered Alberta and formed communities 
at Spring Lake wouth of Deysland, as well as in the 
neighborhood of ileisler and Forestburg. At tne same 
time Claresholm, Pincher Creek and kagrath in the 
foothills belt received American-German settlers 
as did also milk itiver area and Lethbridge. In 
1907 and 1908 more districts in central Alberta 
east of the Calgary-Edmonton line were entered by 
American-Germane largely through the efforts of 
a colonization company originating in Eureka, L'orth 
Dakota, negotiating with the Calgary Colonisation 
Board. In this way the core of the large number of 
German-speaking families now in the Acme-3eiseker- 
Carbon district was formed, kith the year 1908 












63 


began the history of German-speaking settlements in the 
Cypress Hills and kedicine Hat areas, formed by people 
previously established in the Western States with the 
addition of newly arrived immigrants and further in¬ 
creases through the westward movement from older 
Saskatchewan communities. The Schuler-iiilda-Burstall 
area which juts into Alberta from Leader, Saskatchewan, 
was settled in 1909-1912 and, following northward 
along the Alberta-Saskatchewan boundary, other Sask¬ 
atchewan offshoots are found in the vicinity of 
Altario and Compeer, Rosenheim and Provost, Alberta, 
with Luseland and Liacklin just east of the Boundary, 
in Saskatchewan. 

In 1910 more German-speaking immigrants 
entered northern Alberta and between this date and 
the first two years of the Great War foundations were 
laid for the present German-speaking communities at 
Friedenstal in the Peace River district, for Lapp and 
Freedom respectively north anu west of Westlock, and 
for points west of Kdson whose possibilities were 
Drought to light when the Grand Trunk and Canadian 
Northern railroads were building their lines to the 
Pacific coast through Yellowhead Pass. Of the latter, 
Tomahawk, Wildwood, hvarisburgh, liorth and South Styal, 










. 








. ' ' ■ 




. 









, 

. 





























64 

Wolf Creek, liosevear and Edson drew German-©peaking 
families. Other pre-war immigrants of German speech 
enlarged the Irvine-Walsh communities east of Uedicine 
Hat, settlea at aranum north of macleod, and at Three 
Hills ana Trochu north of Beisekei*. mennonite settlers 
also came to Alberta from Manitoba about the year 1910 
and settled at Swalwell northeast of Beiseker. Another 
group of mennonites from Nebraska formed a settlement 
south of Tofield shortly afterward, representatives 
of the x^ennonite Brethren in Christ, some of whom 
speak Plattdeutsch in their nomes but whose services 
are all performed in the English language in xdberta, 
had come to Alberta from Waterloo county, Ontario, 
as early as IS94. In the winter of 1907-08 this body 
founded tne Beulah Mission in Edmonton. The main body 
of its followers was established at Didsbury about 
this time. 

During the war and the years immediately 
following it German-speaking immigration into Alberta 
dropped to a small fraction of its former proportions. 
New Genaan language settlements were established, 
however, when in 1918 ten hutterite colonies: four 
from Old Elm Spring in South Dakota and six from 
Yfolf Creek, North Dakota settled in southern Alberta. 


























65 


Another feature which made for the establisiinufent 
of further German language communities was the acquisition 
of larger acreage by settlers in the older districts 
throughbuying out their neighbors and the resettlement 
of those who sold their homesteads in order to take 
up land elsewhere in the province• This has been 
a part of the history of the settlement of Alberta and 
many of the first to arrive have farmed in two or 
three different districts and have cnildren who are 
farming in as many more* while others have remained 
on their homesteads and have established their children 
around them on farms which they have purchased from 
former neighbors. At Castor in central Alberta, and at 
Sexsmith and ^emb^ley in the Peace River district there 
are German-speaking families who proceeded to these 
communities from Stony Plain. Others have proceeded 
to Hay Lakes from Lutherhort east of Ellerslie and to 
the Heed Ranch east of Olds from Babbits Hills district. 

German-speaking immigration did not again 
reach its pre-war proportions until 1923 when over 
300 families of mennonites were brought to Alberta 
from southern Russia by the Canadian Pacific Railway 
and were further aided in establishing themselves, 
the largest settlements being at CoAldale east of 













66 


Lethbridge, Namaka east of Calgary \ Rosemary, Duchess, 
Countess and Gem in the Bassano-Brooks district, Burns 
Ranch east of Olds and La Glace north of ^embley. In 
1926 began a much larger influx of Reichsdeutsch and 
of Polish-Germans than Alberta had hitherto experienced. 
Some of the existent German language groups were added 
to and new ones appeared in districts still available 
for homesteading: at Athabasca and Colinton in 1926, 
Northmark, Heart Valley and Goodfare in 1927, Flatbush, 
Fawcett and Barrhead in 1828, and in the following 
/ear at Slave Lake and Rewbrook in northern Alberta, 
lines Creek in the Peact River district, Thorsby and 
points west, Patience and Falun respectively northwest 
md southwest of Retaskiwin, Lavesta 26 miles west 
of Ponoka,and Alhambra east of Rocky fountain House. 
Caught by the depression before they were established, 
many of these have incurred debts, others have made 
slight headway, while the majority feel that they are 
"marking time". A number of the post-war immigrant 
group have left Alberta for British Columbia and a 
number have returned to Germany. 

The movement away from the dried-out areas 
in scTuthem Alberta in the last four years has brought 
a number of German- speaking families from southern 
















. 






















\ 




' 


















. 










67 

and eastern central Alberta to the newer German 
language communities west of the Calgary-Edmonton line, 
in the territory north of Edmonton, and in the Peace 

River area. 













68 


Chapter 11. OCCUPATIONS. SURVEY. 

Table 68, Volume 11 of Census 1931 classifies the 
German mother tongue group as to residence. 


!dale 27,829 
female 22,450 



Urban 

13,131 


Total 

63,410 

84,376 

29,034 



A survey of the urban population of German 


speech takes one from east to west end of Alberta's 
:ities, reveals various stages of assimilation and 
represents all types of occupations. One is first 
directed to the "foreign" or manufacturing section 
>f the city: north-east and south-east Edmonton, 

Riverside in Calgary, North Lethbridge, the valley 
north-east of the river in Medicine iiat, east of the 
tracks in Wetaskiwin. There domiciled in the neighbor¬ 
hood of the packing plant, the mill, the machine shop, 
the pottery and the greenhouse are many German-speaking 
families. They aBe the thrifty laboring class, many 
with trim houses and neat gardens on their oWn lots. 

Their ministers knoj* them quite well and the teachers 

speak well of the ability of their children. 

Then one cosines upon tradesmen and small 

business men, and lastly attention is drawn to professional 

men. 














I • !• 

































, -M 






' 
























69 

The large number of German surnames in city 
directories indicates German descent in many cases 
irhere through two or more generations there has 
been no connection whatever with the language. Urban 
occupations and urban residence, particularly in 
fields other than industrial labor, are prone to 
i esult in the speedy dropping of a second language 
through lack of practice. The use of a foreign language 
in family life cannot long remain free from linguistic 
intrusion, and church and social gatherings likewise, 
t is in urban communities that evidence is most 
i*lear of assimilability on toe one hand and appreciation 
>f toe value of a second language to toe extent that 
conscious effort is exerted to overcome the natural 
„o lose it, on toe other. The usual urban interests 
;ire held by toe German-speaking population and they 
Lake advantage of opportunities for toeir gratification 
as time and means permit. 

A classification of toe German origin group 
as to occupations is found in the Census. Its figures 
may be interpreted as applying with fair accuracy to 
the German language group in Alberta since those of 
German speech who are found in other origin groups 
would, when classified b/ occupations, balance in most 











70 


respects with the number here included who are not 
of German speech. This holds particularly for the 
iigricultural occupations, which in this case involve 
ilie largest numbers. 

In 1931 there were 29,983 persons, ten 
years of age and over, gainfully employed in Alberta, 
who stated their origin to be German. More than 21,000 
of this number were immigrants, and these 21,000 
tojoaprise one eighth of Alberta's gainfully employed 
immigrant population. 

The number of women in thejLerman origin group 
who are earning their own living is outnumbered one to 
nine by the number of men, only a few more than three 
thousand of the 21,000 being females. Of these 12 1/2% 
are engaged in agricultural pursuits, 3 % in manufacturing, 
1% in communication (telephone operators), 6% in trade 
( majority saleswomen), 14% in professional service 
(teachers and nurses), 53% in personal seijvice (domestic 
servants, housekeepers, waitresses, lau^resses), 

6 1/2% in clerical work (steltographers and bookkeepers). 

Of the 26,892 males 75% are engaged in 
agricultural pursuits (nearly 12500 being farm owners 
and stock raisers, and over 7500 farm laborers), 

2% in mining (505 in coal mining, 57 in oil drilling 










71. 

and quarrying), 4# in manufacturing ( 107 in vegetable 
products, 32 in textiles, 82 in wood anu pulp products, 
printing and publishing} 687 in metal products of whcm 
241 are mechanics), nearly SD in building and construction, 
electric light and power (one half, i.e. 341 are 
carpenters), 3% in transportation and communication 
(412 in railway transportation, 359 in roat transportation} 
3 C # in trade (364 retailers, 293 salesmen. 111 buyers), 

3 1/2# in service (334 in professional service, 427 in 
personal service, 174 in clerical work), nearly 4# 
unskilled workers not engaged in agriculture, mining 
or logging. 

Reference to the Census map on page 8 will 
uake clear the following areas under wnich the 
i ierman language communities have been considered. 

^eace River ire a is Division 16 on the Census map. 

Northern Alberta extends from Lesser Slave Lake to 
a hori zontal line drawn through Wetaskiwin. 

Central Alberta lies between horizontal lines through 
Wetaskiwin and Calgary. Southern Alberta lies between 
Ihe line drawn horizontally through Calgary and the 
i meric an boundary. 

The Peace River District. 

Friedenstal, near Fairview, is the oldest and most 


















'Xmvsa.r 
J’dsovi ! 5 


'Sh»»'A | T»kj 

uRT\Tj! 


yeqr^vilU 


i NaV. 

'3>\p&rk 


\&ask\wm 


U\<fc0YY\''oe 


f\^DetY 


ftfUod 


-3 •» 

J> Warner 


HiVtVewm /pc 

H^c^rttV; | /y 

. p 1 A? 


wm 


/ 


V«^tr S\^vft/ 

4 '-r'T; '.V ' 


/ ^'«k v \ 1 j 

I Dopp nf^^a'bJ.iCj 


.Nf^ 


Y(esV\ock ^ 

r^xkta , 


r ?Ves'c^'AV6,Jl 


■i 


HIGHWAY 

•$ ALBERTA 

^ Hi&tridfc w\)«r<t German \s spoken. 

♦ i-mvn\^Yan\:5 from Gevmanj ^ussi^U-S^A 

* K; "Hftermoirut^s 
mm HuVVtrUcs 

*» Mo io 


SCMt of Miles 


& b k c\t cl.9 1 wa n 














72. 

prosperous of the German language communities in the 
Peace River area. It originated in 1910 and its 75 
families are mixed German and German-Russian settlers 
strongly affiliated with the Catholic church. _ 

The Lutheran settlement west of Wembley is also fortunate 
in its location but, like the other Peace Idver settle¬ 
ments, was begun shortly before the depression in 
wheat prices and has felt its effects keenly. It is 
however a well established district, consisting mainly 
of families who hojmestecded at Stony Plain forty or 
fifty years ago. This is also true of East Sexsmith com¬ 
munity, where progress has been made more difficult 
by the heavy bush characteristic of the Burnt Hills 
stretching northward from Sexsmith. Smaller settlements 
of Lutherans at Goodfare and of kennonites at Lymbum, 

La Glace and Wembley ccQnsist of post-war immigrants 
from Poland and Russia. They are just beginning to rise 
from the effects of the depression. The district of 
Northmerk is outstanding for the headway it has made 
in clearing the land which is watered by the Burnt River. 
The district was opened in 1928-29 by immigrants 
from the northern German provinces of kecklehburg and 
Schleswig-Holstein. With the addition of Polish and 
Russian German immigrants the total of 60 families has 
















73. 

been reached. This settlement might be termed e 
rapidly growing eight-year-old advanced by uerman toil, 
for nearly 600 acres were newly broken in the past 
year and 30000 bushels of wheat and oats were threshed 
from 1600 of the 2000 acres under cultivation. These 
settlers have vivid recollections of the obstacles 
which faced them in homestead life, when freight on 
each sack of flour was $0, wnen a whole day's work 
at a temperature of 60 degrees below zero netted #1, 
when fine linens which had been brought from Germany 
were rain- and mud-soaked in the hastily-erected 
houses. But eight years have changed this aspect. 

Two homestead settlements at Peace Grove 
and hoyce north o^f nines Creek, which is the "end of 
steel 11 , were begun by German and Polish-German immigrants 
about a year later than Northmark settlement . They 
were aided by two Lutheran synods , both of which 
maintain congregations here. Poverty, discomforts, 

toil,-all the elements of homesteading are still 

present. Yet what a difference in comparison with 
frontier life of forty years ago! Clearing and 
breaking is done by tractorj various manufacturers 
of modem farm machinery maintain salesmen who 
penetrate to the farthest outlying farms, on roads 









■ 


- 




' 


















■ 





■ . , 

. 












, 

. 









































74 

which are ruinous to cars, in order to place machinery 
in the farmers' hands, when the low prices of the 
depression years prevented them from making a living 
the government came forward and advanced relief so 
that they might he assured of the necessities. Thus 
helping hands have been extended and different 
standards of living and of farming maintained at the 
cost o^f incurring great indebtedness. 

In mixed language settlements at Dixonville, 
North Star and Notikewin, the most northerly point 
able to be reached by highway, there are a number 
of German Catholic homesteaders, while other German¬ 
speaking homesteaders are found in small numbers 
at posts in the central and north-western part of the 
Peace River area which can only be reached by horseback. 

Northern Alberta. 

The road from the Peace River district lies along 
the shore of Lesser Slave Lake, an elongated, narrow- 
waist ed stretch of water which shimmers through tall 
poplars and finally emerges with a bristling fringe 
of willows, with roots grimly interlocked in the 
spongy soil. Its shores are no agriculturists' paradise. 
The notorious Slave Lake bush has caused many a man 
to despair of clearing his land, an enterprise which 


















75 


involves both labor and expenditure. A number of young 
German immigrants who were in a hurry to locate homesteacb 
settled on the north shore of the lake. They are now 
making their living b.y trapping during the winter months 
and their object is to begin fur farming, following 
the example of several mink ranchers located on the 
highway along the southern shore. At Athabasca there 
are both old timers and newcomers whose mother tongue 
is German. One man participated in the Klondike Gold 
Aush. The majority, however, are post-war immigrants 
on scattered farms, anc^tueir cnirf recreation as a 
language group is an informal Saturday-night 
gathering at one of the home s in Athabasca. 

There are four Lutheran congregations at 
Newbrook which include 40 families of newcomers who 
settled there immediately before the depression. 

Flatbush and Fawcett have mixed congregations of 
Austrian, iwussian-and Polish-German settlers in 
districts heavily overgrown with brush, i^uch German 
is used at Flatbush store, the proprietor and clerk 
being German-speaking. Some effort has been made to 
form a language society. 

German and Austrian families are settled 
in the neighborhood of Dapp. A number of these entered 





















76 

the district between 1910 and 1913, previous to the 
building of the Edmonton-Dunvegan and B.C. railroad. 

Others have settled on homesteads since the war. They 
are in possession of fertile land and a number have 
artesian wells on their farms, A German-speaking social 
organization ana an annual picnic are institutions 
in this district, 

A number of Westlock's business men are of 
German mother tongue, some of long standing and thoroughly 
assimilated, others of more recent arrival. 

Along the highway to Barrhead is Freedom, 
where families from Germany settled in 1914. This 
well-established agricultural district is watered by 
the Pembina Biver. Post-war immigrants from VolJjyni^ 
Russia and Germany began homestead communities and 
Lutheran congregations at Rochfort Bridge, and also a 
Liennonite settlement across the Athabasca liver from 
Blue i\idge on the edge of the uninhabited territory 
in the central north. 

Upwards of 25000 persons whose mother tongue 
is German reside within northern Alberta, and four- 
fifths of tills total is found within a circle of 
45 miles radius with Edmonton as center. The proportion 
of urban dwellers becomes noticeably higher in this 
section, Edmonton alone counting nearly 3000 uersons 




:■ " . ■ - i - - ; - 

-■ " ' .• • - 5 ; •>- - ■ ./ : ■. 

> 

, j ' . ... 'J- - .i . 






77 


of ten ye are of age and over who had a speaking knowledge 

of German, The urban population is also augmented in 

the older agricultural areas by farmers retiring to 

the comparative comforts of residence in towns and 

villages. There is constant intercourse with non-German- 

sp^eaking people,and greater educational opportunities 

for the young people have resulted in their being f*r 

more proficient in the E ng lish language than in Gexiuau. 

On the other hand there is greater opportunity and greater 

inclination towards orgaisation in groups where the 

object is to meet regularly as German-speaking bodies. 

8 congregations of 

Edmonton has four social organizations and/four different 

A 

religious denominations which are served by German-speak¬ 
ing pastors. 

Within 50 miles northeast, south and west of 
Edmonton there are several hundred farms which have been 
cultivated by German-speaking people for upwards of 
fifty years. The o^rjLginal settlers cam to Alberta 
from Volhynia, with the exception of the early Stony 
Blain and Josephsburg homesteaders wha are Swabians, 
bora in so uthern Germany and in provinces which were under 
Austrian government before 1918. Of those who immigrated 

as adults only a few are still alive, but they, with the 

tell 

children and youth of the homestead days tales in 
abundance—tales of tall grass and stubborn stumps, 
of rain, mosquitoes and rabbits, of bitter cold and 













‘ 
















. ' . 


- 














' 
































78 


blistering heat, of oxen and wild-looking cattle, 
of homesickness, of birth and death endured in iso¬ 
lation. Tales full of pathos and then talde full of 
humor come tumbling forth as the past is revived. 
There are also tales of the war years when feelings 
were tense and unpleasantness between individuals 
was balanced only by tolerance on the part of the 
government, xiegarded at tnis distance, the days of the 
war take on the aspect of a time during which great 
respect was due to the government for maintaining 
this attitude. 

The early days, with all their discomforts, 
are regarded as good days~°kein Schixnpfen, keine. 
meetings, kein Relief". The keynote of the time 
was self-reliance. The German immigrant recalls that 
his attitude was: "Du hilf dir selber," and not 
"the world me a living." Prosperity in 

the main attended their efforts and the solid 
adherence ©f these people to the land has made 
a valuable contribution to Alberta's agricultural 
history. In conjunction with their zeal 
for farming they have maintained their religious 
affiliations. The individual communities are charac¬ 
terized not only by the measure of their agricultural 



*: V. 

■ 

■ 


. ..... 



. : : ■ • ' 

. ■■ - , r • 

. 




viL-■ 


. . 

... ■■ . - 

. 




)T\ \ 

, 

: 

. 






• - '• . . 





79 

progress and the countries of origin ana time of 
arrival of the settlers but also by the religious 
denominations 4o which they adhere. Two Lutheran Synods, 
and the Moravian, Baptist and Reformed churches are 
supported in tue various caumunities. A Mennonite 
settlement south of Tofield stands very much apart 
from the other German language communities in 
customs ana dialect. Begun by immigrants from Nebraska 
during the years preceding the war, the settlement 
has maintained its religious and family ties in 
that state while supporting Alberta's agricultural 
interests. 

East of a-jtifoionton area, at Vegreville and 
Mannville there are German-speaking settlers surrounded 
largely by bkrainian farm communities. To threat, 
on the way from Lake «abamun to Bason, there are 
scattered German f ami lies in most of the farming 
districts, with larger settlements at Rosevear and 
Wolf Creek. Swamp ana bush render much land in this 
part of the province unsuitable for agricultural 
purposes and while progress has been made, homesteading 
in these paints has been a long drawn-out process. 

At Tomahawk south o^f Sebs Beach, an agricultural 
settlement, about half of which is Russian-German 
in origin has been fortunate in maintaining a 









80 


0 

progressive community spirit and possesses on A of the 
best cooperative stores in Alberta. 

Central Alberta. 

Sections in the eastern part of central 
Alberta have gradually been added to the dried-out 
area, with relief and abandonment of farms following 
as matters of course. In the western port, post¬ 
war immigrant homesteaders and resettled farmers from 
dry districts are building further agricultural 
communities. German-speaking people are settled 
in varying numbers throughout the whole of central 
Alberta. Larger communities of American immigrants are 
found in Catholic settlements in the vicinity of 
Spring Lake, Heisler and Forestburg. ^outn of this, 
at Castor and Hanna are United Church congregations 
of Russian-born Germans, and Catholic and ^ennonite 
settlements are found between Provost anu ^CLtario. 

All of these have been affected by drought and hail 
in recent years. East and west of the highway 

between Wetaskiwin and Ponoka there are many Gasman- 

farmers 

speaking of long standing, who,like those 

of the Edmonton area, have contributed much to the 
establishment of Alberta's agricultural industry. 












81 * 

At Olds and jldsbury fovnir ranches lim 
been tmmed into agricultural settlements ana along 
both sides of the highway between Beiseker and Trocbu 
farms averaging 640 acres in siae;. have been cultivated 
by German-speaking people formerly established in the 
Western States* Four Hutterite colonies are situated 
south of the Beiseker-Drumheller highway and have 
been prosperous in agricultural pursuits under a 
religiously controlled communistic system. Settlements 
of Lennonites at Acme and Swalwell have f also, under 
a religious group-consciousness,become outstanding 
i and dairy fcriming. 


Southern Alberta. 

Twenty-eight Hutterite colonies, all but two of which 
maintain economic communism based on religious control 
are located at points along the highways in th^estern 
section of Southern Alberta. Ten of these were 
established in 1918 and further arrivals from the 
Dakota^colonies, together with the n& ural increase 
in population have swelled the number more than 
three-fold* 

A prosperous German-Catholic farm community 

of long standing is located so uth of Fincher Creek. 

Hussion-born ^ennonitee who came with post-war inmiigration 

of Aennonites from Hussia 








82 9 

# made possible by the aid of the Canadian Pacific 
Railway, are located naarjjy at Springridge and Glenwood- 
ville, and in a large settlement of 262 families at Cofcl- 
dale. Other groups of German-speaking farmers are found 
at Claresholm, Champion and Vulcan. All of these are in 
the fertile foothills belt where a view of tne Rocky 
Mountains, majestically seated in the distance, 
relieves the flatness of the prairie and vAiere strip- 
running and irrigation are being used to combat 
soil-drifting and drought. 

Further Mennonite settlements are at Kamaka 
and in the Basseno-Brooks district where irrigation is 
the ipracti seqj meth od of farming. ^ 

The large German language settlements north 
east of medicine Hat present a monotonous picture of 
dry flatness studded with groups of farm buildings 
which can be seen fo r miles around and whose occupants 
are nearly all dependent upon the government for their 
entire sustenance. Over ^uudred German-spelking 

families are in this position in tiie Sandy Point, 

Hilda and Schuler districts, o garden truck and no 
feed other than ms skkn thistles for their cattle, 
no money for upkeep of buildings ana machinery, 


# see following page 













83. 


and the stigma of relief spreading its demoralizing 

influence over all-these are depressing the old 

and baffling the young. And yet there is no exodus 
from these districts, but rather a return to the 
old stand on the part of the few families who have 
left to try farming elsewhere in the province. 

The proceeds of the few bumper crops of the past 
thirty years are all invested in buildings and equip¬ 
ment and the firm belief in "nex^t year 11 causes the 
entire settlement to persist in the face of continued 
disappointment. " All we need is a rain-maker" is 
the burden of their song, for with even a little 
rain the soil produces the hardest wheat of any in 
the province. The Irvine and Walsh settlements, 
extending south into thejcypress ilills, are not 
affected to as great an extent as Hilda and Schuler 


owe 


^previous page. 

The kennoniten der allgemeinen 
Kenferenz in Canada hav>, during the 14 years 
since the debt was incurreu, paid a total of 
$1,124,913.06 to the Canadian Pacific Hallway 
and announce in their year book that they still — 
$662,894.79 of the principal and $780,000 on interest. 
Many references are made t.o|tiiis debt in the report of 

Sld C inSJ 0 1937,"^°SJenUor?is%epeateSy a drawn 

Biay be rid of the yoke of debt. 









84 

settlements, for, in the words of the busy relief 

still 

officials, "more of them are^paddling their own 

canoe." The relief question is a difficult one here, 

and there is not the same hope of recovery as in the 

homestead districts of the north and. west of the 

province where settlers were forced to accept reliif 

through a depression in prices which caught them 

before they were sufficiently well established* 

In the south it becomes a matter of supporting a 

large number of families during the dry years in the 

hope that there will be periodic crops which will 

again render them self-supporting for a time. 

The two alternatives of installation of irrigation 

at high cost and undei* great difficulty since the 

districts are bothf far removed and higher in 

elevation than the sole source of water supply, 

or the assisted resettlement of a large part of the 

population and a change in type and method of farming 

pursued by the remainder so that these may be self¬ 
work 

supporting, are matters upon which researches now 
being done. 










One individual German language settlement is 
described at greater length in the pages 
which follow, and is typical of established 
German language communities 

1) in its origin as a homestead settlement. 

2) in the variety of backgrounds represented. 

3) in strong religious adherence. 

4) in extent of Maintenance of the German 
language. 

The account was prepared f!roiii information 
gathered during a visit to the district 
last October and was enlarged through the 
further cooperation of two meters of the 
settlement. 

Snapshots taken at Friedenstal are included 
in the Appendix. 

















Frieaenstal, east of Fairview. 

There are about seventy German families living 
in the neighborhood of Fairview and Bluesky, two towns 
on the line of the Northern Alberia Railway north of 
the Peace River* They are located some fifty to sixty 
miles west of the town of Peace River. The nucleus 
of the settlement, which dates back to 1910, and the 
portion which is solidly German, lies around Friedenstal 
Mission. In the early d ys the name of the post office 
was Friedenstal. When the railroad came this post 
office was divided, the eastern part going to Bluesky, 
while the western part was joined with “aterhole, the 
little town that was moved, bag ana baggage, to the 
railroad in 1928 and became Fairview. The district is 
a fertile flat plain, the Fairview elevators can be 
seen for miles around and the expanse of beautiful 
Peace River sky seems endless. 

The clearing of this landlwas not difficult as 
this part was mostly open prairie free from stone, though 
one farmer said that breaking was mate difficult for 
the homesteaders by the presence of rocks. Wonderful 
fields with an occasional bluff of trees lie along 
both sides of the roads and each group of fram£buildings 
is of two distinct orderst the first small sod-roof 
buildings and the more recently erected model houses 
and barns. The chief drawback of which the district 
is sensitive is the absence of underground water, but 
the farmers have learned to overcome this by digging 
large pools or "dams" as they caHl them, thirty to sixty 
feet wide, 100 feet long and 12 feetceep, which c tch 
the run off of snow and rain and successfully hold water 
the year round. A shallow well is dug ne r by into 
which the water filters through a trench filled with 
sand. 


Friedenstal is a prosperous farming district, 
the crops having been consistently good. Last year 
saw a eneral shortage of rain in the Pe ce River 
district, causing a drop of some 2000 bushels in the 
customary yield of some farms. w hen I visited the 
district in October the farmers were busy with fall 
work for which the early harvest had granted them an 
unusual opportunity. 

The business men in the town of Fairview acknow¬ 
ledge the sound principles of the Friedenotal farmers 
and the R.C.M.P. constables frankly praised them, as 
law abiding citizens and mentioned that/ A Bfle 01 uiese 
German families is on relief. They are also naturalized 









citizens, some of them having had their citizenship 
papers before coming north into the Peace Hiver 
district. 

In the summer of 1910., two young German Cana- 
dians. Peter Gans and Louis Flat, started out on their 
bicycles from Edmonton in search of homestead land. 

They followed the old trail which led through Peace 
River and on the north side of the Peace to ^unvegan, 
over which all previous settlement in Grande Prairie 
and Spirit Hiver had passed. In the high optimism of 
the land seeker they paddled along and came to where 
Friedenstal settlement now lies. On emerging from 
behind a bluff of trees a vast expanse of pwairie 
opened before theii/eyes. ' A ’hey stood awestruck at 
the beauty of the land, jumped off their bikes and 
examined the soil, and discussing its quality, they 
wondered wh t wonderful land there must be in Grande 
Prairie when people could pass by land such as this 
to settle there. They found no one to talk to and rode 
on happy in the thought of being able to homestead 
land of such wonderful quality, the like of which they 
had never seen before, ^hen they came to Spirit River 
they met a survey party who told them they would begin 
surveying some of the beet land across the Peace River 
in a few days, the land that they had already set their 
he-rtf upon. But like all land seekers they went on t 
Grande Prairie ana started searching for available land 
there. After several days of intensive roaming through 
the country they had to admit that there was nothing 
available to equal the landjbn thejnorth side of the 
Peace and they maoe up their mind to double back as 
quickly as possible, fhey met a party of three Germains 
Bartholet, Lexterkamp etna Groppe, who had just located 
there and they asked them why they had not located in 
that marvelous country north of the Peace and they 
answered* "We saw it alright, but no one had settled 
there and we feared that there must be something wrong 
with it, something we knew nothing of." 

It took a lot of persuasion to dispel that fear, 
but they finally pulled up staked and followed back 
across the Peace to start a settlement there. They 
located their various homesteads and immediately be an 
to break sod and build shacks. A few days later the 
surveyors came and ound them securely squatted on their 
new homesteads. A few letters in German newspapers 
brought a score of German settlers in the following 
summer and thus Friedenstal settlement began. Early 
in 1914 Dr. Bernstein a German physician joined his 














u 

sons in the settlement ana begng the first and only 
doctor, he was of inestimable value to the new settlers, 
who were deeply grieved by his death around Christmas, 
1915. Up to 1914 the settlement consisted almost en¬ 
tirely of German-born settlers who came north after 
having spent several years in the U.S.A. or the Cana¬ 
dian .vest. At present more than half of the settlers 
are Russian born Germans who came _ rom the Odessa 
district in southern Russia or from the vicinity of 
Saratow, central Russia, and settled here between 191 
and 1916. Some of these families came by way of *=»outh 
America where their relatives still live, and a few 
later arrivals endured harrowing experiences before 
leaving Russia. 

Outstanding among the adventures and tragedies 
of the early days an incident must be menticnea which 
occurred in June 1913. Mr. and Mrs. Konschak, an old 
couple, who had settled in Friedenstal with two of their 
children, wer on their annual visit to Grande Prairie, 
where their two other children were located. They 
camped overnight at the crossing of the Spirit River. 
Hobbling one of the r horses and turning the other loose, 
as was customary, they prepared their evening meal and 
retired for the night underneath the democrat. Next 
morning, finding that the loose horse had disappeared, 
Mrs. Konscha,, who was a very active woman in spite 
of her seventy-three years, told her husband, who was 
considerably older and feeble, to remain by the camp¬ 
fire while she went to find the lost horse. They 
thought it would not be far away. «hen she did not 
return after a lapse of a few hours Mr. Konschak 
became very anxious and when a passerby happened along 
the road he told what had happened and asked him to go 
to the nearest settlement to summon help. The settlers 
of Spirit River responded immediately and commenced the 
search. When at nightfall the search still remained 
fruitless word was sent to the Friedenstal and Waterhole 
settlements north of the Peace and to the large 
settlement of Grande Prairie to the south. Every one 
who was able volunteered to assist in the search. For 
weeks the countryside was combed and hope ran high that 
she would be found alive; the weather happened to be 
clear and mild and Mrs. Konschak, being strong and used 
to pioneer life, would know how to subsist on roots 
and berries. The saw mill of George Garnett, which as 
nearby, kept up steam continually and blew the siren 
at frequent intervals. A camp was quickly set up to 
provide the searchers with food. This .ragedy elded 
the people into one, no one spared himself in the 
































4 

\ 














C 

’ 




- 


a i 

* 




.. 



' 

* 







fig 


frantic search, but all in vain. Special searching 
parties remained active until fall. It was on the 
date of her disappearhce one ar later th t a sur¬ 
veyor discovered her Remains, only seven miles from 
the camp site. 

When the settlement was first started the late 
Bishop Grouard, a revered pioneer missionary, inquired 
into the spiritual needs of the settlement and suggested 
reserving a church site near its center. At his re¬ 
quest Father Biehler, German missionary, volunteered 
to homestead the church site and serve as missionary 
to the settlement. Unfortunately his health did not 
allow him to continue his labors very long. Father 
Croise 1 took up his work ; in 1912 and built thejfirst 
log church and rectory wito the help of the new set lers. 
In 1913 Rev. Father ... Ebert came from Eisenach, 

Germany, to assist him and when the war broke out 
Father Croise went overseas as chaplain, le ving 
Father jbert in charge of the mission, which he tended 
for seventeen years. In 1921 a magnificient new 
church was erected and finished just in tire for 
Christmas mass* This landmark and the community hall 
bear testimony to his untiring efforts* He is now 
succeeded by Rev. Josph Wagner, who had come from 
Germany with him in 1913. Besides the church and the 
community hall the mission consists of a convent for 
four Sisters, a large rectory for Father agner and 
his assistants, Fathers Herter and Klein, (two of the 
four priest who have come from a college noar Frank¬ 
furt within the last three years and were first stationed 
in Friedenstal by the diocese in order that they might 
assist at the church and outlying missions while 
learning the English language!, and a modern twe-room 
school, in stucco, which was just about to be opened 
when I saw it. School was being helfli temporarily in 
the community hall. x he new rectory was also in the 
making and a snapshot in Appendix I show® the c rpen- 
ters and Father Klein busily hammering on theroof 
of the structure. Purchase of a new organ for the 
church is anticipated also. The church bell, weighing 
640 lbs., and manufactured by one August Marfc, 
Brockscheidt, Sifel, arrived in 1929. 

I was invited into the two school rooms taught 
by two Sisters neither of whom speak German, and was 
asked to say a few words to the classes in German. 

I learned later that there is only one non-German 
speaking family attending Friedenstal school. There 
are 3S children in grades 1 to 4 and 37 in grades 





: i - , 


4 














. 

i 'l l Vv; 






• ”.V. 








. 






* 

. 






D 








' 


' 









21 

5 to 9. French is being taught toy one of the Sisters, 
who is French-Canadian, and classes in German by Father 
Herter were to begin as soon as the children were 
settled in their new school building. It was hoped 
that all the children would attend them at the close 
of the regular school period, the youngsters at the 
home in which I stayed, however, were not over- 
enthusiastic, and after hearing the many varieties of 
German spoken in Friedenstal homes, I cannot help 
feeling that there is hard work ahead if the ultimate 
object, a inrowledge of "Schriftdeutsch", is to be 
attained, w We have not done enough in this way for 
the Germane of this district in the past.y said 
Father Herter. 

It Is planned that houses will be built around 
the Mission, some of the lots having already been 
sold. I should add that there are no debts whatever 
on the buildings at Friedenstal Mission, ^nd still 
other bouquets may be tirown! Friedenstal School 
District, established in 1914, was the first rural 
school with a frame building north of the Peace River, 
as well as having been the first rural graded school. 

I was told that during the war Inspector Beveridge 
noted on his tour of inspection that his German 
district was one of very few to measure up to flag 
pole regulations and the display of the Union Jack 
in the school room. 

In 1913 the settlers of Friedenstal nd 
V/ aterhole started a mutual telephone system at the 
time when Morinville, a few miles north of hdmonton, 
was their nearest railroad station. fhe materials 
for the line were hauled from ^de.onton A by sleigh 
and were installed by the farmers themselves. It 
has remained the farthest northern telephone system 
for years and it is still giving excellent service. 

Since 1920 there have been one or two 
picnics a year the Mission, the proceeds going to 
the Church. Proceeds from socials held in the hall 
are used for its upkeep. $he annual chicken supper, 
held "when the peas are ripe", always draws a large 
crowd, There is a bowling alley beside the community 
hall. Since 1922 bowling has been the Sunday afternoon 
sport and someone is usually thoughtful enough to 
bring along a freezer of ice cream. 








; 

- 


. 




























' 

- 






. 








. 













The Gexman people of Friedenstal district offer 
a most healthy variety of widely differing types and 
enthusiasms, yet somewhere, (and undoubtedly the unity 
and leadership found in their religious adherence is 
a great factor), lies a . reat capacity for getting 
things done as a community and a steadfast adherence 
to their original objective, that of maintaining a 
German-catholic community. 















91 


Chapter 111. RELIGIOUS AFFILIATIONS 

The greater number of German-speaking people of Alberta 
have brought a religious background with them in the 
form of firm personal convictions, religious consciousness 
and affiliations with church bodies which are or were 
actively interested in settlement of immigrants. In 
many districts the people in showing a visitor around 
would point out the church as the building of first 
importance, and it is true of many community churches 
that they were the first buildings in the countrywide 
to be constructed of actual lumber and according to 
a plan. Characteristic of German-speaking homes 

are religious pictures, religious publications, German 
hymnsries, long German graces and family bible-reading, 
while earnest conversation at any time or place contains 
many references to H aer liebe Gott** and "das Christen turn". 
There are congregations whei’e the minister*s word 
is accepted as final in ail household matters and 
where practically all enterprise is therefore attributable 
to the leadership of the church. Religious inclination 
is sometimes so strong that higher education for the 
dhildren is thought of solely in connection with their 
entry into the ministry. 

On the whole these people rejoice in the religious 









92 


freedom which Canada allows them* Many left Europe 
principally because religious liberty was denied ihem. 
It must therefore be of interest to see what has been 


accomplished with it here in Canada. 

The principal churches supported by uerman- 
speaking people in Alberta are: # 


Three Lutheran bodies well over 18000 members. 


Homan Catholic church approximately 8000 
Branches of Mennonite church " 4000 
Hutterite Brotherhood Over 3000 
Moravian church 3600 
German Baptist church 2200 
Evangelical church approximately 1500 
Reformed church " 500 
United Church of Canada " 1500 


Other religious affiliations maintained by people of 
Gasman speech are, with approximate numbers: Seventh 


day Adventists 500, Anglican 100, Latter Day Saints 
or Mormons 100, Bible Students 20. ## 


rr -hautfht bw +heir m i'o ijf ers 

The extent to which German is ugod in xhtir e orviees 
will be considered in Chapter VI. 

## A number of Jews in Alberta are able to speak 
standard German in addition to Yiddish, which is 
a combination of Plattdeutsch (about 60,Jf and Hebrew, 
with additional foreign words varying with the country 
of residence. In 1931 out of a total of 3663 Jews 
in Alberta there were 11 who were boBn in Germany, 

46 in Autria, 373 in Poland and 1196 in ^ussia. The 
number who have a speaking knowledge of standard 
German is probably in the neighborhood of 100. 















93. 

1. The Evangelical Lutheran synod of ..-issourj. Ohio 
and Other States . The Alberta-B.C. district of this 
Synod is one of 30 on the North-iimerican continent. 

The district numbers 12257 members in the 102 stations 
where German is used in services. Thirty-three of its 
forty-four ministers were stationed in Alberta in 1037. 
It has eight parochial schools in ALberta (hines Creek, 
Sexsmith, ..smbley, Stony Plain: town and rural, 

Edmonton, Brightwiew and Lavesta) and a Concordia or 
pre-seminary training college with four professors 
at Edmonton. The theological college where its ministers 
are trained is at St. Louis, hissouri. 

Albei'ta-B.C. district is subsidized to the 
amount of $25 000 annually from the surplus funds 
raised in the whole of the 30 districts of the Synod. 

This Lutlieran Synod was founded by German¬ 
speaking immigrants to the united States in 1839 and 
organization took place in Chicago in 1847. The foremost 
of the six Fathers of the Synod was Dr. C.F. Walther, 
who became its first president and whose interpretation 
of Luthers doctafefoas fonns the fundamental difference 
between the principles taught by this Synod and those 
of other Lutheran bodies. Its work had grown from 16 
congregations with 23 pastors in 1847 to 4800 congre- 












94 

gations with 3760 pastors in 1934. The first 
representative of the Synod came into the region of 
Alberta in 1894 and the first congregation was formed 
at Stony Plain. Until 1921 when the Alberta-B.C. 
district was formed, the work was supervised entirely 
from Minnesota district. Alberta-B.O. district grew 
from 113 congregations with 27 pastors and 6900 
members i n 1921 to 200 congregations with 42 pastors 
and 11600 members in 1934. The congregations have 
been German-speaking to begin with but many services 
are now given in English and a number of English- 
speaking people have joined the Synod. All of the 
pastors receive bi-lingual training, in English and 
German. 

Concordia College, Edmonton was opened on 
October 31, 1921 and moved to its present buildings 
in 1926. It is somewhat like p private high school, 
entrance requirements being eight public school 
grades. The curriculum of the Department of Education 
cf Alberta for grades IX to Xll is followed insofar 
as the religious principles of this Synod, will allow. 
Instruction is given in English and German. The study 
of Latin, Greek and Hebrew is stressed. Until a £ew 
years ago the college was co-educational. 













95 

The young people's organisation of this 
Synod is the Walther Jeague and a r ally of 200 
members practically all of German**speaking parentage 
from points within a radius of fifty miles from 
Edmonton as centre took place on October 10, 1037. 
Programs are carried out almost entirely in -jnglish. 

Canadian church publications of this Synod 
are: Kanadisch Lutherisches Kirchenblatt, and the 
Canadian Lutheran, botn of which are Winnipeg monthlies. 
2. The Kv&Rv.elieal Lutheran S^nod of Manitoba vnd 

Other Provinces : one of three Synods of the united 
Lutheran Church of Worth .America. Its theological 
colleges are at Saskatoon and Waterloo in Canada 
end at St. Paul, Linnesbia. The synod has a member snip 
of 7196 in Alberta, with 4b churches, 13 preaching 
stations and 20 ministers. 44 Sundcy schools and 42 
weekly schools with slightly mere than 1000 pupils 
were reported in 1937. Three students from Alberta 
congregations are at present preparing for the ministry 
and five others are in Lutheran institutions. The 
Synod receives a subsidy from the Board of American 
Missions amounting to $50 000 annually for 30 of its 
pa/^ishes, 12 of which are in Alberta and include 
31 congregations with 2369 members. The Seminary at 








96 

Saskatoon, which had its beginnings in Alberta, also 
receives liberal assistance from the Boar d of Education 
of the United Lutheran Church. 

# "The Manitoba Synod was organized 40 years 
ago, however the beginnings of the work reach back 
several years furtoer. In the autumn of 1888 40 Luth¬ 

eran 1 amilies at Winnipeg, Manitoba, sent an urgent 
appeal to Rev, F.Veit, President of tne Canada Synod 
(Ontario), asking for todservices of a Lutheran pastor. 
Veit himself went to tne assistance of these people... 

In February, 18oj, Rev.,u.C.Jchmieder came to Winnipeg 
as the first resident missionary. He served the congre¬ 
gation at Winnipeg, but braving the severe cold of 
winter and the difficulties of travel he penetrated 
into Saskatchewan and Alberta and ministered to 
scattered groups of German Luther^ans thus laying 
the foundations =Cov*future congregations* To be 
more in the centre of the large field he moved to 
Edenwald, Saskatchewan, in 1890, where he labored for 
6 years. Other pioneers of those early days were paste*® 
Ruccius, Bredlow and Pempeit, the former two still 
with the Manitoba Synod* *... 

"Soon after the organization of Synod a large 
and steady influx of Lfctoerans from Europe set in. 

The missionaries already overworked could not cope 
with the situation. There was lack of men and means 
and in the church in toeEast there was not the 
proper appreciation of toeb^sibilities and opportunities 
afforded in th^vest. For years these conditions pre¬ 
vailed* Other Lutheran synods came into the field 
and took possession of many rich opportunities* 
Nevertheless the Manitoba Synod continued to grow 
though undermanned and inadequately supported. At that 
time new men for the field came mostly from the Kropp 
Seminary in Germany. 

"To insure an adequate supply of men for 
the increasing work and gradually to raise up a 
native ministry* synod found it necessary to arrange 
for a seminary on its own territory. Rev. J.Goos, who 
became the first president of the institution, began 
instructing the first students in the parsonage at 
Spruce Grove. In 1915 the first building was dedicated 
on the campus at Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. How important 
this step was, soon became evident, when war broke 
out and ghut off further supply of pastors from Germany, 

# Rev. A.Goos. Article in toe Canada Lutheran, October 

*3r. 



















97 

and when after the war a wave of immigration swept 
in from Europe offering new opportunities for expansion 
of the work. 

"With her own seminary preparing men 
for the ministry, an influx of Lu trier an immigrants 
from-r'-^jr* Europe, a greater interest for the 
work ond a larger measure of support oy the church 
at la*Cge a time of ra^id expansion set in. For a 
time 4 field missionaries were engaged gathering in 
Lutheran settlers and organizing congregations. ..ith 
the depression and decreased allotment this work of 
ingathering slowed up considerably, but since then 
more intensive work has been done. The large fields 
served by the fieldmen were divided into parishes, 
churches and parsonages were built with the aid of 
the Board of American missions and loans from Church 
Extension. Nevertheless expansion has not ceased, 
there are still many opportunities for progressive 
mission worx. ImiLigration does not bring many to . 
our doors in these days, but people from the driedout 
areas have in the last years headed for northern 1 
districts and thus the frontline for mission work 
is gradually' being pushed farther north. There is 
£he Peace stiver district in idberta, the heaver Hiver 
district in Saskatchewan ana in northern Manitoba 
the mini£ towns. Then in all three provinces there 
are many conanunities without any or adequate church 
services, and the Manitoba synod with other cliixrch 
bodies shares the responsibility to go in and possess 
the land for Christ ana His church." 

The young people* s organization of this 
synod is the Luther ^eague which has 304 members 
between the ages of 15 and 30 in its 12 branches in 
Alberta. The programs at e mainly in German. 

3. The American Lutheran Church was formed by the 

nerging of the Ohio, Iowa and Buffalo Lutheran Synods 

in 1930. Its Alberta Conference is one of four in 

its Canada District, and is compoysed of 35 stations 

in southern r."?W^*and central Alberta, with 8 ministers 

and about 3500 members. Previous to 1930 the Iowa 








98 

and Ohio Synods had had 10 parishes in Alberta. 

The American Lutha* an church has a college 

in Regina and its theological seminary at St.Louia 

Missouri* An Old People's and Orphan* a Home at 

Melville, Saskatchewan,is an institution of this 

church* The Immigration Board of the American 

Lu tiier an church, heaoed by n.ev. belief ilex* at medicine 

Hat, haa been working with the Canadian lacigic hail- 

way in bringing out immigrants and settling them 

Ca 

in congregations. The #nada district of this church 
receives an annual subsidy of between forty and fifty 
thousand dollars from the Uni tea States. 

4. The Roman Catholic Church h&a 11 German-speaking 
priests stationed in Alberta: 7 in the Peace diver 
district at Frieden&ial, Bex-wyn and North Star* 

2 in northern Alberta at St. Albert ana Admontonj 
1 in central ALberta at Spring hake; 1 in southern 
Alberta at reaaiBcam. Gexmeui-speeding Catholics of 
Provost district ©re able to affiliate themselves 
with German-speaking priests at macklin. While the 
number of German-speaking Catholics in Alberta is 
much smaller than in Saskatchewan they are equally" 
strong in their attacximent to the church. Friedanstal 
coEBnunity described in Chapter 11 is typical of 
German Catholic settlements in that the religious 






' 















99 

tie is an effective lever in community life. 

A German Catholic newspaper, Petersbote, 
printed at kuenster, Saskatchewan, is subscribed to 
by German Catholics in alberta. 

5. The kennonite church . There are 18 different divisioBs 
of Mennonites in Canada and several of these are 
represented in Alberta* There are approximately 600 
member* of the English-speaking mennonite Brethren 
in Christ with headquarters for Alberta at Didsbury 
and Canadian headquarters at Waterloo, Ontario. Two 
other groups are branches of kennonite churches in 
Manitoba and in Nebraska* These are kennonite groups 
which have been represented in Alberta since pre-war 
days. Post-war immigration brought three other branches 
of Mennonites into Alberta: the Evangelical kennonite 
Brethren and two larger branches, ^ennoniten Bruder- 
gemeinde and kennoniten der allgemeinen Conferenz. 

During the years since 1923 these have congregated 
at 43 stations throughout the province and have 
built churches in the larger settlements at Namaka, 
Coaldale, Rosemary and Gem. 

The kennonited der allgemeinen Conferenz 
number close to two thousand members and have 31 
ministers and 4 elders in Alberta* The ministry is 
not a orofession amon# the Mennonites and as yet 












100 

the Conference kennonites have not founded a Canadian 
training school for ministers. Preparatory training 
is given in^he Bible Schools which operate during the 
winter months, much organised charitable work is 
done amongst the Mennonites and there are records of 
donations and distribution of food y clothing and money. 

In the older ^ennonite congregations life 
is centred entirely in the church and the customs of 
extreme simplicity in clothing, clothes without 
buttons, and beard-growing are still observed fcp 
the more conservative members. .Among the post-war 
arrivals adherence to the church is about as faithful 
as among Catholics, and tue desire to Obtain land 
for those who are still without it and to clear the 
remainder of the debt owing to the Canadian Pacific 
Railway are incentives which strengthen their affili¬ 
ation with the church. An additional incentive is 
the sincere wish to aid the remaining i^ennonites 
in Russia* 

The Mennonite church dates back to a 
body of religious refoimere in Zurich, Switzerland, 
1525, but derives its name from that of Llenno Sixmo ns 
(1492-1561) who did most to establish the principles 
of the lar^ge reform movement in holland, whither a 













101 


party of the Swiss reformers had lied. In the kennonite 
religion the idea of the sanctity of the priesthood 
is disregarded entirely, and the sanctity of human 
life and the enlightened conscience upheld instead. 

Much stress is laid upon "die Treue H ( unsere Treue 
der Gemeinde gegenuber, dem Staate gegenhber, unsere 
Treue im gesellschaftichen und bQrgerlichen Leben, 
unsere Treue Gott gegenuber) reinforced by examples 
from biblical ana ^ennonite history. The Bible as the 
final authority, baptism of the enlightened believer 
alone, refusal to partake in military combat, 
objection to the swearing of oaths and an evangelistic 
spirit are marked characteristics of the kennonite 
religion. 

Both adults* ana young peoples organizations 

are included under* Kulturarbeit, kennonite publications 

much subscribed to are: Der Bote, Rundschau and Vorwftrte 

from the kennonite press at nosthern, Saskatchewan, 

6, The Hutterian Brethren, Each individual uutterite 

Bruderhof has its minister, who is without salary or 

special privileges. He is chosen by lot from the 

male members considered eligible for the position by 
all of them, and is on probation 
a meeting of ^-1- ~» 

for several months before he is ordained. His 





p ' 




^102 

theological trailing has been received in his home 
Bruderhof through intensive study of the Bible and 
the writings of the Hutterite ministry from its 
earliest beginnings* Though he is not exempted from 
his share of the physical labor 9 hie position of 
spiritual leader gives him the greatest authority 
and respect in the Bruderhof. In some of the Bioiderhofs 
the other authoritative office, that of Wirt or 
manager, is combined with the office of minister. 

The Hutterite religion dates back to the 
same group of religious relor^jrs in Zurich, Switzerland 
in 1525 as does the kennonite. Separating themselves 
from the reform movements of Luther am Zwingli they 
formed a religious sect called simply “the Brethren 11 . 

They shared with kart in Luther the idea that the use 
of force haa been necessitated on the part of governments 
by the falling into sin of the human race, but they 
differed with him through maintaining tuat executive 
administration and enforcement of law is not the 
Christian's business, since un-Christian principles 
have to be used. They pledged ci,eja.selveB to observe: 

1. Baptism of adults only. 

2. The Lora's Supper as a memorial service only. 

3. Emphasis of the need of Christians to separate 
themselves from the things of the world and to 
abstain from voting and office-holding. 

4. The support of the Christian ministry. 

5. A policy of non-resistance, denying that Christians 








103 

have the right to bear arms. 

6 The scriptural. injunction not to take oaths* 

7. The use of no other punisiiment or means of 
discipline than the biblical one of the Ban* 

The Brethren were known to be in sympathy 

with the demands for reform being advanced by peasants 

although they did not enter the Peasants 1 lar which 

broke out in Germany in 1526. Consequently, when this 

was suppressed they with the militant German peasants 

were forced to flee from thejpevenge of the nobles 

and their course in two directions, northward to Holland 

the 

and eastward to horavia, gave rise to/two separate 
groups of religious reformers: kennonites and hutteritss. 
Conjunction of the Brethren with refugees from all 
parts of Switzerland and southern Geiamany brought 
differences of opinion on the matter of non-resistance* 

A small body then separated itself from the refugees 
in hor&via and, under the protection of the lords of 
Kaunitz in the vicinity of Austerlitz, set out to 
observe non-resistance in its strictest sense and 
to advance another step in their efforts to live as 
the followers of Christ had. done, by shari^ng all goods* 
To this group came Jacob huter with more refugees from 
the Tyrol in 1633 end between that year anu the date 
of his martyrdom three years later he laid down the 
principles of organized community life wi^ich have 








104 

been observed by liutterites in five different 

co untries oner a period of four hundred ye cars. 

They have at times been content to depart 

from communistic life but have allowed themselves 

no compromise on the subject of non-resistance. 

The Hutterian Confession of Faith (Kechenschaft) 

states the attitude definitely: 

"•.since vengeance is of God and not of 
us, it should be left to him ana not be practiced 
by us. For since we are followers of Christ, we 
must also manifest the spirit of aim, who, although 
he could have done it, did not return evil 

for evil. • .Now, as Christians & ould not practice 
vengeance, they may not make the means by which others 
may practice such vengeance and destruction, lest 
they become partaker's of their sin. Therefore we 
do not make swords, spears, guns, nor other such 
weapons. But what is made for the daily need and use 
of man, such as knives, axes, hoes, etc., we may 
and do make...If someone uses them to harm another, 
that is not our responsibilityj let him bear his own 
judgment...we willingly pay taxes and customs, 
or however it may be termed, for we have le-r-ved this 
from our master, Christ, who not only paid it himself 
bpt co mmanded others to do so, saying: x.ender therefore 
unto Caesar the things that are Caesars and unto God 
the things that are Goa* s.. .But for warfare, destruction 
of life and shedding of blood (when taxes are 
asked for sucn particular purposes) we give no tiling. 

This we do not out of wnntonness or stubbornness but 
because of the fear of God, that we may not become 
partakers of others' sins." 

(Translation from viedemann's ..echenschaft by John 
11 orach, The Hutterian Brethren lb2o-lJbl.£»i37) 

7. The Moravian Church . There are twelve congregations 

the 

of/Moravian church in nlberta, the oldest of which 
are at Brttderheim and Bruderfeld. They were supplied 

















105 

upon request with a Moravian minister from Bethlehem 

Pennsylvania in 1896, and take their names from the 

church which in German is called "Braderkirche' 1 . It 

is also referred to as "Herrnhuters" from the town 

reformers 

of Hermhut built by X _ i in Saxony and still the 

principal seat of their influence and educational 

institutional. The religious sect of Moravian Brethren 

was founded by followers of John IIuss (1370*1415), 

a graduate of Prague University in 1393, lecturer in 

theology and philosophy, ana martyr to his anti-papal 

removed 

teachings, Not far/from Lutherans in religious 

doctrine, the long nistory of the Moravian church is 

characterised by an educative missionary zeal. 

Though its principal adherence is in America, 

Germany and England, it has stfittjlons on all the 

continents. 

8, The United Church of Canada . Some years ago this 
body maintained a superintendent of German missions. 

At present services are performed in German at 

the following stations: Edmonton, Castor, hanna, Medicine 

Hat and Calgary. 












106 


Chapter ]LV. ORGANIZATIONS 

Method and organization are often referred to as 
leading German characteristics. There are a*ny 
Germans who are not happy unless their world is in 
precise order and who like to hold to a routine 
which they e#£vulish for themselves. The very 
language, many a student has said when he encountered 
a lengthy compound-complex sentence, reflects organizing 
ability. One might expect to find a high degree of 
organization among the German element of Alberta and 
consequently be disillusioned by the discovery that 
German immigrants are also individualistic, and taut a 
heterogeneous mixture ' of Viewpoints affected by 
religious affiliations, birthplace and length of 
residence in Alberta renders tne effective organization 
of the language group impossible. German language 
communities in one part of the province are moreover 
totally unconscious of the existence of many others 
except insofar as religious or family ties bring 
them to one another^ attention. Hutterites are a 
closed book to the majority of Germ an-speaking 
Albertans and mennonites nearly so. Congregations of 
the various other religious sects do not engage in 



















































































' 












. 




















107 


iliter-denominational activities. 

The home and the family remain the best 
organized units and the religious community next. Sport 
and entertainment are included in church programs 
in the rural communities and purely secular organizations 
for people of ueraaji speech are not favored by the 
churches, which claim th^at such organizations fail 
in their efforts to promote German culture. Outside 
interest in the religious community is naturally taken 
up by participation in community league and school 
district activities, where the language used is 
English. Individual organizing ability is moreover 
deflected into channels of district organization for 
political and administrative purposes, where by reason 
of wider acquaintance and deeper insight into the 
problems of provincial government, assimilation 
is hastened and interest in the establishment of 
German language societies as such declines. Finally, 
when one considers that the German-speaking homesteader 
seldom has either time, money or opportunity to 
support organizations other than the church, the 
scarcity of secular German language societies 
becomes less remarkable. 

It is the Reichsdeutscher and the German- 










108 


Canadian, together with the urban or v«,ll established 
rural Russian German who maintain social organisations. 
There are five purely local societies and five branches 
of a Canada-wide organization at present maintained 
in Alberta by German-speaking people. At least four 
others have been active in Edmonton in the past but 
have been either temporarily or permanently dissolved, 
Deutscher ^und, Canada ,This society was organized 
in Montreal in 1933 and is registered in Ottawa under 
the name Canadian Society for German Culture. Canadian 
headquarters are in Montreal and western Canadian 
headquarters in Winnipeg. Five local branches or Orts- 
gruppen existing in Alberta to date are: Edmonton, 

20 members, organized 1934; ¥egreville, 15 members, 
organized 1935; Eorthmark, 25 members, organized 1^35; 
Dapp, 10 members, organized 1935; Calgary, 10 members, 
organized 1938, 

Reports are sent from the local brcliches to 
^r, P.Abele, Bezirksleiter, in Sdmonton, who has been 
alleviated with the organization since 1933, They are 
forwarded to Winnipeg and finally to Montreal. The 
reports are in the nature of minutes of the monthly 
meetings, vdiich in turn take the form of discussion 
groups dealing with varied topics of general interest. 











109 


Heading material is supplied by the Verein der Deutschen 
im Ausland whose head offices are in Berl^ in. The 
Deutscher Bund, Canada, is also a benevolent 
society and quantities of donated clothing and flour 
are distributed to needy homesteaders. Cash donations 
raised by means of membership fees and occasional 
newspaper appeals are sent to theGebietsleitung at 
Winnipeg and western Canadians in need apply there 
for help. 

Membership is at present restricted to 
males. It is intended that, as the organization 

grows, women's circles and youth groups will be 
formed, while the long-visioned contemplate the 
project of a private school- of instruction in 
German, music and literature,with occasional 
recreation trips such as are practised in Germany. 
While the object of this society is definitely to 
promote German culture in a rather conservative 
way it is worthy of note that membership is restricted 
to naturalized Canadian citizens and that no 
political objectives are included in its program. 
Deutscher Kluo Edelweiss, ^dmonton was incorporated 
in 1906 by Alberta's first Parliament, turough the 
efforts of a small number of German-speaking citizens 













110 

then resident in Edmonton who were desirous of 
establishing among themselves a common tie of a 
social nature. The first president was a w. G f 
Koennann, then owner of theihdmonton German newspaper 
"Alberta lierold". Mettin^s were held at 96 stl and 

102 Ave. until 1912 when thejclub had grown sufficiently 
to establish club rooms on 106a Ave. The club 

was disbanded du^ring the period of the Great ,;ar 
but reorganized shortly afterward. A clubhouse on 

103 St was rented by the society from 1922 until 
1928 when it established itself in the present 
Edelweiss club building on 101a Ave. between 95 and 
06 streets. A measure of economic prosperity has 
since been enjoyed by the organization for in 1933 
purchase of the building was effected and iIs con¬ 
tinued growth has made it one of the best financially 

social 

established^organizations in western Canada, assess¬ 
ment of its present property amounting to over 
$10,000. All members in good standing have a share 
in this property. 

Membership is open to any person over 
21 years of age whose application is unanimously 
accepted by a regular meeting of the club. It is one 
of the few clubs where membership and entrance to 































. 






. 






. 


























■ 




























. 
















Ill 

to the club's beer room is open to both sexes. The 
total membership is 176 of whom 60 are not German¬ 
speaking. 

A 'family evening' is held every month, 

is 

at which musical and other entertainment k * 
featured. An orchestra and a small mixed choir 
are affiliated with the club. A library consisting 
of several hundred volumes is used by the members. 

Benevolence has also been included in the 
activities of the Edelweiss Klub. A burial fund, 
in which members of two years' standing may share 
upon payment of $6, assures these of a sum of $100 
in the event of death. Financial difficulties on 
the part of members and non-members have regularly 
received the attention of the club. A prise of books 
to the value of $26 is offered annually by the 
Edelweiss Klub to be awarded at the discretion of 
the of the German Section of the Modern 

Language Department of theUniversity of Alberta. 

A trophy which is awarded at the annual German Day 
las also be»n donated by the club. Among other 
Interests are the Christmas and Easter entertainments 
a.t which children of the members receive gifts. 
Present efforts are turning a large measure of 




















112 

attention to the problem of enlisting the interest 
of the youthful element in the club for the organization! • 
sponsorship of pro grams of a cultural nature. 

The following theme song was composed for 

the club: 

1. Heil Edelweiss du Blume femer Alpen, 

Du weisser Stern der unsre Heimat ziert, 

Du wirst auf ewig unser Sinnbil£ bleiben, 

Da sich das ^erz zur Heimat stejbs verirrt. 

2. Auf fTemden Boden wollen wir uns finden, 

Und halten treu an altem deutschen Branch, 
fcamradschaft wo 11 die AX erzen aller binden, 

Wir schworen es mit unserm letzten Hauch. 

3. Ein Heil dem Land dem unser fernres Leben 
Und alle Kraft wohl in der Zukunft gilt. 

0 Canada wir werden dich auch lieben 
Und deutsche Treu sei dir ein guter Schild. 

Deutsch-Canadiseher Kationalverband, Edmonton, 

Meetings of this organization firre held in Scona 
Assembly Hall, Whyte Ave., Edmonton south. Its 
present membership is in the neighborhood of 80, 
a large number of whom are farmers living in the 
vicinity of Edmonton. Monthly meetings take place 
on Sunday afternoon. Occasional concerts and other 
social entertainments are held in which a targe number 
of young people take part. Maintenance of the German 
language is furthered to a great extent in this 
organization . The following are extracts from the 
constitution of this society, which was incorporated 








113 . 


on October 25, 1926. 

11 Article 11. The purpose of this association- 
shall be: First: the establishment of a non-partisan 
and an undenominational organization of all Canadian 
citizens of German birth or descent with a view of 
causing them to take the responsibilities of their 
Canadian citizensnip more seriously by showing a 
greater and more active interest in all political 
and other public problems. Second: To safeguard and 
promote whatever special interests the German element 
of this country may have, such as a) To meet all 
false impressions of biased opinions about German- 
Canadians with the necessary information and enlighten¬ 
ment. b) To urge upon every German living in this 
country to become a Canadian cit^en as soon as the law 
permits, c) To use our influence that in this land 
in which we speak and use the English language by 
choice and by necessity, our great inheritance, the 
German tongue, be not lost to us and our children. 

"Article 111. Any person may become a 
member of this association who is: a) A Canadian 
citizen of German stock* or b) any German-speaking 
person living in the dominion of Canada intending 
to become a Canadian citizen at his or her first 
opportunity." 

Deutsche, iigbeitsKemelnschai't., Sdmpnton .i’Ms organ!- 
zation was formed in 1937 and is in the nature of 
a committee of three delegates from each of the 
German-speaking societies in Edmonton. The immedi¬ 
ate purpose for its formation was the establishment 
>f a committee authorized to assume the responsibility 
for the management of the 10th Annual German Day held 
at Victoria Park on August 1st, 1937. Arrangement 
of the annual program has become its chief duty, with 
a further purpose of establishing cooperation among 
the German-speaking organizations through their 







. 




■ ■ * f p.v ' " ■ . 

: 




.V ;* •' 










• ■ ■ 

* 

. 

. .... ::: ■ ; 


; 

•' ' ' ■ 

v~-V; • '.'-a.- yj 


‘ 








































114 . 

delegates for cultural programs such as joint 
entertainments, a regular series of uennan films and 
German language classes. 

Program of the 10th Annual German Day, Edmonton, 1937; 

Saturday, July 31. (Evening) Edelweiss Klubi Gupper 

meeting. 

Sunday. August 1. (Afternoon) Victoria Park: Addresses. 

(Evening) Memorial hall:Concert. / Sports, 
konday, August 2. 

(Afternoon) Edelweiss Klub: Children’s 
festival (adjudicated). 

VerA'issmofcnnicht. Calvary . A large German-speaking 

society was in operation in Calgary during pre-war 

years and possessed club rooms, licensed bar and 

restaurant above the White Lunch on 8 Ave. E. 

These premises were badly damaged by member's of the 

56th Battalion in 1915. ±ull compensation was given 

and the club probably disbanded. Reorganization of 

the Verein Vergissmeinnicht took place in 1931, 

the certificate of incorporation being issued on 

April 27. Its object was stated as follows: to 

bring into close touch all German-speaking people 

and give aid to them if necessary. Its operations 

were to be carried on cniefly at 618-8Ave E. 

kembers must be able to speak German. One special 

meeting was held weekly and a general meeting every 

three months. This club grew to a total mambersnip 


























■ ■ • . 

' 
















■ 

I 




























115 

of 200 in 1932^33, with meetings twice a month in 
club rooms on 2 St E and 3 Ave. Bi-weekly dances, 
•family evenings*, and a Christmas entertainment 
were among the activities. With the depression and 
ensuing unemployment many members left Calgary to 
work in British Columbia lumber camps. Various 
troubles arose and a dispute between two factions 
within the organization was in the hands of lawyers 
last December. 

Verein Alpenroee. u euxcine uat . i'his oranization at 
present consists of about 30 maiibers and meets for 
social purposes. 

Other German-speaking societies which have operated 
in Edmonton: 

xhe German-Canadian Association . Incorporated Oct. 17, 
1923 under the Benevolent Societies Act, with the 
following purpose: M to bring together all persons 
of German origin or descent residing in the city 
of Edmonton or in the^ricinity thereof for social 
and amusement purposes. ” 

Deutsch-Canadische Gesellschaft lu30 . Restricted 
membership and a program of cultural and intellectual 
pursuits characterized this society. Monthly meetings 
were held in the Springer hotel, Edmonton, until 















116 


Turn unci Sport Club Je urn . Over fifty entnusiastic 
members of the German-speaking youth of Edmonton 
formed an athletic society in the summer of 1931, 
chiefly through the initiative of recent immigrants 
from Germany and Austria who missed the sport clubs 
to v;hich they had been accustomed. Exercises began 
outdoors at the reatf of the president's home on two 
evenings a week for each sex, and gymnastics were 
pursued with gradual assemblage of home-made equipment. 
As the organization grew it was able to rent the 
first floor of the Edelweiss club building on four 
nights each week. One thousand dollars' worth of 
equipment w^ s purchased from Germany through the 
raising of numoerous small loans all of which were 
repaid in the course of one year by proceeds of 
entertainments and membership fees. The locale of 
the club's activities cn^ed several times 
when it rented successively the gymnasium of 
Fire Hall Ho. 2, small premises centrally located 
on Jasper Ave., and Sunnydale Pavilion. A few 
years ago this club had attained considerable 
recognition in the eyes of Edmonton's sport lovers. 
Performances in memorial Hall and ^asonic Temple 
were enthusiastically received. Others were given 












r. 






i d ■ : . 

, .V...,"/'.-: . i v vLv; 

.■ ■' ' ' : r i,= '•■■■•■ .. ■■>•: ; .v : •• , ■ . V". • •> ■ pU ' 

' 

! -j ».■<..■ y f . ? * :■ .v ' • ; ■■■;: v-; 

• ^V-' - y' 

' ^ ■ ■ 

/ Z i . ■ , . . . 

...■•■ > . . >; . i. ' ■■■ ■? 

' • '< . . ■' ■' ' ' : • ■ ••'■■“...s , 

.Mi ( t. ■ . ■■ . -.v 

. 

■ 

, 







117 

during intermissions at the Commercial Grads* basketball 
games in the **dmonton arena, at the annual German Day 
and frequently at the Edelweiss Klub. gix of the 
members gave a performance at Vermilion exhibition 
in 1934, and representatives more recently took 
part in the Coronation Day program of i^ay 12, 1937. It 
was usual on Sundays during the summer months to 
spend the day at sport and games in parks or at 
beaches near Edmonton, with trucks for conveyance of 
members and equipment. 

The departure of some of the members who, 
with the cessation of immigration, were not replaced 
and differences which inevitably arose with regard to 
the election of non-German members to the executive, 
in conjunction with difficulties attending the lack 
of a permanent place of practice were the causes of 
the disbanding of the organization. The equipment was 
deeded to the Edelweiss Klub and efforts have since 
been directed towards building a gymnasium for the 
maintenance of an athletic club as a branch of the 
Edelweiss Klub. 

The Association ox German-speoKin& workers . This 
organization had an approximate membership of 400 
in 1330 and was successful in placing many immigrants 




















' 















v , ; • > ■- v.,:.,... . . 




































■ 




















118 

who were without connections at the time of their 
arrival. Branch organizations were formed in Vancouver, 
Calgary* Hegina and .linnipeg. A circular which was 
distributed in 1930 •tated its purposes: 

"Was wir wollen: 

Arbeitsvermittlung und Nachweis. 

Beistand und Beratung in alien taglichen Fragen. 
Rechtsauskunft. 

Gegenseitige wirtschaftliche Iiilfe und Zusammenschluez* 
Verhinderung der Einwanderer-Ausbeutung. 

Erleichterung des Eintritts in die Berufsgewerkschaften 
Kranken- und Unfallversicherung. 

Wirtschaftliche Besserstellung der Lohnarbeiter. 

Der Verfeand sieht seine vomehmste Aufgabe in der 
Y/ahrung und Korderung des ^nsehens, sowie der materiellen 
und gedsi jgfin Interessen seiner Mltglftidtr durch 
Aufkiarung und Einftthrung besserer Sozialphlitik und 
Arbeiterrechte..." 

Membership declined during 1931. A program for the 
assisted im m i gration of German communists was 
opposed by the majority of the members and the 
ensuing discovery of fraudulence on tne part of one 
official led to a voluntary disbanding of the associ¬ 
ation during the winter of 1931-32. 

German Canadian newspapers subscribed to in Alberta 
are: 

1. Der Courier, 1835 Halifax St., Regina. 

2. Der Bordwesten, 295 Market Ave., Winnipeg. 

3. Deutsche Arbeiter Zeitung, 544 King St.,Toronto. 

4. Deutsche Zeitung far Canada, 339 Mountain Ave., 

Winnipeg. 

5. Alberta Herold, 10247-107 St., Edmonton. 

Religious publications have previously been named. 

In the order named, the above newspapers are considered 



















. 





































. 




' , 














‘ 

































119 

to be characteristically liberal, c^feervative, 
labor, nationalistic, local. Subscriptions to 
the Courier in Alberta are 2605 and to the Alberta 
Herold 2500. No figures were submitted by the other 
newspapers. Total subscriptions in Alberta are esti¬ 
mated at 10,000. 

The Gejman-speaking organizations and institutions 

exist to fortify self-respect and to share pride 

in a common origin, to make possible the frequent 

3 > 

interchange of ideas and to assist both the maintenance 
of a semblance of what is termed "deutsche Kultur, 
Sitten und Gebrauche” and the adjustment of the 
language group to Canadian life. 

Political affiliations among the German¬ 
speaking population are varied. Continuous adherence 
to the Liberal party has characterized some districts 
for many years. Support of the present Social Credit 
government is also indicated in a number of localities 
where German-speaking people have joined study groups 
and Social Credit clubs. Many are in sympathy with 
the communistic ideal but active affiliation with 
Canadian communist parties represents a very small 
minority. It is likewise true that the progress of 















' • -V 


■ 




. . • •• 






1 . 


I ■■ 














v. 
















. • ' ' 


. 








r y.i-i .-.i/t; 










120 


the National Socialist government of Germany is 
applauded by a fairly lafge number of German-speaking 
people, the majority of whom were born or have lived 
in Germany but there is no evidence of active support 
of the German government other than that at least 
two families in the Wide of the province have sent 
one or more children to be educated in the Hitler 
schools in Germany; neither is there any evidence of 
the existence in Alberta of a political party for the 
propagation of German national Socialism. The prominent 
place accorded Germany in world events during the last 
four years, together with the emphasis placed upon 
•race* and culture in contemporary German literature 
would be expected to be of intense interest to people 
of German birth in all countries of the world and to 
produce a psychological effect of having something 
to uphold. Yet it is recognized everywhere in Alberta 
that the German-Canadian is separated from the actual 
workings of the movement and that he regards present 
anti-German criticism in the press without overwhelming 
emotion. A few extremely enthusiastic students of 
National Socialism have returned or are directing 
their efforts towards making possible their return 
to Gennany. The German immigrant who intends to remain 

















■ 

■ 




' 
























' ' ■■■ * 































































121 . 

in Canada, however, ana this represents & large 
majority, is regarding Germany's contemporary history 
with the mixed feelings of a sympathetic by-stanner 
and his views are affected both by his own political 
convictions and by his local interests. There are those 
who are frankly in sympathy with the National Socialist 
program in Germany ana there are others equally fTcink 
who are out of syn^athy with the movement. 

Circulars issued by the herein der Deutschen 
im Ausland offer a regular supply of reading material: 
books, papers, magazines, etc., which will be sent 
to all addresses submitted. The implications are that 
this is either a charitable missionary gesture or 
one of goodwill extended by the German government, 
with the aid of its people, to German-speaking people 
resident in Canada ana in all parts of the world and 
ultimately, through the latter, to non-Germans. 

A liberal estimate of the number of German-speaking 
homes in Alberta which are likely to be reached by 
such literature would be 5000. Practically all of 
these would interpret it as a gesture of goodwill 
and be grateful to receive the reading matter as 
being of cultural and educative value. ..hile constant 
reading of such material might be expected to arouse 





• . ;■ ^ i f- ■ <:•<' 

. v ;> : 4, ; ■>..*<' >v:.-v f ' *• ^ . 

. ■■■•■, " V ?■;* ■:'•*■ • 

,yVr:- ; -. w v 

■ ■ ■ - . ' 

• : t = ."• - i / //■' ■ ■• • . • 

- ; ;• •v-• /••• >>:■ / • - 

•v 1 ,-, ■ * >-,• 

y&4 ■,. . , 

, *, • e i r ■ i ■ '■ ; : ■■ 

■ " ‘ ■ ■ 

■ " y fy ; •" - "•■■' I . iiw 

■ ■ . c - ' a . t , ■ I I , 

■ 

t • ' • •' •••• ■ . : : ’ ' '•.. .• . ; ;r •; 

'• ; - —' ■: •-;■ '■■'■ • i 

: ■' - ; '"i ; U ■ .v-v- 

• ..■■ • 

• . ;* 
— . ■'. : , • , v: • • •; 

' ' 

: 




122 

missionary zest for the propagation of German racial 
and nationalistic theories evidence of such is at 
present negligible. The necessity of facing the fact 
that he must adapt himself to life apart from hie 
homeland is not lost on the German-Canadian. koreover, 
visitors to the Olympic Games in Berlin, 193®, 
report that addresses,made under the auspices of the 
Verein der beutschen im island for German-speaking 
aliens, advised them that the National socialist 
party desired no attest on their part to propagate 
the Nazi regime by establishment of political parties 
in their countries of residence. They were exhorted 
to raise the prestige of the German nation through 
obedience and support of the lav/s and customs 
dictated by the governments to which they owed 
allegiance. The one way in which their German sentiment 
could be turned to good account, they were told, lay 
in their maintenance of "deutsehe Sitten und Gebrauche" 
in their homes and in their social organizations. 

/Jid so the report closes with the observation that 
“if ever you see a german-speaking person making a 
great to-do about *Keil Hitler* and proclaiming 
himself a Nazi you may be sure that he has no actual 
insight into the theory of -rational Socialism nor 
affiliation with the German government.»* 




























■ 




















































































?! 




t 



















123 


Chapter V. CITIZENSHIP 

Considered from opposite poles, the question of 
citizenship of any language group in ^dLberta 
would mean: have the members of this group been 
a burden to the rest of the province, are relief 
recipients, inmates of sanatorium, asylums and 
penitentiaries, deportees and trouble-makers numjerous 
among them; are they non-naturalixed, refusing to learn 
the English language; are they non-assimilable, 
demoralized, only taking but never giving? Or have 
they been ideal citizens, tiirifty, self-supporting, 
healthy, law-abiding, progressive, eager to cooperate; 
have they maintained none of their former associations 
and practices except those most valuable to the ; 
evolution of a rich and varied Canadian culture; 
are they placing Canada first in the upbuilding of 
Alberta's industries, the support of public institution^ 
the study of the English Language, the raising of 
young Canadians to take advantage of all opportunities 
offered to citizens of Alberta; are they guided by 
sound moral principles to a friendly and unselfish 
attitude towards all their fellow citizens? 

German-speaking citizens would be the last 
to maintain that they have been models of ideal 





124 

citizenship. Yet I believe they are correct in Maintain¬ 
ing that the Gemail-speciting population has been ^a 
near in its approach to the ideal as any immigrant 
group, with the possible exception of the Scandinavian, 
Those connected with agricultural settlement and admin¬ 
istration in Alberta ar^e fairly unanimous in 
placing the Scandinavian population at the head of 
the list for all-round citizenship, Scandinavians 
are efficient farm managers. They are not urbanized 
as are British immigrants! but have proceeded to 
Canada from rural centres. They bring with them 
an interest in educative and cooperative methods. 

Their background is one of peace with Great Britain 
and pacifistic withdrawal from the centre of European 
affairs. The Scandinavian countries are not world 
powers and their people are not politically ambitious 
or nationally jealous. There are no pan-Scandinavian 
institutions to rival the Ukrainian nationalist 
activities of the sympathy between the German- 
born and the Ver ein der Deutschen im ^ueland. 

The same statements apply to members of the few 
Dutch settlements in Alberta, 

Slight as is the understanding of typical 
differences within the immigrant ^roup generally 
referred to as Germans! they are placed second on 











126 

the list for all-round citizenship. The xiussian, 

Polish and American-born Germane have brought 
agricultural experience with them. They have interest 
but little love for their homelands and are at least 
a century removed from Germany as their country of 
origin. |lence their group consciousness is not 
nationalistic but cultural in character ond they are 
to a great extent immune from the effect of pro-German 
or anti-German sentiment. 

The German and ^ustrian-born are faced with 
a more difficult problem of adjustment, for, if they 
are sensitive to constant adverse criticism of Ger¬ 
many in Canadian newspapers, inhibition^ of emotions 
results tad feelings of being misunderstood and 
militated-against arise. Love of the Fatheriana is not 
so blind that every jibe at Germany's political 
policies is at once taken to heart, otherwise there 
would be an abundance of long faces ana a long line 
of deportees, while Canada would be forced to 
conclude that she had been mistaken in her opinion 
of the assimilability of German immigrants. Yet 
hypersensitivity arising from an intimate knowledge 
and a native appreciation of the beauties of 
Germany and the marvels of German arts and sciences, 









- 












• ■ A ,? I 


' 

; 

■ 

! y. . : ’ . , i .... ; ... ^ .V . 


i ,- 1 






. 




. 


. ■ v-'. . . * > 












* 






. 












126 

quite apart from nationalistic or racial theories, 
is one of the pitfalls in the path of assimilation 
of the German immigrant, and may rob Alberta of 
some rather fin€ ccontributions to its cultural life. 
Though not a pitfall of overly large dimensions, it 
is undoubtedly an obstacle which faces every German 
who enters Canada. He may have prepared himself to 
face it but his attitude cannot be fully detei-mined 
until he has actulLlly taken the s it? and begun his 
life among a people who are educated to regard 
Germany less as a cultural power than as a political 
menace. Tactlessness, intolerance and ignorance in 
so human a consideration as land of origin allow the 
sensitive to conclude that the cultural contribution 
which is theirs to give is likely to be regarded as 
coming from potential carriers of an undesirable 
influence. Pre-election addresses in which German- 
Sanadian citizenship is referred to in flattering 
terms and in which candidates take pains to trace 
their German ancestry fall wide of their mark. What 
Is desired is not "handling with gloves" but a more 
consistent emphasis upon cultural contribution and 
greater evidence of good faith. Under such a spirit, 



















- 

















, 












■ , 











- 




^ 127. 

there co^uld be no German immigrant who failed to 
realize that acceptance of Great Britaine* point 
of view in foreign affaire by Canada aat large 
does not ostracise him from any rank of Canadian 
citizenship for which his capabilities qualify him. 
i; aturali aation . 

Table 4, Census 1931. Figures here refer to the 
"German origin" group. 




hot i.aturulized . lotul injflloe 4... 


Austria 

306 

Bel lum 

11 

Czechoslovakia 

193 

Denmark * 

62 

Finland 

2 

France 

11 

Germany 

4816 

Greece 

1 

Holland 

27 

Hungary 

173 

Italy 

5 

Yogo-Slavia 

94 

Lit'iuaaia 

21 

Norway 

2 

Poland 

1754 

Roumania 

468 

Russia 

2427 

Sweden 

24 

Switzerland 

478 

Ukraine 

11 

Others 

12 

Total European 

10909 

China 

1 

United States 

5413 

Other Countries 

106 

16429 

German citizenship in 

1936 hi 


670 

21 

259 

4 

38 

7857 

— mm 

28 

243 

7 

136 


3293 

1083 

6870 

73 

24 

1005 

21611 

3 

14387 
_45 

36046 


The number of German irth resident in alberta in 














was M h 128 . ^ 

that yeaxy It follows that 1261 Grcitizens became 

German Canadians during the years 1931-36. 

Five years* r< sidence in Cn.na4a f a speaking; 
knowledge of English and freedom from relief debts 
is required of applicants for citizenship. It is 
estimated that the last requirement has kept 2 of 
all immigrants from obtainin citizenship papers. 

Tany of the post-war immigrants after they had paid 
for their transportation to Alberta had barely suf¬ 
ficient means to set themselves up on their home¬ 
steads and through no fault of their own were unable 
to weather the depression years without financial 
assistance. The receipt of relief and the fact that 
much of the homestead land which wastaken up r quires 
considerable investment of capital as well as labor 
in order to make it fit for agricultural purposes 
has tended to discourage the homesteader* Several 
good years will be necessary before he can clear his 
debts and in the meantime his morale is further 
lowered by hiKt inability to qualify for citizenship 
papers. It is regrettable that the judges before 
whom applicants for Canadian citizenship appear are 
not allowed to exercise their discretion in cases of 
immigrants who accepted relief much against their 
own will and are at present unable to repay these 







' 












. 

























































129 . 

debts without pr judicing their future. I any desir¬ 
able citizens are being overlook , ose el lity 

for citizenship consists in the determination with 
which they have applied themselves to cultivating 
the land which was available for them. They might 
have been deported on the grounds of becom ng public 
charges yet they did not wish to avail themselves 
of free transportation to their native countries. 

They prefer to remain and they desire Canadian 
citizenship, 
relief. 


The extent to which non-nnturalized immigrants at 
present share in public relief expenditures is shown 
in a report of the Bureau of Relief and Public -el- 
fare, 1936-37: 

Nationality Farmers Non-Fanners Total 


British by birth 4,282 
" Naturfetn-3,875 
Foreign not Nat. 1,006 


3,622 7,904 61.6% 

1,683 6,558 36.3% 

824 1,829 11.96% 


Unemployment relief was received during 1936-37 
by 498 persons who stated their nationality to be 
Berman (naturalized and non-naturalized included)• 

They comprised 3.2% of the total relief recipients. 
Seventy-five per cent are farmers. Further German¬ 
speaking people would be included in the Austrian, 


Russian and Polish nationalities which total 1994 










. 












■ 

. 














' 













• 




















130 


or 13.03%, 1497 of whom are farmers. Many are In¬ 
cluded here who a. re not German-speaking but on the 
other hand the r, e are also Geman-speaking people 
among those of American nati nality who r,light be 
estimated at 288 or one tenth of the American 
nationality group. Thus the German-speaking people 
receive at Hie outset 13.29% of the unemployment 
relief auvanced by the provincial Government. All 
foreign nationalities combined with the exclusion of 
U. , i., which totals 18.85$, receive 29.46% of Iberta’ 
relief. After hearing two relief officials make such 
unqualified statements as M Those Central Europeans 
cause us 90% of our trouble. Corral them ana ship 
them cut of the country is the best anybody could do 
with them. All those people from Russia, Bulgaria, 
C Yogoslovania^and those places,...we'd be better off 
without them. And look at the crimes in the foreign 
districts i u it was a pleasure to discover the ollow- 
ing comment made by an authority on conditions in 



# It has been too easy an explanation for many 
ill-informed public men that the cause of 
all our troubles lay in immigration and in the 
immigrant. Usually the statements emanating 


# R. England. Col. of W. Can. p. 88 






131 • 

from such sources are not backed by any 
personal knowledge or experience with any 
large numbers of immigrants. Those who have 
had the opportunity of knowing something of 
what the Majority of the immigrants have gone 
through in Western Canada during the past 
three years will have nothing but admir tion 
for the fortitude nd self-reliance they have 
shown in meeting not only a new land and new 
conditions, but also the special unexpected 
difficulties of the depression with its handi¬ 
caps of a revoked welcome and selfish misrep- 
resentation. 1 * 

With regard to crime in German settlements, a 
number of H.C.R .P. constables throughout the province 
were approached and official assurance of the law- 
abiding, almost docile nature of the settlers in 
large German-speaking communities was received. The 
sole complaint was that of the manufacture of al¬ 
coholic beverages by some individuals and this was 
modified by the statement th t the beverages are 
seldom used to excess. 

Health. 


A comparison of the birthrates in the German and 
British origin groups in 1936 shows an increase of 
2177 or 2*3.9^in the German origin group and 6472 
or 1.6l^in the British. The total births in the pro¬ 
vince were 15786 or 2.14$. Large famili.. are cust- 
omary in the rural German-speaking sttlement. hmong 
the Hutterite and older Mennonite groups they are 










1 32 0 

practically the rile. Families of eight or ten are 
not unusual in mary farm communities and size of 
family is often indicative of contentment and of an 
ambitious outlook. The custom of setting up the sons 
on farms and giving a dowry of stock to the daughters 
is still observed in the long established farm com¬ 
munities. In any, case, children are thought of ©e 
”the crop that never fails”. Urban famili s ^nd t ose 
of the Canadian-born are generally not so large and 
plans for higher education are included in the pro¬ 
ram of up-bringing. 

The ”origin” classification is again the 
only one liable as a basis of comparison for treated 
cases of tuberculosis. In 1936 Central CLberta 
Sanatorium, Calgary, discharged 146 patients 86 of 
whom were of British origin, 10 of German, 1 ustrian, 

2 Russian and 4 of Polish origin. Bdmonton Sanatoria 
discharged 85 patients 22- of whom were British, 6 
German, 1 Russian and 9 t olish in ori in, < L he Russian 
and Polish groups are again stated because they may 
in a few cases include G rman-speaking people. 

Reports from Alberta Mental hospitals reveal 
t e following* A total of 785 patients admitted in 

Ponoka Mental Hoppital in 1936 clessifed as to birth- 















, 

* 

- f“- 


. 


- 


'f 

. 




■ 






; , 

* • 

A 










1 33. 


place showed 138 bom in the British Isles, 18 born 

in Germany, 21 born in Austria, 15 born in Russia, 

and 36 in Poland. X total of 521 patients in Oliver 

Mental Institute showed 98 born in the British Isles, 

13 in Germany, 25 in Russia, 9 in Poland. 

Provincial Training School dor Mental Defectives, 

Red Deer. 


(Total patients 209) 


Eat&itx.gf- parents q£.i-Stign£g fathers 


British Isles 49 
Germany 4 
Austria 11 
Russia 8 
Poland ? 


fothers 

54 

1 

9 

7 

? 


This unpleasant probing serves to establish the ide: 
that tubercular and mental diseases are neither larger 
in proportion to British nor unknown in the German 
language group. Taken as a whole the German language 
group is a naturally hardy and physically active 
population group. 

Interest in Education. 

The percentage of children of German-speaking parent¬ 
age who receive education beyond the first year of 
high school has not been high in the rural districts 
in the past. Agriculture has been the main inter st 
here, and the program of studies followed in the 
schools served mainly to attract the attention of the 




















. 

■ 
































■ • t 










. 






■ 














. 













134. 

student dtaby from rural life. This fact has been 
recognized and the program for rural schools is be¬ 
ginning to devote time to agricultural topics. Farm 
clubs and branches of agricultural organisations 
are also bringing new interest and practical education 
in agricultural pursuits into the rural district. 
Examples of participation in work pursued under the 
directorship of the Department of Extension of the 
University are Young Farmers' organizations in the 
Edmonton district and a class of 97 young people of 
all but one of whom were of German-speaking parentage 
who took advantage of a short course giv n in Hilda, 
north-east of Medicine Hat, last November by a section 
of the Youth Training School. 

Many remarks about the "younger generation" 
concern the children of foreign language groups. 

School teachers are unanimous in considering them 
bright pupils and many parents are encouraged to give 
their children advanced education. In turn, the 
younger generation demands more than it^jparents 
did. It is often said that the industry, thrift 
and religious consciousness which characterized 
the immigrant is lost in his children. They have 
not the same attitude towards economics, of buying 





. 










. 







































• 





« 

■ 


* ■ • 










136. 

no more than they cai pay for, and of putting some¬ 
thing aside for a rainy day—or a dry year—and the 
prevailing attitude is that Canada is their heritage. 
They observe that present day programs for further 
development involve large-scale rather than individual 
enterprise and they expect amalgamation of efforts 
in further cooperatives. 

One of the problems confronting the Government 
of Alberta today is tha^f internal resettlement. 
Whole farm districts in central and southern Alberta 
have become unsuitable for further seeding and some 
have been abandoned by the settlers. It is estimated 
that the dry areas could be made to support about 
one third of their present population, but, with the 
one-time prospereus residents new practically penni¬ 
less and the majority hanging on partly in the hope 
of recovery and partly because they are powerless 
to make a fresh start, the removal of the two thirds 
whom the land cannot support must be an assisted 
movement. Land in the Smoky Hiver district south¬ 
east of Peace River town has been set aside for an 
agricultural relief settlement. If capital is about 
to be invested in aiding thejpopulation of the dried- 
out sections of the province to proceed to new 
quarters, the opportunity is at hand for the pre¬ 
paration of a well organized settlement program with 










136. 

proper attention given to details which in the past 
have been left to take care of themselves. 

In the laying out of the agricultural relief 
district the acreage needed to support a family and 
the type of fanning to which the district is best 
adapted will necessarily be of prime importance. 

It will be possible to choose the most ideal arrange¬ 
ment of school districts, and the exact location of 
schools and th^lorder in which they are to be built 
may be decided upon long before uBettlers are intro¬ 
duced into the territory. x he stations where postal, 
medical and other services are to be given can also 
be fixed. What this thesis wishes to establish in 
this connection, however, is the necessity of con¬ 
sidering human factors in the location of the families 
tJqeraselves. Rather than either the haphazard or the 
particular group s ettlement which resulted from pre¬ 
vious methods of disposal of lands, parties of fam¬ 
ilies elected from more than one neighborhood and more 
than one linguistic group should be settled in the 
same districts. The location of their land and the 
question of who will be their neighbors can all be 
decided before moving takes place. Provision for 
settlement of families with children of school age 
on land nearer the schools can be made. 1’he religious 















■ 

. 

„ 

• ^ 










■ 

\ 





, 




. 

, 






* 

' 














• s 








137 . 

denominationsof the settlers is a further consideration 

which, if placed before them at the time of planning 

of the settlements, will undoubtedly effect as happy 

an arrangement in this respect s it is possible rto 

attain. The vital need, however, will be the common 

meeting ground where views may be e^jhan^ ed, the 

problems shared and advice and encouragement given 

and received. Such a position properly belongs to 

the rural school. Its ideal mission is to be the 

centre of community activity, so that household meets 

household and parents meet teachers. Of inestimable 

importance is the engaging of teachers who have a 

sympathetic understanding of agricultural life and the 

possibilities of conmunity organization. In 

estimating the value of a competition between ruaal 
5 

municipalities inaugurated in 1930 by Dr. W.J. Black, 

Director of Colonization and Agriculture for the 

C.N.R., Mr. R. England states* 

"As organizer, the teacher can find many 
many opportunities of securing for his pupils 
the benefit of the knowledge and skill of 
members of his community. To this wider 
concept of education, emphasizing the giving 
of reality to thejlwork of the schoolroom by 
very definite contacts with the life of the 
community, the scorecard is a contribution. 

Marks were given for the physical environment, 
school grounds and;quipment$ emphasis was 
placed upon thw whole agricultural develop¬ 
ment of the community and its interest in 
public health, its interest in community 
activities and for membership of boys and 










138 

girls in swine, calf, sheep, grain, poultry, 
bee, potato, canning, and dressmaking clubs, 
or other such activities of a constructive 
character. A s ction was devoted to arts, 
handicraft and domestic economy——Home- 
manufacturing va*. also emphasized....and 
interest in cultural activities such as dram¬ 
atic, musical, joci?l, athletic, folk-uancing, 
etc • 

It is remarkable how few people have realized 
that there is a definite cultural value in the 
stimulation of appreciation of afcticles 
created by the hands. Design, colour, quality 
of materia}., craftsmanship—these things are 
part of civilization itself, and too often 
in a conventional curriculum they are ignored 
although they provide an obvious pathway into 
the traditional life of a people. They can 
provide a sympathetic approach as well as a 
foundation for the establishment of e# com¬ 
munity life. The school can well become a 
museum, an entrepot of ideas and skills, 
a means for the dissemination cf information 
secured through the extension services of 
the University and of the Departments of 
Agriculture f and as such fill an important 
place as a community centre.” ^ 

What the Provincial Government dares not 
overlook, however is that adequate recompense must 
be provided for teachers, if continuous service 
along these lines is to be secured for the rural 
school. Proper housing and sufficient means to 
enable the teacher to establish a home in the com¬ 
munity are essential to the effective execution of 


# R. England. The Colonization of Western 
Canada, p. 183. 































■ 
























. 
































•<? 




. 









139. 

of such a program. 

Land still available for colonization pur¬ 
poses in Western Canada, is upwards of twenty million 
acres. In Alberta the regions tow rds which settle¬ 
ment is directed lie in the area west of Red Deer 
and in the Peace River block. While a 
considerable portion of this land is necessary for 
agricultural relief settlements it is reasonable t o 
assume that future agricultural development in the 
province will require larger popul tion than is sup¬ 
plied by the natural increase of its present 772,782. 
In the event of a further influx of settlers into 
Alberta it is to be hoped that planned settlement 
will have been found to be by far the most efficient 
and therefore the logical course to follow. 

The problem of unemployment and the need for 
economic regulation is at present too absorbing to 
allow much scope for thought on the subject of re¬ 
opening Canada’s doors to immigrants. Further, it 
is highly improbable that citizens of the European 
countries in which Canada has sought her agricultur- 
ists, would emigrate under present conditions. The 
Scandinavians, English and French are now prosperous 
enough at home and therefore not anxious to emigrate. 
It is difficult for emigrants to leave Russia, and 















* 

V 

* 





























. 


A 

’ 

■' 

* 

•• 










140* 

prohibition of the exodus of property from Germany 
renders large German-speaking immigration highly 
improbable. Poland, Czecho-Slovakia, and Yugoslavia 
are thus the countries from which Canada is most 
likely to recruit further immigration, whether of 
German or of other speech. 

In the past the largest Canada-ward w ;ves 
of immigration have been possessed with the desire 
for more room, more freedom, less restriction for the 
individual or the homogeneous religious group-—in 
short, a chance for personal advancement. The fact 
that M in Canada nobody cares two pins whether you 
sink or swim" has sometimes hurt but on the whole 
been preferred by most newcomers. Future immigrants 
may not support this state of affairs. They may 
not be content with the opportunity to hew out a 
niche for themselves in the face of cut-throat 
competition* They may be convinced that, with rig¬ 
orous efficiency at the mast, economic security is 
attainable for all and that all efforts to maintain 
a democratic form of government are pure folly. 

Perhaps in addition to good health and a 
measure of economic credit Canada would like her 
future citizens to possess open minds with regard 
to the workability of a democratic form of govern- 














































■ 















' 













































141 . 

ment, and surely this is not asking too much of new 
arrivals who, having observed existing democracies 
from a distance only, elect to establish themselves 
within their territories. It would be fantastic 
to suggest that huge numbers of missionaries of var¬ 
ious forms of government will shortly be knocking at 
Canada's doors, but it is less so to suppose that 
future large-scale immigration will regard Canada 
not as a M land of the free” but as a "land of the 
inefficiently governed" and that they may see the 
flaws of its present system of management without 
seeking to understand its adherence to a democratic 
ideal. Believers in the evolution of democracy 
through education of the voting public should there¬ 
fore be on "their toes" in the effort to remove the 
flaws without losing the ideal. Nothing will be 
gained by refusing to hear the newcomer and to con¬ 
sider his arguments for change, but t heTe is also the 
duty of creating sin understanding of Canada's present 
method of approaching difficulties. 

Immigrants must be encouraged to feel that as 
citizens of Canada there is a place for their proud 
appreciation of their own national background, at 
the same time lacing the fact that they as upholders 

























' 







■I 















































142 . 

of this culture and tradition have been transplanted 
into a new land, owe allegiance to a foreign ruler 
and have to live among types,both representative and 
particular, of all nations. The ultimate aim (La not 
only to make a good living, to get possession of land 
and to allow for the maintenance of former cultural 
environments in separate locales, but to derive an 
understanding of the entire Canadian set-up and to 
forge a composite nation to give real significance 
to the term Canadian. 

It is high time for a common understanding 
of this higher aim and the kaleidoscopic character 
of new and old raw material to penetrate into the 
thought of all who contemplate a part in Canada’s 
future. 






































, 












































143 • 

Chapter VI. THE MAINTENANCE OF THE GERMAN LANGUAGE. 

Chief of the channels through which the German lang¬ 
uage is maintained are homes, churches, organizations, 
newspapers and other reading material. A German 
program is occasionally heard on the air and, in 
addition, German is found on the time-tablesof a 
few schools in the province and is taught at the 
University. 

Homes. 

One can safely say that all immigrants of German 
speech have taught their children to speak German in 
their e arly childhood, the rapidity with which they 
have acquired English being dependent upon where the 
family is located and the opportunities for inter¬ 
course with English-speaking families. Even today, 
in the largest and most thickly settled German com¬ 
munities, the eldest child of a German-speaking family 
might possibly enter public school without knowing 
any English. Yet as soon as one child in the family 
is attending school, learns to read, write and compose 
thoughts in English, looks up to "teacher” as an 
ideal being and is encouraged at home lo aspire to 
first place in the class, an enormous outside influ¬ 
ence enters the home. Even in such districts, b fore 
many years have passed the dhildren are speaking 















144 . 

English to one another and German to their parents, 
their neighbors* parents and their minister if these 
insist. Twenty years ago when isolation was greater, 
schools less numterous and the Alberta-born population 
of German-speaking parentage was almost all under 
the age of 21, weeks might pass during which groups 
of families spoke no English add heard no English 
spoken. Today, however, with radios and movies 
bringing the outside world into homes and communities, 
and with telephones and automobiles allowing a wider 
circle of acquaintance and activity, foreign languages 
and group consciousness are maintained at the expense 
of participation in a wide and inviting field of 
outside affairs towards which youth invariably feels 
itself drawn. 

So today there are several thousand Albertans 
of German-speaking parentage who new the language 
in childhood and who will tell you they understand 
German but never have occasion to speak it. They 
spoke it long enough to acquire a child's vocabulary 
but put it away with childish things. Few children 
of non-English immigrant parentage are linguistically 
minded to the extent that they retain their mother 
tongue or study it as a secondary language. The^ 





















' 

. 


- 






' 









< 












































145 . 

are rarely proud of their ability or of the opportunity 
to have a bi-lingual upbringing but regard it rather 
as an imposition, an extra takk, and something which 
makes them appear different from children of English- 
speaking homes W.th whom they associate. Their atti¬ 
tude might be different if their own parents spoke 
perfect English, or even perfect German and moderatelj 
good English. It might also be different if the 
majority of Albertans were given to the study of 
foreign languages. As it is, they see no reason why 
they should revere and perpetuate an institution 
which marks their parents as foreigners and which 
they themselves never use as a medium of expression 
for the new ideas which come to them in their develop¬ 
ment through a Canadian education. This same attitude 
is at work in the^ase of children of English-speaking 
immigrants, who do not retain their parents' accents 
and who would object if their parents required them 
to don a marked accent as soon as they entered their 
homes or whenever they were with a group of similar 
linguistic extraction. 

With the exception of the Hutterite colonies 
and the Mennonite settlements as well as a few cases 
in the denser settlements in the vicinity of Medicine 









146 . 

Hat, Edmonton, Fairview and Wembley the homes in 
which the parents have gone through Alberta schools 
are English-speaking, and little if any effective 
effort is put forth to induce the children to speak 
German. In cases of intermarriage where one parent 
is German-speaking the language of the home is 
English. In cases of intermarriage between a recent 
immigrant of German speech and a Canadian of German¬ 
speaking parentage there is an even chance that the 
children will learn to speak German during their 
childhood, this again dependent upon whether the 
family is established where it has access to a large 
number of Germanyspeaking homes. 

Churches• 

The strongest ties which bind German-speaking people 
in Alberta together and the strongest active forces 
in encouraging the upkeep of German in the homes lie 
in their religious adherence. Here too the dropping 
of the mother tongue is noticeable. German speaking 
congregations are served by the following religious 
bodies: 

The evangelical Lutheran Synod of Missouri, Ohio 

and Other States . 

The statistics of this synod include Alberta 
and British Columbia in one district and separate 





















figures for this province are unfortunately not avail¬ 
able, Rev. Eifert of Leduc, President of the Aiberta- 
B.C. district, believes that the proportion of German 
to English work is evenly balanced in both provinces. 
That German is being steadily replaced by English in 
their congregations is diown in the following two 


tables from their Statistical Yearbook, 1936. 


Year 

% of work English. 

1922 


22% 


1924 


29% 


1926 


36% 


1928 


40% 


1930 


44% 


1932 

# 

37% 

# Relapse due to increased 

1934 


43 % 

immigration of German¬ 

1936 


46% 

speaking people between 




1926-1931. 

Language 



No. of stations. Members(Alta-B.C 

All Berman 



46 2661 


More German than English 11 2667 

Haltf and half 36 3478 

More English than German 9 1066 

All English 68 2486 

At the 102 stations where German is used, Saturday 
schools and vacation schools are held in which children 
are given religious instruction in German. German 
is also part of the time table of the private schools 
maintained in Alberta by this Synod, reference to 
which will appear below. This Synod, the most con¬ 
servative of the Lutheran Synods in its inter¬ 
pretation of scripture, is fostering Y/ith interest 
the change from German to the English language in its 













148 . 

congregations. It is doing this in order to instruct 
the younger generation, who are not so conversant 
with the German language as is necessary for profit¬ 
able religious teaching. At present the pastors are 
still being given bi-lingual training but with the 
changing picture they will drop the German language 
insofar as it ceases to be a profitable medium for the 
communication of their religious convictions. When 
reproached by German-speaking parents for allowing 
the transition to English rather than teach the chil¬ 
dren German in order that the service may remain Ger¬ 
man, this church answers that its business is to 
save souls and that it can best do so by employing 
the language of the persons it is trying to reach 
and that, moreover, parents are not always consistent 
in their appeals, for they often look to the church 
to give their children instruction in German and then 
do not cooperate by requiring them to practise 
speaking it at home. 

The United Lutheran Church, Manitoba Synod, has a 
membership of 7196 in Alberta, 44 Sunday Schools with 
1099 scholars and 91 teachers, and 42 week-day schools 
with 1095 scholars. The work of this Synod in 
Alberta up to 1935 has been done entirely in German, 
excepting on special occasions attended by the general 


i 




- 


















* 

' 




. 












. 
















. 

























149. 

public. An English Mission began in Edmonton in 
1935 and a few youhger ministers introduced occasional 
English services in their parishes. Whenever there 
are young people in their confirmation classes who 
do not understand German sufficiently well they are 
prepared in English from the bi-lingual book of 
catechism. The question of introducing English 
/into the service was discussed at a conference of 
ministers and church board members held in Edmonton 
last November but was shelved. The question is evi¬ 
dently not urgent in these congregations and as there 
are several among the ministers who received all 
their training in German and who hardly feel quali¬ 
fied to preach regularly in English, transition from 
German to English is likely to be retarded in the 
work of this Synod. 

The American Lutheran Church has 25 stations in 
Central and Southern Alberta, with a membership of 
approximately 3500. practically all its work is 
done in German, although Lethbridge and Calgary 
ministers have within the last ten years introduced 
English for the benefit of the younger generation, 
and have built up a fairly regular attendance at 
these. This step, however, has also been taken with 
a view to increased membersnip and service among 











i • 




• . - 

V 

- 

' 

■ 




. 








* 


: 
















160 . 

people of English speech who have no minister of 
their own. 

Each of the 10 American Lutheran ministers 
who are serving Alberta congregations holds Sunday 
schools and Saturday schools where religious in¬ 
struction is given in German. Judging by the trend 
in the United States congregations, where most of 
the services are reported to be held in English, the 
change of language will also follow in Canada. I'he 
official language of this Synod is English, but its 
Alberta stations have not yet reached the transition 
stage. 

The same is true of the Reformed Church with con¬ 
gregations at Josephsburg, Glory Hills and MArtins* 
located respectively east of Edmonton, west of 
Edmonton, and south of Vegreville. I'he German 
Baptist Church aees its present work in 20 congrega¬ 
tions in the German language but reports a growing 
desire for change on the part of the young people. 
The Roman Catholic church has a few parishes in 
Alberta where the German hymnary and the German 
language are used, chief of these being the settle¬ 
ments at Friedenstal and Notekiwen in the Peace 
River district, Spring Lake south of Dayslana and 
a settlement south of Pincher Creek. 





* 


: • ■ " " .. ■' ■, . :• 

> 

- 

- 

■ 







■■ 











ft 

, 










f 



















151 • 

The Moravian church or Bruderkirche is in the midst 
of the transition from the German to the English 
language. The ministers of its 12 congregations are 
in the unfortunate position of being regarded as 
linguistically too German by the younger element of 
their following and as linguistically too English 
by the older church members. All twelve congregations 
began by using German as the sole language. President 
Bev, Gutensohn of Calgary used nothing but German 
during 25 years of service in Alberta, 14 of which 
were spent at Bruderheim, In Calgary today he never 
carries on a conversation in German with anyone under 
the age of 40, and he finds that many of the children 
speak no German at all. In a religious instruction 
class he recently tried a vocabulary test of their 
knowledge of German and received such translations 
as "puppy" for "Puppe" and "Shtove" for the English 
"stove". The large urban congregation in Calgary 
will within the next 10 or 12 years be entirely 
English-speaking, while rural congregations are more 
likely to retain German as a spoken language for 
another generation. The difficult transition period 
often lasts from 15 to 20 years in a congregation 
and there is always a little tension as to which 
language will be used on special occasions. Inter- 



-• • - ■ . - ' 

. . 








* 

:* 

. 


- 


























. 





- 



- 




« 









* 


. 






. 












162 . 

marriage of members with English-speaking people 
hastens the transition and attendance of all marriage 
ceremonies by English-speaking friends of the prin¬ 
ciples necessitates their performance in the English 
language. 

On the whole it may be said that the church, 
when it finds itself confronted with the task of 
first teaching the children the German language in 
ofder that they may grasp their religious instruction, 
invariably changes its language. From the stand¬ 
point of loss of knowledge of the German language 
the churches deplore this transition, yet the trans¬ 
fer has its compensations, for it undoubtedly indicates 
progress in assimilation on the part of the church 
members and in a measure provides for better under¬ 
standing between departments of religious work 
wherever cooperation is desired. It is likely that 
fifty years hence there will be practically no German 
church services in the congregations now established, 
the rapidity of the transition depending upon the 
ability of the ministers to pre ch in English and 
the continuance of the present scanty immigration 
of German-speaking people. Amon^the Hutterites and 
Mennonites the case is slightly different, since 
adherence to the German language is combined with 


















. 












. 










- 












. i 















- 









163. 

adherence to their religious tenets and the church 
service is fixed in the German language much as the 
Roman Catholic mass in Latin, hence much more resis¬ 
tant to alteration. Love and reverence for the old 

! 

German hymns foundin the hymnaries of all the above- 
mentioned churches also dies hard, and many will 
doubtless be carried over into the English services. 

Some idea of the work among the Mennonites 
towards maintaining the German language may be gained 
from the following report which I have translated 
from the minutes of the Seventh Convention of 
Mennonite Settlers of Alberta held in Gem Public 
School on July 16 and 16, 1937* It was delivered 
by Mr. Isaac Regehr of Coaldale. 

Report on Cultural Work. 

"I cannot give a province-wide report on the 
cultural work. The necessary data from the 
individual settlements are not on hand. x iis 
could and should be done by a provincial board 
of culture in th€^rovincial Committee. All 
that I am able to' do is to make a report on 
the cultural work at Coaldale. Perhaps this 
convention will provide for a board of culture 
in the Prov. Comm, to report to the next con¬ 
vention on the cultural work in all our 
settlements; in any case the Prov. Comm, should 
be charged with the duties of such a board of 
culture and cultural work as one of its most 
important functions. 

"The VDA (Verein der Deutschen im Ausland, 
Berlin) has contributed many good books to 
our Coaldale Library, and wishes further to 
extend its energetic support to our German 







164 . 

schools. It also offe s to assist the Prov. 
Comm, in establishing a circulating library 
and to provide our largest settlements in 
the province with stationary libraries and 
school materials. 1’hese matters could best 
be handled through the Prov. Comm, or through 
an established board of culture in the Prov. 
Comm. 

"The cultural work in Coaldale is carried on 
by two departments, the German library and 
the Gemaan Saturday schools. 

"The Coaldale German Mennonite Public Library 
was founded on Nov. 29, 1927. Members of the 
first library committee were B.B. Janz, 

J.B. Janz and D. Klassen. A beginning was 
made through a resolution of the united body 
of Coaldale Mennonites whereby each family 
contributed one book. In this way the fir3t 
80 books were gathered in three months. David 
Klassen was librarian during the first year. 

"Since 1934, in accordance with a resolution 
of the Immigration conference, English Books 
have also been adcepted in the library. In 
1936 the library had 320 bo^ks, two-thirds 
of which were donated and one-third purchased. 
The library is used by about half of the 
Mennonite faimiles. It is insured against 
fire. The last annual report was made on 
January 7, 1937. 

Receipts $79.78 

Expenditures 76.45 
Balance 3.33 


Books in the library Jan.l, 1936 389 

Additions during 1936 

Donated by Dr. «. Quiring 136 

" » VDA 165 

" " Mrs. Schleiffer, Ohio 120 

" " private persons in Coaldale 71 

Transfecred to the library 79 

Total 960 


Of theses German 884 
English 60 
Russian 16 
“960 














155. 

Members on January 1, 1936 118 

Additional membership in 1936 12 

Total ISI 

As it has been agreed (1937) to pay ft. 

Thiessen, proprietor of the new store, the 
sum of $50.(DO for accommodation and care of 
the library, a fee of one cent per book is 
being charged. Last winter the library 
introduced branch school-libraries into the 
five Saturday schools, and much usd is being 
made of these by the scholars. In 1936, 
exclusive of the school branches, 3791 books 
were loaned. 

In these ten years the Coaldale German Mennonite 
Public Library has become a noteworthy factor 
for German culture. The fact that it is used 
not only by adults but also by the children 
guarantees its further development. 

The Jecaral compulsory German school attendance 
of children between the ages of 8 and 15 and 
the use of High German as the lagguage in 
most of the homes, as well as our Mdnnonite 
publications: Bote, Rundschau and Volkswarte, 
lead us to hope for the future that we and 
our children shall long retain our beloved 
German language and through it our German 
characteristics and dispositions. 

The German Saturday Schools. 

In the past winter 1936-37 five German 
Saturday sdhools were functioning in Coaldale i 
three single-classes, one with two classes 
and one with three classes, with a total of 
8 te chers and 200 children, 3 he re was an 
average attendance of 155 children every 
Saturday* i.e. 77.48$. An average of 27.2 
school days with 115.8 full hours of instruction 
was maintained. 

The school fees averaged 50 cents per month 
jber child, the teachers* salaries the agreed 
$50 per term. Two of the schools have their 
own school buildings, two are held in the 
meeting houses and one in the Bible School. 





















































. • • 1 












156. 

In the course of the winter two school confer 
ences were held, one a practical meeting with 
the children in attendance, the other without 
children. 

The shhool board consists of three person. It 
paid one visit to ach of the schools. Written 
reports of these were not prepared as in the 
previous year, this probably due to lack of 

time. 

At the suggestion of the board* the teachers 
have begun to lay more stress on perfection 
of hand-writing and home reading. Ihe teachers 
provided their pupils with reading material 
and the pupils willingly read a great deal, f 
too much in the opinion of some parents. A ’he 
teachers find tnat silent reading at home, 
while it does not urther correct speech 
and script, nevertheless broadens the chil- 
drans* outlook, enriches intellect and feeling 
through acquaintance with good feooks, increases 
the vocabulary and a akens interest ^nd 
understanding for German culture, whichis 
of great importance. 

In addition to the individual culmination 
programs a united school d y was held on April 4. 
*he parents* pleasure at the childrens' pro¬ 
gress was evident. It is worthy of note that 
B.B. Janz in his closing address could truth¬ 
fully point out that not one of the 200 children 
had a trace of an English accent. Finally, 
the local photographer took a picture of the 
assembled Coaldale German school children with 
their teachers. The local committee through 
its eleven district representatives again 
made a complete list of all the Mennonite 
children between the a es of 8 and 15, in 
preparation for the coming ochool year, 

According to this list Coaldale has 254 
Gefiman children of school age. Beginners 
are not accepted until they have completed 
one year in the Bnglish school. 

All schools operate throughout the whole 
Saturday except the Bienenkorb school which 
began operating on Wednesday evenings and 
Saturday morning and has held to this 
schedule with good results. 











167, 

Goaldale has in addition to the i' ive Saturday 
schools an advanced chool begun and maintained 
during the last two years by Elder w. Martens. 
As the Gt iman schools were formerly local con¬ 
cerns of the individual school districts, 
scant data regarding their development are 
contained in the records of the Coaldale 
Mennonite group. There is a three year period 
% . during which no entries were rnacie. 

It is time that a real history of the German 
schools at Coalaale be written, with regard 
to their 10 years of existence, before the 
details are completely forgotten. What the 
German schools in Coaldale are, what they have 
or nave not acuieved is entirely the work of 
their school leaders. If parflirts, children, 
school leaders, teachers, school boards, 
district representatives and the local, com¬ 
mittee remain ever conscious of their duties, 
the German schools at Coaldale will not lack 
for anything, but will flourish and soaceed to 
the blessing of the community and the praise 
of God. 

In order to give children without means the 
opportunity of attending the German school a 
fund was established by the local committee 
through special contributions of supporters 
of the schools, during the past year the local 
committee was able to pay the fees of seven 
children. 

It is natural that everyone engaged in cul¬ 
tural work should wish to see whether the 
work is progressing from year to year. 
Comparative statistics will show this most 
clearly, dry as they may be in themselves. 

One advance is the eonsolidation of 3 single 
classes into one school of three classes. 
Anotheris that half of the teachers receive 
a fixed monthly wage instead of being paid 
by the individual children each month. The 
united^y)'sciiOol^ was also a progressive step 
as was also the payment of fees for poorefc 
children, from the local treasury through 
contributions, ^hat the proportion of the 
total enrolment of 200 to the total of 40 
who did not attend & German school remained 
practically unchanged cannot be considered as 
progress.” End of report 







158. 

A report by Mr. Wm. Martens appears in the 1937 
yearbook of the General Conference of Mennonites 
in Canada and deals with the advanced day-school 
mentioned in the above report. I have translated 
this from German together with extracts from reports 
from the same Yearbook dealing with the Bible- 
schools at Rosemary and Wembley. 

The School at Coaldale. 

During the winter months of the last two years 
the youth of Coaldale had the opportunity 
of attending the German school. The enrol¬ 
ment last winter was 15. Wm. Martens v.as 
their teacher. The school had wo divisions. 
Instruction was given in the following sub¬ 
jects* Bible story, much Bible reading, 
church history, Mennonite history, homeland 
history, German reading, grammar, composition 
and singing. The school was greatly blessed 
in its work. A number of the students were 
baptized in their faith in Jesus Christ and 
are now members of our congregation. I wish 
there were such schools in all of o»* 
settlements; we need them, we must have them, 
if we wish to hold our young people! 

Wm. Martens* 

The Bible School At Rosemary, Alberta. 

Qyr Bible School had 25 students in the school 
year 1936-37. Ten of these were young women, 
all of whom stayed with us to the end of the 
term. Five of the young men drifted away 
during the course of the school year. 

Otherwise the attendance was good. 

Instruction began early in November. It was 
necessary to close the school on March 18 
because I had to attend the conference at 
Spring Ridge. 

Brothers Jacob A. Dyck, J. Lowen andk were 






159 . 

teachers. Our humble services found favor 
in the eyes of God. 

The material end was managed without difficul¬ 
ties or deficit by the Bible School Society 
"Aufwarts" which was founded in the fall. 

P.R. Dyck. 

Report on Hoffnungsfeld Bible School at 
Wembley, Alberta. Peace River District. 

1. The Hoffnungsfeld Bible School is a 
Society school and was founded by the 
society. The society and especially the school 
board deserves credit for having faithfully 
supported the school in prayer and in deed. 

2. The enrolment has been small in the last 
few years because the families are scattered. 

The largest attendeance we have had in one 
year has been 11 students. On the whole 

the students abided by the regulations of the 
school. Generally speaking, they were good 
students. ,f 

The Hutterite colonies obtained permission 
from the Department of Education to establish public 
school districts on their territory. The school- 
house and teacherage afe built on the school ground 
which borders the other buildings of the colony. 

The schoolhouse is also used as a church and rows 
of wooden benches stand behind the school dusks. 
Services are held every evening and as there mus) 
be nothing worldly to distract the attention of the 
colonists, all maps, pictures, blackboard and/enter¬ 
prise work must be covered up or laid away at the 
end of each school a ay. In addition to the regular 


public school cay daring which instruction is given 
by the teacher hired in accordance with the Regulations 
of thejoepartment of Education, one of the men of the 











160. 

colony teaches the children for an hour before school 
opens ana another hour after school closes. The 
instruction is biblical and historical and is delivered 
in German. The language used in the colony is German, 
spoken with a Tyrolean accent in which none of the 
vowels are rounded. 

Besided the work of the church in maintaining 
the German language there is the part played by the 
German-speaking org nizations, two of which maintain 
lending libraries and in all of which the young 
people who attend havs the opportunity to hear dis¬ 
courses and discussion in German, as well aB the 
opportunity to take part in programs of a social 
nature. Occasional German radio broadcasts are 
sponsored by organizations both social and religious. 

Newspapers and other re ding material are 
another means whereby a knowledge of the German 
language is furthered. There are approximately 
11000 subscriptions to German newspapers and 
magizines in Alberta at present. Much reading 
material ( in the form of pamphlets, reports of ad¬ 
dresses delivered on various occasions, and attr ctive 
sport and Household magazines) has flowed in from 
Germany both by way of relatives and friends with 
whom correspondence is maintained and through the 
work of the VDA, which supplies reading material to 










&1I who r e^esr / +. r^is i; \ is read w»Vln 

interestj expecially by those who were born in Germany 
or have visited Gemmany, the illustrated numbers 
encourage the children to read, and those which 
find their way into the homesof their English-speaking 
friends have sometimes aroused the desire of others 
to acquaint themselves with the German language. 

With regard to the type of German spoken, 
the following statistics are to some extent revealiig. 
Of the 63410 persons who in 1931 stated their mothefc 
tongue to be German, 44.05$ were Canadian-fcorn, 
a further .04% were born in the British Isles or in 
British Possessions and 11.9% were born in the United 
States, which means that 56$ of the total were born 
in English-speaking countries. It is safe to say 

that nearly all of this 56% were educated in English- 

I 

speaking schools, that they have a greater command 
of English than of German and that the majority 
speak English at home in preference to German. Of 
the European-born immigrants of German speech only 
132% were born in Germany, 2.2% in Austria and 
29.6% elsewhere. (16% were Russian born, 6.4% 

Polish born, 2 1/2% Roumanian born, 0.6% Czecho¬ 
slovakian born and 0.6% Hungarian born). It follows 
that two-thirds of the European immigrants of 
German speech were born in countries where the state 











162. 

language was not German and that a consider ble 
portion of these received bi-lingual schooling, with 
the bulk of the instruction sometimes in German, some¬ 
times in the language of the state. Mention is often 
made of the remarkable way which the Russian and Polish 
Germans have preserved their language, and it is gener¬ 
ally said that they were able to do so by reason of 
their superiority over the peoplee of the countries 
in which they were living. German being one of the 
three world languages as well as the langua e of the 
best agricultural class, it as respected and kept 
remarkably pure# In Canada, however, where the state 
languages are the other two world languages, and in 
the United States, where English is^also the state 
langua e, the situation is different. Neither the 
immigrants nor their children so much as think of 
linguistic superiority, with the result that German 
at once begins to be forgotten. 

With regard to the number of cases in which the 
English language has been adopted with complete abandon¬ 
ment of German it is interesting to note:(1) that of 
74,460 persons who stated their origin to be German 
48,694 or 65.3£ gave German as their mother tongue. 

[2) Of tho^e ten years of age and over in the same 
Ger®&ft origin group 68.® spoke German including 

















' 






■ 














- 


















■ 


















. 






















. 













163 


3*6% who spoke no English, while 31.4% or 17,718 persona 

spoke no German at all. (3) Again, of the 14,387 

United States born immigrants who stated their origin 

to be German, 7586 or 52.4% gave German as their mother 

tongue which would indicate that 47.6% of this group 

spoke no German at all. I'his dropping of the German 
been 

language has/undoubtedly to some extent due to inter¬ 
marriage with other language groups. 

If we mean, when we ask whether the German 
language is being retained, "Have the children of German¬ 
speaking parentage a sufficient vocabulary to be able 
to express their thoughts with facility in German, 
and could they write a letter in Geman if called upon 
to do so?" the answer is, in general, in the neg¬ 
ative. In the larger rural settlements and in the 
Hutterite colonies there are many children who fill 
the first requirement but would fall down on the second 
since they speak a dialect of German at home, read very 
little and are therefore unable to spell acceptably 
in German. Moreover, parents are prone to incorporate 
English words into their German with the result that 
the children really learn a type of German thedse of 
which, for example in the presence of a more recent 
immigrant of German education, embarrasses them greatly. 














‘ 








164. 

The measure in which the German language is 
being retained by the Canadian-born does not appear to 
be at the expense of their ability to speak English. 
Sometimes children who speak Germ an at home will use 
a slightly twisted word-order or interject an extran¬ 
eous M yet w into an English sentence, but, varying as the 
amount of education beyond public school andthe type 
of outside conversation and reading, their ability to 
speak German lias virtually no effect upon their English. 
The Que st ion of German in the Schools . 

The regulations of the Alberta SChool Law with respect 
to the language to be used are as followss 

Section 146. (The School Law) Language to be Used. 

(1) All schools shall be taught in the English 
language, but it shall be permissable for the 
Beard of any district to cause a primary course 
to be taught in the French language. 

(2) The Board of any district may, subject to the 
regulations of the Department, employ one or more 
competent persons to give instruction in any,lang¬ 
uage other than English in the school of th^aisfc- 
rict to all pupils whose parents or guardians 
have signified a willingness that they should 
receive the same, but such a course of instruction 

shall not supercede or in any way interfere with 
the instruction by the teacher in charge of the 
school as required by the regulations of the 
Department and by this Act. 

(3) The Board shall have pov-er to raise such sums 
of money as may be necessary to pay the salaries 
of such instructors, and all costs, charges and 
expenses of such cou se of ii .struction shall be 
collected by the Board by a special rawe to be v 
imposed upon the parents or guardians of such 
pupils as take advantage of the same. 










167. 

The only group who have presented the Department 
of Education in Alberta with a langua e problem insofar 

as defiance of the regulations stated above is conce ned 
are the Ukrainian Nationalists. Their insistence upon 
employing teahhers of Ukrainian speech has meant that 
a wretched type of English has been taught and spoken 
in the classrooms of districts which are predominantly 
Ukrainian Nationalist. Much trouble has resulted due 
to the substitution of Ukrainian f bP English as the 
medium of instruction during the bsence of the school 
inspector, this complaint has been voiced less fre¬ 
quently within the last year or two. 

There has been no unwillingness to comply with 
the regulations on the part of the German-speaking 
population* Hundreds of their children have entered 
public and public separate schools without a knowledge 
of English, thus confronting themselves and their 
teachers with an obstacle to be overcome in addition 
to covering the regular program of school work. 
Fortunately, however, they have been supplied with 
English-speaking teachers and so have repidly acquired 
a command of English as grammatically correct as that 
which they heard used by their teachers and their 
English-speaking neighbors. Trustees of school districts 
where German-speaking people are in the majority have 
very seldom specified the ability to speak German as 







' 






■ 





■ 

* 











- .... 









. ■ 

. 



. ' I0 





. 







, 



. 

' 

: 

























(■ : 






• - 




































168 . 

a primary requisite either in choosing or ifl requesting 
the inspector to supply a teacher. They have moreover 
scarcely taken advantage of the provision made for 
instruction in another language at the close of the 
regular scuool period. There are no public schools on 
record at the Department of Education where such in¬ 
struction is being given daily in German. Leduc and 
Kuhndale S.D.*s are visited once per week and Calmar 
bi-weekly by United Lutheran ministers who give reli¬ 
gious and German language instruction ^o 68,pupils in 
these three schools at the close of the regular 

h 

school day. Peace Grove S.D. north of Hines Creek may 
also have such instruction in the school building. 

The reason that no apparent advantage is taken 
of the opportunity granted by the Dept, of Education 
lies to a great extent in the fact that parents feel 
they can insist upon the children using the German 
language at home, and that often the only person in 
the district, who could take on the work of the H one 
or more competent persons” referred to by the Dept, 
is the German-speaking minister, who is already giving 
weekly or bi-weekly classes for instruction in catech¬ 
ism, bible history and dictation in German, at no 
extra cost, in the Church. In any case, a knowledge 
of English has ueen put before retention of German in 
the school life of the children in German-speaking 
















169 . 

districts. Parents are often heard to deplore the 
complete dropping of German by their children as soon 
as they have learned English at school, but I have 
yet to hear one parent deplore the knowledge of English 
which his children had acquired. A ’he thought "I want 
my children to have a German education” brings the 
accompanying thought ”Then you will have to send them 
to Germany” and there the matter closes. 

While the German-speaking population has offered 
no linguistic problem to the Department of Education, 
a problem of another nature has been presented . by 
the desire of the Evangelical Lutheran Synod of 
Missouri, Ohio and other States to maintain its pri¬ 
vate schools. Provision is made for private education 
of children in Alberta under the section of the School 
Law which deals with compulsory attendance* Parents 
are required to send their children to public school 
up to the age of fifteen years, but they may, if they 
so desire, ^end than to be tutored in any private 

•y 

institution which satisfies the regular school inspector 
as to the efficiency of its instruction. Eight 
Lutheran private schools are maintained in Alberta by 
the above-named Synod and are taught by ministers with 
United Sta es seminary training. Religious instruction 
is givaiboth in English and German and it is claimed 
that the prescribed curriculum for Alberta public 








170 # 

schools Is followed in addition, but with the qualify¬ 
ing statement that all ideas which do not conform to the 
Synod’s official interpretation of the Bible are im¬ 
mediately pointed out as being contrary to Scripture 
and therefore false, ”fheir school day is half an 
hour longer than required by the Department for public 
schools and since the last half hour of the public 
school day may be devoted to religious instruction if 
the Board so desires or permits, it is possible for 
the Lutheran private school to remove any objection as 
to the time-table followed by limiting religious and 
German instruction to one hour daily. This leaves 
the presentation of material and the qualifications of 
the teachers still open to question. A comparative 
estimate of the efficiency of instruction in the private 
schools would follow from a study of the results of 
Departmental examinations ih which their pupils had 
participated. However, only the first eight grades 
are taught in the Lutheran private schools and the 
majority of their pupils have not gone befronj them. 

The course prepares them for entrance into Concordia 
Lutheran College, Edmonton, which offers a six-year 
course including subjects of the four higher school 
grades subject to the same qualification as tho e of 
the lovier graaes, in addition to religious training. 

From Concordia College the students pass into a 










* 





171 . 

Seninary at St. Louie, Missouri, for a further three 


years 1 training and thence into the ministry. 


No inspector lias formally withheld his approval with 



The policy of 


regard to these schools 


the Department of Education has been to concentr te 
efforts upon the an^elioration of public schools in 
the same districts, drawing attention to the provision 
made for a half hour of religious instruction and 
the teaching of a foreign language at the close of 
the school day, with the result that the enrolment 
in the Lutheran private schools is decreasing. 

Of the other private scho Is in Alberta, such 
as Roman Catholic private schools, Llanarthney, 
Nightingale and Queensmeade schools in Edmonton, St. 
Hilda's in Calgary, Canadian Junior College near 
Lacombe, Camrose Lutheran College, Prairie Bible 
College at Three Hills, commercial schools, etc., 
few, if other than Alberta College North and Concordia 
at Sdf onton offer any instruction in German. Th t 
which is offered at Alberta College is the regular 
High School unit of German. 

Interest is being shown in the French and 
German courses being offered by the Department of 
Extension of th^jlniversity of Alberta over station 
CKUA. A hese are being eagerly followed by many 






172. 

listeners. The educational and cultural advantage of 
the study of foreign languages is universally recog¬ 
nized. University Matriculation requirements are, for 
the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, 1. English 2. Social 
studies, 3. Mathematies, 4. a Science <£. a For^gn 
language, while entrants into the Faculty of Medicine 
are required to have two foreign languages. The course 
required for Normal Entrance allows substitution of 
either Music or Art for a foreign language, which is 
reasonable in view of the fact that the normal school 
certificate is heaneforth to qualify the holder to 
teach only Primary, Elementary and Intermediate school 
grades. 

The Department of Education of Alberta has 
placed on its^course of studies as the foreign lang¬ 
uages to be taught: French, German and Latin— 

French as a modern language, one of the three world 
languages and one of the state languages of Canada; 
German as another modern language, also one of the 
three world languages with all that this implies of 
being widely spoken and widely read in all the fields 
of science and art; Latin as one of the classical 
languages. 

Several conditions ha-e made it appear advis¬ 
able that most High School teachers be prepared to 







173. 

teach one common foreign language, A he crowded time 
table of the small high school hardly permits the in¬ 
structor to offer more than one foreign language; the 
frequent interchange of teachers and their necessary 
continuance of second and their units of languages 
taught in the school during the previous year, the desire 
of the high schools to accomodate non-resident students 
who come in from rural centres with one high school 
year behind them and require second and tuird units 
of a foreign language; the introduction of a variety 
of options such as Mechanics, Junior business and 
Household Economics with the tendency towards a course 
of a more general nature with room for only one 
foreign language, French has been installed as the 
foreign language taught and studied in most High 
Schools, Latin is also installed iji all larger High 
Schools, although it is showing a decreased enrolment 
since the introduction of Oral French into Grade IX, 
German as a foreign language on the course of studies 
has limped along practically unnoticed in the back¬ 
ground, as will be seen from the numbers of candi¬ 
dates for final examinations in the three languages 
during the past three.years. 








■ vr ' 




■ : 

• ' ■ - ' , 






■ 


; . ■' , ■■ .... . '• 








. 








' 





















174 . 

L ^ r |g f i L | Un S SfiflBflfff merman 3 
1566 660 131 44 

1572 610 163 67 

1468 634 134 79 

In 1936*37 a total of 271 students were receiving 
instruction in Gennan courses under 38 teachers in 
Alberta schools. In the current year no Ge man is 
being offered in such large centres as Lethbridge 9 
Medicine Hat and ^etaektwin although two of these cities 
have men on their staffs who could offer it. It is one 
of the objects of this thesis to suggest that the 
present inertia of the school system with regard to 
the instruction of modern languages be broken up f and 
that German be put on an equal basis with French. l his 
is a request to the Curriculum Committee for Inter¬ 
mediate School grades for the introduction of Oral 
German as a suitable Grade IX option, from which enrol¬ 
ment in the High School units of German will follow as 
a matter of course. Oral German introduced into Grade IX 
would be p popular study in many districts and teachers 
are available who could offer Oral German and follow 
up with the high school units. There are, in addition 
to those now engaged in teaching Gennan, Mr. Ludwig 
of Medicine Hat high school, Mr. Liejae of Lethbridge 
Manual Training School, Mr. Miller of Vegreville 
High School and a number of recent graduates oi the 
School of Education of the University. Moreover, 
the same man whose articles and lesson-plans for teachers 



4*936 3619 1728 

1937 3869 2023 











of Oral French, which app ar in the Alberta Teachers* 
Association magazine and are regarded by school authorities 
as excellent, is able to prepare a similar series for 
Oral German, This is Mr. R.E. Zuar during the present 
year instructing in German at the University of Alberta. 

The introduction of a course in Oral German 
might give rise to the question of **Why not Oral 
Ruthenian, oral Swedish, etc?** The obvious reasons 
why German should be preferred would lie in the fact 
that it is a language of modern science, one of the 
three world languages, already on the course of studies 
and nominally an a par with the foreign languages 
already installed in the High Schools of Alberta. 








i.76 

Chapter VU. GJIBTtAL CC LOTIONS 

1. That there is a wide variety of types among the 
German-speaking population of alberta in that 
birthplace, religious adherence and year of 
immigration constitute great differences. 

2. That there is group consciousness within toe 
German language group due to differences in 
country of origin and in religious aifiliations, 
and that these differences render group 
consciousness on toe part of toe entire language 
group negligible. 

3. Hi at toe c^if ^Contribution of the German language 
group to Alberta has lain in toe development of 
its agriciiltural industry, in which all sections 
of toe language group have participated, and tout 
they are adhering to agricultural occupations. 

4. That methods of disposal of land in i Jberts have 
resulted in toe founding of religious and 
linguistic communities on toe pert of toe 
German-speaking people and that toeir religious 
affiliation is toe stronger tie. 

5. That settlement of districts in south-eastern 
Alberta for agricultural purposes has resulted 
in the need for internal resettlement. 







•-T 








' ; " ' ■ : .... ■. 

' 5. 


y • m ■ 




" fi. ■ ... ■ • ■ (- ■ • 







* 

: ' - V.. - 




- : .' 





, "-\r J0;% #; ■ ; • 


... ■ 









177 

6. that agricultural relief settlements should be 
planned in detail with a consideration of human 
factors including language and creed before transfer 
of settlers is begun and that selection of 
families to compose the settlements should be 
considered with a view to establishing cultural 

and educational life with the schools as 
community centres* 

7. That a desire for furtherance of German culture 
and language is present among German immigrants* 

8. That political affiliations with Germany are 
not held by German immigrants in Alberta. 

9. That future German-speaking immigration is likely 

since 

to come from Central Europe and that/all European 

e * 

immigration may be pi^judiced against a democratic 
form of government it is the duty of every supporter 
of the democratic form of government for Canada 
to direct effort towards a nearer approach to 
the ideal. 

10. That the German-speaking population is assimilable 
next to the Scandinavian and that the antagonism 
of the Canadian press towards the German government 
constitutes a problem of adjustment for the 
German immigrant. 



















- 


. - ■ ■: - ' 

; v. ; ■i ; s ■:% .. - ■ . 

. 








: ' - ' ' ' - ' " - 





















178 


11. That the extent to which relief debts are allowed 

to retard naturalization of post-war immigrants 

discretion 

should be subject to the ajqmnrak of the judge 
before whom application for citizenship is made. 

12. That Jfiaintenance of the German language in the 
German language group is weak on the part of 
the Canadian-born of German-speaking parentage. 

13. That the introduction of Oral German into Grade 
IX is possible and desirable. 











1. Homesteading at Friedenstal, near Fairview. 

Peace River District. 





2. A dan on the farm of Mr. M.Friedel, Friedenstal. 
Sole water supply, due to absence of underground 

water. 











3. First Friedenstal Catholie church and congre¬ 
gation, 1914, A nuirher are Uussiin-Germans 
who came to the Peace River district from 
South America. 




























5. The newly completed Friedenstal sopai*atej&schoo 1 
which faces the church. 

6. Friedenstal church and parish hall under construc¬ 
tion. October 1937. 




















7. kissouri Synod Lutheran church 10 miles north of 
Hines Creek. A private school has been taught 
here since 1933. 



8, Hines Creek, 1S30* Newly arrived Polish-German 
immigrants* 


















9. Missouri Synod Lutheran church and private 
school 5 miles west of Wembley, 



10, Group at Northmark, homestead district opened 
by people from northern Germany in 1927, 











11. Mink pens on ranch of ^r. Gronau at Faust. 

12. The problem which confronts the Flat bush 

homesteader. 


13. Homestead residence at Wolf Creek north-east 
of Edson. 
















14. Farm garden at Hosevear. 



15* Manitoba Synod Lutheran church at Rosevear. 

Hinge 8 of breaten iron worked by a member of the 
congregation. 
























16. Farm of Mr, W.Granke,Lutherhort, south-east 
of Edmonton, 




\ >r f v<L, i 2 




fcv lx ifcT i FTW 


1 _ 

17, Installation and ordination of minister in 
Manitoba Synod Lutheran Church, Barrhead, 






















. t ■ • v ’ -v r |t- 

























* 














---—------ J 

IS, Members of Turn und Sport Club Jabn at German 
Day, Edmonton, 1932. 





' - - • •' . . —- ; 









21. A winter afternoon in town. Geman/ 
speakiii^ farmers of .ilcui district. 



























































































