KBitVEY AND EVALUATION 
OP ALBBETA 

IVillSIOHAL AS!) COTOFY 
’HHtepAL'S ASSOCIATION 



For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 






















&X, IIBBIS 

iwnsiaw 



University of Alberta 
Printing Department 


















































Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/surveyevaluationOOtoew 



THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 




A SURVEY AND EVALUATION OF ALBERTA 
DIVISIONAL AND COUNTY PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE 
OF MASTER OF EDUCATION 


FACULTY OF EDUCATION 
by 

Henry Toews 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


MAY, 1959 






iii 


ABSTRACT 

The primary aim of this study was to investigate 
the comparatively recent organizations termed Principals 1 
Associations in Alberta’s divisions and counties. The 
study proposed to collect information on these organiz¬ 
ations in order to find out where and why they were first 

established, how they are organized, and how they operate. 

* 

The study aimed to reveal the work these Associations are 
doing and what their present relationship is to the people 
they work with, namely, the superintendent, trustees, and 
teachers. An evaluation of aims and their work by admini¬ 
strative officials, experts, and the principals themselves, 
closed the study. 

The investigator has found that the fifty-one 
Associations in existence generally have a membership of 
principals, vice-principals, and the superintendent who 
in the main do not pay fees. Most Associations enjoy the 
moral support of superintendents and trustees and the 
latter often provide financial support as well. 

It was found that Principals 1 Associations have 
worked and are working on many educational problems in the 
field of administration and supervision. Their efforts 
have mainly been geared to coordination of educational 
goals in the various schools of a particular division or 
county. Division-wide projects in testing, remedial 


V *r ,i -1 vj" : . - ; :) 

1 

- F • ■ ■ .' u'i'O i I ;' ', 1 j t ' t J, ■ 


c 


< r ; ■ ' ■ ■:' 

•t o,h 






■ryxij'-: 

< - i ■ 


■ 


: 1 '' , 

i 






'■ X. " ■ u ■ ' ■ 0 ' 





i: ■' 1 


■ ■ ■ 

v [- i : tji •; - . < • 




- 








iv 


instruction, reporting to parents and promotions, and other 
activities, together with stated aims and objectives, have 
led the writer to conclude that Associations are striving 
for uniformity in their particular areas* 

The investigation has revealed that superintendents, 
trustees, and high school inspectors think highly of 
Associations and believe their potential is great as they 
move toward greater maturity. Superintendents term them 
very valuable and trustees generally appear to agree that 
cooperative effort by boards and Associations is possible 
and desirable. 

If this study has given an explanation of how bodies 
of principals in rural Alberta are organized, how they work, 
and what value is placed on the same, then the writer feels 
that his task has been accomplished. 




t 

■ « 



V 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The writer wishes to express his appreciation 
for the assistance received in the preparation of this 
investigation. The writer is particularly indebted to 
Dr. H.T. Sparby under whose direct guidance this study 
has been written. The assistance given by Dr. T.C. Byrne, 
Chief Superintendent of Schools for Alberta, through his 
direct advice and departmental records, is gratefully 
acknowledged. The writer’s thanks also go to Dr. A.W. 
Reeves, Dr. H.T. Coutts, and Mr. 0. Larson whose interest 
prompted them to act on the evaluation panel. The writer 
also acknowledges the assistance of superintendents, 
trustees and principals in Alberta divisions and counties 
without whose cooperation this work could not have been 
completed. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I. THE PROBLEM AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE. 1 

The Problem. 1 

Purpose and scope of the study. 1 

Significance of the study. 2 

Procedure. 5 

Organization of the study. 5 

Methods of securing data. 6 

Limitations.. , .. 7 

Definitions of Terras Used. 7 

II. HISTORICAL REVIEW OF DIVISIONAL AND COUNTY 

PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS . 9 

Origin . 9 

Early Associations. 11 

Lethbridge School Division . 11 

Foremost School Division . 14 

Eastern Irrigation District School 

Division... 15 

Camrose School Division. 16 

Calgary Rural School Division. 16 

Taber School Division «... . 17 

St. Mary’s River School Division. 19 

Summary. 20 

III. AIMS AND PURPOSES OF PRINCIPALS’ 

ASSOCIATIONS . ..... 23 






























. ' ■ 










. .£• 

■ 


■ 


- 

1 ■_ 

*- • • - * * - - . ‘ 

. • . . • 






. . 












vii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

IV. MEMBERSHIP IN PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS . 32 

Membership and attendance of 

superintendents. 32 

Trustee membership and attendance. 33 

Secretary-treasurer membership and 

attendance. 35 

High school inspector membership and 

attendance. 36 

Membership fees. 3& 

Conclusion. 39 

V. OPERATION OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS. 41 

Cost of Transportation. 41 

Meetings. 44 

Frequency. 44 

Time of meetings .. 46 

Place of meeting. 47 

Length of meetings. 49 

Distance travelled to meetings . 51 

Attendance. 51 

Officers. 54 

Elections. 57 

Summary .. 5$ 

VI. PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATION RELATIONSHIPS WITH 

SCHOOL BOARDS, SUPERINTENDENTS, AND TEACHERS . 60 






































T ~: 









' 




, , 




■ 


* ■* ■ ■ . 






























viii 

CHAPTER PAGE 

School board and Principals 1 

Association relationships . 60 

Superintendent-Principals 1 Association 

relationships . 67 

Principals 1 Associations and teachers ... 71 

Summary. 73 

VII. THE WORK OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS. 3l 

Work to Improve the Principalship. 33 

Principals 1 Leadership Course . 34 

Principals 1 Associations and Board Policy . . 35 

Handbooks. 36 

Disciplinary problems . . 37 

In-Service Training of Teachers . 39 

Division-wide educational projects .... 90 

Educational projects in individual .... 90 

Staff meetings. 91 

Teacher orientation programs . 92 

Curriculum study . 93 

Cooperative supervision . 93 

Institutes and conventions . 93 

Self-evaluation of teachers . 94 

Work in Relation to Pupils and Pupil 

Progress. 95 

Testing. 95 



















■ f) 













ix 

CHAPTER PAGE 

Testing for the purpose of remedial 

instruction.96 

Testing for the purpose of promotion 

and comparison with other schools .... 103 
Testing for the purpose of instructional 

guidance in grades IX and XII.106 

Testing to determine mental age and/or 

intelligence quotient . 107 

Reporting to Parents . 10S 

Promotion Policies . 109 

Inter-School Sports . 110 

The Work of Principals 1 Associations Relating 

to School Plant, Equipment, and Supplies. . . Ill 
Pupil supervision in school buildings, 

on the playground, and the school van . . . Ill 

The school office.113 

Instructional aids and supplies.115 

Textbook rental . 116 

Public Relations . 117 

Summary.119 

VIII. THE VALUE OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS TO 

EDUCATION IN RURAL ALBERTA.125 

The Superintendents Evaluate . 12S 

School Boards Evaluate.133 
















. 

. . , . . 

. \ , . ... 

' 

... - t c 

' 

t 

. . ■ • . 

. 

.. 

. 

. 








X 


CHAPTER PAGE 

Board opinion regarding trustee 

membership, cooperative projects of 
Associations and trustees, and joint 
projects of Associations and the 
A.T.A., superintendents* 

attendance, and certain means 


of support.134 

Board chairmen evaluate the work of 

Associations . 137 

Associations Evaluate Themselves . 144 

Evaluation of activities . 144 

Means by which Associations might be 

improved.147 

The Experts Evaluate. 149 

Evaluation of aims and purposes.150 

Evaluation of Association work.153 

Summary ..... . 160 

IX. CONCLUSION.163 

Summary.163 

Implications for further research. 167 

APPENDIX A.170 

APPENDIX B.173 

APPENDIX C.136 





















xi 

CHAPTER PAGE 

APPENDIX D.190 

BIBLIOGRAPHY . 193 














' 











LIST OF TABLES 


TABLE PAGE 

I. Suggested Aims of Associations Ranked 
According to Ratings Given by the 

Associations . 29 

II. Summary of Suggested Aims and Purposes 

Evaluated by Principals 1 Associations. 30 

III. Trustee Membership in Associations . 34 

IV. Attendance of Non-member School Trustees at 

Association Meetings . 35 

V. Membership and Attendance of High School 

Inspectors in Associations . ..... 36 

VI. Membership Fees in Associations. 3& 

VII. Membership Fees Paid by Six Principals 1 

Associations . 39 

VIII. Methods of Meeting Transportation Costs of 

Members of Fifty-One Associations. 42 

IX. Frequency of Association Meetings . 45 

X. Average Number of Meetings Per Year of 

Associations Convening Irregularly . 46 

XI. Meeting Place of Principals 1 Associations ... 49 

XII. Suggestions Made by Associations for Improving 

Length and Time of Meetings. 51 

XIII. Miles Travelled (One-Way) to Meetings by 

Members of Fifty Associations . 52 



















xiii 


TABLE PAGE 

XIV. Average Attendance by Members at 

Principals 1 Association Meetings . 53 

XV. Reasons Given by Associations far Attendance 

of Meetings.54 

XVI. Officers Designated in Principals 1 

Associations of Fifty-One School Divisions • . 55 

XVII. Average Size of Forty-Eight Associations 

and Their Executives . 57 

XVIII. How Associations Work with School Boards .... 61 

XIX. Attendance of Trustees at Association 

Meetings.63 

XX. Summary of Assistance Given by School Boards 

to their Associations . 66 

XXI. Attendance of Superintendents at Association 

Meetings.63 

XXII. Degree of Participation of Superintendents in 

Association Work.69 

XXIII. Some Ways in Which Superintendents and 

Associations Assist Each Other . 71 

XXIV. Methods of Communication Used by Associations . 74 

XXV. Attitudes of Teachers to Association Projects . 75 

XXVI. Testing By Principals 1 Associations 

Throughout the Grades for the Purpose of 
Remedial Instruction.97 



























„ 


■ :)- ' : ~ v "... J :.!£ r-j• 

, • • 

- 

a 


■ 




* 

./-■ .. , 


• Vv ; ; 


' 

a 








t 












xiv 


TABLE PAGE 

XXVII. Testing Programs of Associations in Three 

Subject Fields in Division I . 93 

XXVIII. Testing Programs of Associations in Three 

Subject Fields in Division II. 99 

XXIX. Testing Programs of Associations in Three 

Subject Fields in Division III . 100 

XXX. Testing Programs of Associations in Subject 

Fields—Reading.100 

XXXI. Testing Programs of Associations in Subject 

Fields—Language.101 

XXXII. Testing Programs of Associations in Subject 

Fields—Arithmetic . 101 

XXXIII. Testing Programs of Associations in Subject 


Fields—High School Grades X—XII. ..... 102 

XXXIV. Testing Programs Coordinated by Principals’ 
Associations in Elementary and Junior 
High School Subjects for the Purpose of 
Promotions or Comparisons with Other Schools 103 
XXXV* Work of Principals’ Associations in 

Testing Programs of Grades IX and XII. . . . 10? 

XXXVI. Work of Principals’ Associations in the 

Intelligence Testing Programs.103 

XXXVII. Work of Associations in Public Relations . . . 119 










> 












■ .V ' ti 









































. 














' 































XV 


TABLE PAGE 

XXXVIII* Rank Order of Activities in Which 

Associations Report Having Done at 

Least Some Work.122 

XXXIX. Rank Order of Activities in Which 
Associations Report Having Done 

Extensive Work.123 

XL. Superintendents 1 Evaluation of Principals 1 

Associations . 129 

XLI. Opinions of Board Chairmen with Respect to 
Membership, Cooperation, and Support in 

Principals 1 Associations . 136 

XLII. Evaluation of Association Work by Chairmen 

of School Boards.141 

XLIII. Principals 1 Association Work as Ranked by 

School Board Chairmen. . 143 

XLIV. Activities of Principals 1 Associations 

Valued Most Highly by Principals ...... 146 

XLV. Evaluation of Aims and Purposes of Principals 1 

Associations by Educational Experts.153 

XLVI. Work of Principals 1 Associations Ranked in 

Order of Importance by a Panel of Experts. . 159 























LIST OF FIGURES 


FIGURE PAGE 

1. Ratings assigned by Associations to 

suggested aim: improvement of instruction . . 24 

2. Ratings assigned by Associations to 

suggested aim: to coordinate the work of 

principals.. . . . 25 

3* Ratings assigned by Associations to 

suggested aim: to get more uniformity in 

school administration . 26 

4. Ratings assigned by Associations to 

suggested aim: to advise the board regarding 
educational policy . 27 

5. Ratings assigned by Associations to 

suggested aim: to assist the superintendent 
in supervision of instruction. 28 

6. Membership and attendance of superintendents 

in Principals 1 Associations . 33 

7. Membership and attendance of divisional 

secretary-treasurers in Principals 1 

Associations . 36 

8. Mileage received by Association members 

travelling to and from meetings. .. 43 

9. Time at which thirty-six Associations meet 

regularly during the school week . 4$ 












xvii 


FIGURE PAGE 

10. Length of meetings in hours held by fifty-one 

Associations in Alberta divisions . 50 

11. Officers used in the executives of divisional 

Principals’ Associations. 56 

12. Assistance given to Associations by boards. ... 63 

13. Channels of communication between Principals 1 

Associations and teachers . 72 

14. Lines of communication—teachers’ groups to 

Principals’ Associations. 77 

15« Work being done by Associations to improve 

the principalship. £4 

16. Areas in which Principals’ Associations work 

in cooperation with or by request of their 
divisional board. &9 

17. Activities in which Principals’ Associations 

cooperate with teachers . 92 

Id. Activities planned and executed by Principals’ 

Associations for teachers . 94 

19. Grade ten final testing programs in six 

subjects coordinated by Associations . 105 

20. Grade eleven final testing programs in six 

subjects coordinated by Associations ..... 106 

21. Work of Associations related to: reporting to 

parents, developing promotion policies, and 
promoting inter-school sports . 110 





















■ - A' 

"" 

. ■" * ’;b. 

• L 0.5 ytf ;; ,v\i : ■■■ ' .. . Ov ■ 7 

} : 

. 

* 



' ' . ■ " v 

• ■ ... , 

■ . .... 

. . • * - •• ... - ■' ' \ : 

• •• •• " if .' ■ s ' , ' . ' X ■ . ' ■ : ' ■ ) I 

• . r v 





*• r •• '.A' 








, . 'l;6 







> [3 





xviii 


FIGURE PAGE 

22* Work of Associations with respect to pupil 
supervision in school buildings, on the 

playground, and on school vans.112 

23# Work of Associations with respect to school 
office procedure in pupil records, filing 

systems, and pupil attendance.115 

24. Work of Associations with respect to 

instructional aids, pupil supplies, and 

textbook rental.116 










CHAPTER I 


THE PROBLEM AND ITS SIGNIFICANCE 

I. THE PROBLEM 

Purpose and scope of the study . The purpose of this 
investigation is to survey Principals 1 Associations in 
Alberta school divisions and counties and to evaluate, 
through several authoritative agencies, the contributions 
these organizations are making to rural education in the 
province. Less than twenty years ago there were no formal 
Associations of principals in the province of Alberta except 
for one in the city of Calgary. Today we have Associations 
in our cities, and fifty-one groups operating in all but 
six of the rural inspectorates. It seems certain that some 
educational need must be served by these organizations. 

In order to accomplish the writer’s aims, he will 
attempt to concentrate his study around the following 
questions: 

(a) Where and for what reasons were the first Associa¬ 
tions in the province established? Who provided 
the leadership required for their organization? 

(b) What aims and purposes do Principals’ Associations 
have, and are they clearly defined and stated? 

(c) Who are the members in these Associations? 





I 


c 


7 




r 


vJ 


■ 




- f 


' or. . *i ’j ; : ■ ■ v -f , .. .. V"' " ■ ' 


■ • 















: i: ■ ;;(C 




j ' ' 



2 


(d) How do these Associations operate? How, where, and 
when do they meet? How long are their meetings 
and how is the attendance? How are Associations 
financed? 

(e) What is the relationship of Principals 1 Associations 
to superintendents, school boards, and high school 
inspectors? Do they work effectively with the 
above as well as with the Alberta Teachers’ 
Association and teachers in their respective areas? 

(f) What is the nature of the work that Associations 
do? 

(g) What value do principals place on their organiza¬ 
tions and how, in their opinion, might their 
Associations be improved? 

(h) Of what value are Associations to superintendents 
and how do they assess Association work? 

(i) How do educational experts view Association aims 
and the work Associations do? 

(j) What conclusions may be drawn from the information 
gathered in this investigation? 

Significance of the study . Our increasingly complex 
society seems to place an ever-increasing burden on our 
schools. Vastly extended and flexible curricula, the 
increased demand for learning to reach the greatest 















• • ; ' ;• ' ' : /: . - 1 ’ >'■ ' 

• • :• ■ q i i; ' r i ' . ' 




? 






!' o ‘ f ‘5 

. v. • •. ■ * '• ' 

O' O ' ,' ' • ' X 

! A . iJ ' . u:j. J ■ X: ■:< ■ ; ;V :• / 1 

• * • f.:.K 'j: ’ rr“ ■' 0. ) • ' ' V . • ' ; w a : . ■ 






l ' .■ . 








i .Ky :\>0, 























0:i 






< X-r . 


:• 






• ■ : , - v vi 


. r: . v . 




■ . ■ ■ •, ■ . ' 




. ... 

















■ 

. 











3 


percentage of our population, the leaping strides of 
scientific development, all point their finger at modern 
educators and ask the question: are you meeting these needs? 
The principals, as the head teachers, must give leadership 
to their staffs in meeting this challenge. How can they best 
cope with it in the light of their training and experience, 
which is often too light and inadequate? 

Ever since the creation of school divisions in 
Alberta, there has been a gradual movement towards the 
centralization of schools. Pupils were being transported 
to large schools at some central point. This brought a 
great number of multi-room and graded schools into being, 
the leaders of which became principals who had under their 
guidance a staff of teachers. Soon divisions all over the 
province had reduced the number of one-room schools exten¬ 
sively and the number of centralizations increased. 

As the number of principals in the divisions of the 
province increased, it would appear natural that principals 
should get together, informally at first, to discuss common 
problems and probe ways and means of attacking them. The 
superintendent of the division, as well as the principals 
must have recognized that they had a common job and a common 
responsibility: that of providing an educational program 
which would be commensurate with the growth in population, 
the centralizations of schools, and a stream-lined curriculum. 



4 

The period of the rural administrator and supervisor had 
arrived in the body of the school principal. 

It is only recently that the Province of Alberta has 
recognized the need for training as well as experience in 
its school principals. The Department of Education, through 
its superintendents, is beginning to ask principals what 
they are doing to improve the quality of instruction in 
their schools. Centralization of schools has given impetus 
to the demand for efficient and sound administrative and 
supervisory practices. 

To help in the training of principals the University 
of Alberta has created the Division of Educational Adminis- 
stration in its Faculty of Education. Here principals may 
take courses designed to help them in their work, and if 
successful, they receive an administrator’s certificate. 

Further evidence that the need for better and well- 
trained principals is becoming more widespread is the fact 
that the University of Alberta with the assistance of the 
Kellogg Foundation and in cooperation with the Alberta 
School Trustees’ Association, the Alberta Teachers’ Associ¬ 
ation, and the Alberta School Inspectors’ Association are 
offering the Principals’ Leadership Course which has now 
completed its third year of operation. The course aims at 
bringing principals from all parts of the province together 
to study and discuss common problems. New methods and new 



5 


ideas are brought to light which are carried to their home 
school systems and given the practical test. The principals 
learn from reading, from experts, and above all, they learn 
from each other. 

On the local scene, the value of group study and 
discussion, the need for reasonable uniformity of practice 
by principals in one school unit, and the desire for better 
administrative and supervisory practices have led to the 
formation of Principals 1 Associations. A major aim of 
this study is directed toward substantiating this claim. 

II. PROCEDURE 

Organization of the study . It is planned to give the 
historical background of the earliest Principals 1 Associ¬ 
ations in Alberta divisions and counties. A chapter in this 
study will discuss aims and purposes of Principals’ Associ¬ 
ations. Membership in these organizations will be investi¬ 
gated and certain phases of operation will be dealt with. 
Relationships of Associations to school boards, superinten¬ 
dents, and teachers will be revealed and a large portion of 
this investigation will summarize the work which Associ¬ 
ations have done in the past and what they are now doing. 

An evaluation will be attempted with respect to the 
aims and work of these rural Associations. In order to do 
this the writer will report the opinions of Associations 







c 


c 




, ■ 


( ' 


i 


'i 






" . . f r-U ' 


















. 


















6 

themselves, superintendents, school boards, and a panel of 
experts• 

Methods of securing data . To obtain the information 
required for this study the investigator prepared an eleven- 
page questionnaire which was sent to the fifty-one super¬ 
intendents having Associations in their inspectorates. The 
superintendents were asked to transmit the questionnaire to 
the presidents of their Associations for completion. After 
a follow-up letter and some personal contacts, all fifty- 
one questionnaires were received by the writer. The factual 
material in this study is therefore complete up to the date 
of writing, and covers all the Associations in the rural 
areas of Alberta. A copy of the questionnaire and letter 
may be found in Appendix B. 

To gather opinions of superintendents regarding the 
value of Associations the writer used a letter circulated 
in March, 1957, in connection with a study that the 
Lethbridge School Division Principals 1 Association was 
carrying on at the time. Other opinions were gathered from 
reports superintendents made to the Department of Education 
in 1957, which were made available to the writer by the 
Chief Superintendent of Schools. 

To incorporate the views of school boards in this 
study, the writer sent fifty questionnaires to chairmen of 











t 














‘ 1 ' ' - ■ 





■ 








■ 




’ 

























7 

divisional school boards in which they were asked to express 
themselves regarding certain operational phases of Associ¬ 
ations and to evaluate their work. A total of thirty-one 
(sixty-two per cent) returned the completed questionnaire. 

A copy may be found in Appendix C• 

The panel of educational experts, which evaluates 
the aims and purposes as well as the work of Associations, 
was sent a list of these aims and a summarized list of the 
work Associations have done in the past. A copy of this 
evaluation sheet may be found in Appendix D. 

Limitations . Because there has been nothing published 
on the topic in hand, the writer will rely on primary sources. 
Interviews, minute books of Associations, and an extensive 
questionnaire will form the major basis of information. 

The study will not attempt a comparison of similar organiz¬ 
ations, if they exist, outside of Alberta, nor will it 
attempt to describe or compare our city Associations with 
those of divisions and counties. 

III. DEFINITIONS OF TERMS USED 

Administration -—This term is used in a broad sense to 
include all phases of planning, direction, and 
supervision of education. It is also taken to 
include the supervision of instruction. 







i‘ ■ rh; : . ‘ 1 

J. Ui- *. • ’ - ' ■ 

■ ■ p 


• ■ : 

, 

. i, : . ! ■ l: 

■ 


■ ' • " 

, 


: ■ ■ r > • 

c • • « 


, 




' 

’ 



- ■■ ' ; : ‘ : > } 

: \ r 

■ ■ V ; 1 ; , .... ' ■"> -V . . • ' ' 

V ’ ' • . ' ' ' ' - c - ' . • : ' J to 

f 

c - : ' ■'■■■ v- ■ • ■: ■ :;nl 

o' ■ 1 ... : 1: 'j'VWStpl 

c ' • c •; .• 

* 

< 

♦ 

• • ' . i i. ... • ./ ■ ‘ 



Association —This is a short term used for Principals’ 


Association and refers in this study to divisional 
and county Associations only, except in Chapter II 
where the Calgary City Association is discussed 
under "Origin”. 

Board —A short term used for school boards and school 
committees in counties. 

Charter Members —This refers to members who were present 
when a particular Principals’ Association was 
organized. 

Division —A short term used to denote a school division 
in Alberta. In this study it is meant to include 


counties as well. 






r 



. - 


. 




■ / 


. 1 


i 








■ 


. 




CHAPTER II 


HISTORICAL REVIEW OF DIVISIONAL AND COUNTY 
PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 

The purpose of this chapter is to reveal how and 
under what circumstances the earliest Associations in rural 
Alberta were organized. Since the establishment of 
divisions and centralization of schools appear to have been 
contributing factors which provided incentive for the 
creation of Associations, most of the early organizations 
were established in southern Alberta. The writer intends to 
sketch historically, and in chronological order the organi¬ 
zation of the seven Associations established prior to 1950 
from information gathered through minute books and personal 
interviews. Appendix A in this work lists the names of 
Associations in existence at the time of writing, states 
their membership, and gives the year that each was 
organized. 


I. ORIGIN 

The earliest Association in the province of Alberta 
was organized by a group of principals in the city of 
Calgary in March, 1914. Mr. W.H. Foster of that city was 
the chairman of the first meeting and became the first 
president. The purposes of the organization were: 




J" „ ■ O C: / D 


' 


L» i 




t 


< 



















■ 'Oil* 


■ (■ 

























10 


to provide an opportunity for discussion of various 
educational problems which might arise from time to 
time and to promote social intercourse among the 
principals. 

It is interesting to note that this Association admitted 
male principals only and that the superintendent, Dr. A.M. 
Scott was not a member but attended when invited. 

The Calgary Association was reorganized in 1922, 
membership privileges were extended to women, and the group 
was given official recognition by the Board and its super¬ 
intendent. In 1925, 

the School Board granted a request previously made 
many times to the effect that principals of all schools 
of four rooms or over be granted an afternoon period to 
attend the meetings of the Associations. This accept¬ 
ance carried with it an understanding that attendance 
of principals be obligatory. 2 

The creation of Principals’ Associations in divisions 
seems to have a direct parallel with the trend toward the 
centralization of schools which became marked during the 
war years and continued with greater force after the end of 
the war. The Forty-Fourth Annual Report of the Department 
of Education of the Province of Alberta, (1949), states: 

Tt The increased popularity of Principals’ Meetings reported 
by Superintendents is a natural outgrowth of centrali¬ 
zation”.^ 

With the organization of school divisions in the 
province nearly complete and with centralization growing 
apace because of better educational opportunity in the 






■ 




, 












J ■ ,■: 


> ■ '■ : J 


' 










11 


graded schools, a group of principals emerged who had much 
in common in both administrative and supervisory fields, 
they worked under one school board and one superintendent, 
and they served the same enlarged community. Centrali¬ 
zation grew most rapidly in the southern part of the province, 
perhaps because of more favorable weather and road conditions, 
and often a denser population. The 194$ Report of the 
Department of Education states: TT In the Lethbridge, 

Foremost, and Taber Divisions, the process (centralization) 
is now practically complete, while St. Mary’s River, Fort 
Macleod, Foothills, and Wheatland have made rapid strides 
By the year of the report, Principals’ Associations had 
already been organized in the first four divisions 
mentioned. The same report states that, ’’Principals’ 

Meetings have served . . . where there are numbers of 
larger graded schools”.5 A superintendent during this 
period went to the E.I.D. School Division #44 because he 
saw the possibility of effective cooperative supervision in 
the fine graded schools established there. He was able to 
start an. Association in 1945, his first year there, to help 
him in achieving his goal.^ 

II. EARLY ASSOCIATIONS 

Lethbridge School Division . The first meeting of 
principals for the purpose of forming an Association in 













' ' i ; I'j-i ' ’I i". /'J ‘ i ■ c ; i. .?■ 

. 




03 1 










' ‘ : . 1 

on i •• . •' • • . • ■ . r • Vo o\: •/ ;r.- 30 1 ol’t 


. 

■ 


' 


" t • ' • < ’ < ' ‘ > 


• : • • ■■ • 






• c - •: x f > > l 


! 0 ’ ' ' , V ' 


'■?: odd do 'v-Vv xoV 




' 


( '■ 


• ' • i; ' ' > 


; 

, ' -r 





. ' o. > ■ 




. - . •: ; ■ 





* 



,■- ■ 

.... _ ^ • 






i'.o. ' : - ■ t r « 






• 


. 






















12 


Alberta divisions was called by Superintendent Owen Williams 
of the Lethbridge inspectorate. The date of the meeting was 
December 6, 1941* 

After the motion to form an Association was passed, 
the superintendent conducted an election in which Dr. H.T. 
Sparby, then high school inspector for Southern Alberta, was 
named honorary president. The president was Mr. Leo Smith, 
then principal of Picture Butte school, and the first 
secretary-treasurer was Donald Baldwin, of Iron Springs. 

An executive committee was set up which included a member 
from each of the four sub-divisional districts. The 
members agreed to pay a fee of twenty-five cents per year. 

Although not set down, the aims and purposes of the 
Association are indicated by the work it carried on for the 
following years. Because the members questioned the 
relationship between the new organization and the Alberta 
Teachers' Association, a letter was dispatched to John W. 
Barnett. The letter has been lost, and its contents were 
not recorded, but a motion followed at the second meeting 
of the Association in February 2S, 1942: "That this group 
ask the Lethbridge Local to authorize the formation of a 
Principals' organization among its members for the purpose 
of making special studies".7 The studies mentioned concerned 
the revision of the High School Curriculum. Mr. R.I. Baker, 
Coaldale principal, who had been named to the provincial 




. 






' ' - .. 


c 1 : - 




e , r. ; 0 •:< / 


< ..," 






















' 










13 


body on revision, led the group locally and he in turn was 
given assistance by Dr. Sparby.^ Dr. Newlands had sent some 
books on integration which formed the basis for research. 

There appear to have been other reasons as well for 
the creation of the Lethbridge School Division Principals 1 
Association. Superintendent Williams, who is given credit 
by charter members for the idea of starting such a body, 
recognized that the centralized schools in his inspectorate 
had many common problems which could best be solved by 
calling all the principals together.9 The lack of uni¬ 
formity in the administration of the various centres made 
a body of principals the natural medium through which to 
work. 10 

Because of various school standards prevalent in the 
inspectorate, the new Association launched into the problems 
of testing. It sponsored a resolution at the Annual General 
Meeting of the A.T.A. through the Lethbridge Local that the 
Department of Education institute final examinations in 
Grades ten and eleven for teacher guidance in promotions. 

The plan.was favoured by the Annual General Meeting of the 
Alberta Teachers 1 Association and the Department, but the 
Examinations Branch was violently opposed and the matter was 
dropped.H A June testing program was developed by the 
Association. Other work of the early years included the 
standardization of school supplies throughout the division, 


c 






• . 1 ; r . ■ ■ { • . . 

• , ' . • . ..i 

\ 

: :-4 

' ;S 4 : i ' 

■ • - > 'TO 



c 

* 

1 1 .. 

%ou v v ■ 

' " 

V ‘ 

; . ■ ■ - ■) y ! 

• 


' 


■ t i , ' • 




■ o /< p-'.p 

O :/•/ • L ■ f" 


j ■ . J'- 

■ : '. ■:> 

' 

J 

: 

i l ■ 1 

- 


■ v ... ■ I ‘ • J 

■ V‘ V f XX? 5 

* 

j • ; - ■' ■: 






...". . ( . 

fv ■ k i 




■ 


. . . 





. ' 


■' I ■ - - • 






14 

the development of new report and record cards, and a system 
of filing. 

Foremost School Division . The leadership given by 
superintendents in the establishment of principals 1 Associ¬ 
ations will have to be recognized. As Mr. Owen Williams 
started the Lethbridge Association of Principals, so Dr. T.C. 
Byrne, then newly appointed superintendent in the Foremost 
Division and now Chief Superintendent of Schools, called the 
principals of the inspectorate together on October 15, 1943* 
He had laid a careful groundwork for this meeting by talking, 
during the previous year, to the board and the principals 
about the values of such an organization.! 2 

Dr. Byrne chaired the first meeting and stated that 
its purpose was "to discuss problems of school organization 
and other subject matter pertaining to the duties of a 
principal in order to arrive at a common understanding and 
arrange a uniformity of policy throughout the inspectorate".^ 
The meeting proceeded with discussions of common problems 
and ended with the decision of the ten principals present to 
form a Principals’ Association. Mr. D.C. Pickard of Bow 
Island School, not in the division but in the inspectorate, 
was named president and Mr. Walter Hall became the first 
secretary. Dr. Byrne was elected honorary president. He 
was thanked by a motion for "having chosen this way of 







J 


O'l 













t f - 






•• ■ '* 











i 


r 






! . ’ 






, 









♦ 





15 


bringing the principals together".14 The vote was unani¬ 
mous, The agenda of this first day-long meeting consisted 
of discussions of classroom visits by principals, staff 
meetings, discipline, staff appointments, and school 
improvements. Dr. H.T. Sparby, High School Inspector, was 
present to speak to the group on the new high school courses, 
particularly in Grade Ten. After lunch the possibility of 
starting Home and School Associations was discussed. 
Cumulative records and revision of report cards came before 
the meeting, and initial steps were taken towards their 
adoption .^ 

Eastern Irrigation District School Division . The 
third Association to be established in rural Alberta was in 
the Eastern Irrigation District School Division #44. 

Dr. A.W. Reeves, superintendent, Dr. Keith Thomson, principal 
of Brooks school, and Mr. F.M. Riddle, principal at Bassano, 
met together with other principals of the division to form 
an Association in the fall of 1945, with Mr. Riddle becoming 
its first president. 1 & 

The idea of starting an Association came from Dr. 
Reeves, who had seen the Calgary Association in operation, 
and he immediately realized the necessity of an organization 
in his division. He saw his group of principals as a 
coordinating force for uniformity in administration, in 
planning teachers’ institutes, and in assisting the board 










-> • . ' ' 


!'- >: J ' 





j 









c 


c 


, . ' o./- •; ■ .> n," /‘Or 










. c 








. 

{•• • ' 










- A 


; 




■ j 




■ 




16 


and superintendent in formulating school policy.1? 

Early work undertaken by this Association included 
the organization of a teachers 1 institute, development of 
cumulative record cards, and adoption of a report-card form 
for the division. School libraries in the division were 
placed under a common policy and their operation was closely 
supervised. A Teachers 1 Handbook of policies, practices, and 
regulations was an early project. In addition, the Associ¬ 
ation soon found itself assisting the board in policy¬ 
making. 


Camrose School Division . The origin of this most 
northerly of early Associations is best described by the 
following: 

The Camrose Principals 1 Association was organized in 
the spring of 1946, with Luther Olson as the first 
president, and Mrs. Helen Brager (now Mrs. Ross) as 
secretary. The value of such an organization was 
visualized by the late Mr. C.H. Robinson, former 
Superintendent of the Camrose School Division. 

The meetings were attended by the principals 
of all the schools within the Camrose School Division, 
and also those in the town of Camrose. Meetings were 
held on Saturday afternoon in the Divisional office. 

The purpose of the organization is to present 
the principals and the superintendent with an oppor¬ 
tunity to meet and discuss problems of mutual concern, 
as well as to suggest possible solutions. It is the 
intent of the organization that common problems will 
consequently be operated on a more successful, consis¬ 
tent and harmonious basis. 19 


Calgary Rural . On September 2&, 1946, the Calgary 
Rural Principals 1 Association was formed with H.H. Mumby, 









< I 


, . ' : ' 


t 






"X 








17 

Crossfield principal, its first chairman, and Mrs. N.T. Boos 
was elected secretary. Superintendent G.L. Wilson of 
Calgary Rural conducted the elections and acted as Secretary 
until Mrs. Boos was declared elected. 

Because the meeting place was in the board office 
in the city of Calgary, which already had a long history 
in its Principals 1 Association, it is quite understandable 
that this rural group should be one of the first seven 
formed. Furthermore, the division is comparatively compact 
around the city and is served by good roads. 

Since this Association has seen a considerable change 
in staff, including the superintendent, their early records 
are somewhat sketchy. It is evident, however, that the 
principals met with a purpose, because their first meeting 
proposed a program for the year which included the procuring 
and use of English Drill exercises n to improve the standard 
of English in the schools. n It promised to set up a testing 
program in grade nine and the high school. Pupil report 
cards and school plans of two and four rooms were to be 
reviewed. Other early work of this Association included 
textbooks, survey tests in the elementary school, classroom 
supplies and equipment, book repair, school attendance, 
Junior Red Cross, janitors 1 duties, visual aids, principal- 
staff relations, and school sports .^0 


Taber School Division . When Superintendent.T.C 













fi 


') ' i ■ 




t 






'1 










Byrne moved from Foremost to Taber in 1947, he brought 
with him to his new post the knowledge and experience of a 
successful Principals 1 Association. The first meeting of 
Taber principals took place at Vauxhall on November 10, 

1947, in the form of a supper meeting at the home of Mr. 

Ralph Ringdahl. The first president named was Mr. Lynn 
Hall, then principal of Taber High School. Meetings remained 
informal until the following year when formal organization 
took place.21 

Although the earliest Association preceded this one 
by nearly six years, the Taber group was apparently the 
first to start under a formal constitution. The body of 
laws adopted on September 25, 194$, gave the name of the 
Association, defined the executive, stated when elections 
were to be held, and listed eight very clearly defined 
functions. 

Mr. Harry Myers of Taber became the president in 
194$, and Mr. R.B. McIntosh, the secretary. The Super¬ 
intendent rounded out the executive. The Association 
launched.the year’s work by taking up the problems of record 
cards and their filing. The same program also called for 
discussions on playground supervision and students* union 
activities. Other work accomplished at this meeting included 
the organization of a guidance committee and the endorsement 
of a list of van regulations, including van drivers* duties. 





c 


(, 


■ 








r 0 ?< I 








j ./ 













e c 






c 




) . •; ' ~ ■//:. ■ / : 






» 


. 
























19 


A program set up for the year consisted of the study of 
record cards, testing, hobby clubs, divisional track meet, 
and the music festival. Other work undertaken in the 
Association’s early stages included discussions and actions 
on the function of the principal, homework, divisional 
library books, promotion policies, in-service training, and 
duties of the vice-principal. 22 

An interesting development in this Association was 
that, in December of 1950, a letter asked Dean H.E. Smith 
of the Faculty of Education to institute a course on the 
supervision of enterprise. The Dean replied that the 
question was being studied. In September, 1953, a move was 
made by some members of the Taber Principals’ Association 
to start a regional Principals’ Association for southern 

Alberta. 

St . Mary’s River School Division . Because early 
records of the St. Mary’s Principals’ Association have been 
lost and the writer is unable to find authoritative infor¬ 
mation on its early years, the report on this organization 
will have to remain somewhat nebulous. A number of older 
principals contacted thought it was organized in 1943, 
while another took it to be 1945 when Mr. George Taylor, 
now of Edmonton, became president; and Miss Elizabeth Duff, 
the secretary. 

This Association embarked on a remedial English 
























5 













20 


program in 1945 and studied teaching techniques in the high 
school. Divisional and school libraries received early 
attention from this body of principals.24 

III. SUMMARY 

The organization of school divisions and the sub¬ 
sequent centralization of schools appear to have indicated 
the need for the organization of Principals 1 Associations. 
Six of these were formed in divisions in southern Alberta 
and another in Camrose before 1950 in the following order: 
Lethbridge, Foremost, Eastern Irrigation District, Camrose, 
Calgary, Taber, and St. Mary's (indefinite). 

The initial steps appear to have been taken by far¬ 
sighted superintendents, namely, Mr. Owen Williams, Dr. T.C. 
Byrne, Dr. A.W. Reeves, Mr. C. H. Robinson and Mr. G.L. 
Wilson. 

The work which concerned these pioneer Associations 
centred about the execution of a uniform administration 
policy for their respective divisions and their common 
concern for the improvement of instruction. 






. o ; -y\ r y 




j • IT 



t c 


r 


e 






) 




< 


















> 








21 


FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER II 


^Calgary Principals* Association, **An Historical 
Review of The Calgary Principals* Association TT , Calgary, 

May, 1942, p.l. 

2 Ibid., p.2. 

3 Forty - Fourth Annual Report » 1949 » Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: King’s Printer, 
1950, p.25. 

^ Forty - Third. Annual Report , 1948 , Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: King’s Printer, 
1948, p.16. 

3 Ibid, p.35. 

^Statement by Dr. A.W. Reeves, personal interview, 
July 16, 1958. 

^Minutes of Lethbridge School Division Principals* 
Association, February, 1942. 

^Statement by Mr. R.I. Baker, Charter member, 
Lethbridge School Division Principals* Association, personal 
interview, June 1, 1958. 

9 lbid . 

^Statement by W.J. White, Charter member, Lethbridge 
School Division Principals* Association, in a personal 
interview, June 1, 1958* 

^Statement by Mr. R.I. Baker, personal interview, 
June 1, 1958. 

-^Statement by Mr. D.C. Pickard, Charter member, 
Foremost School Division Principals* Association, in a 
personal interview, May 11, 1958. 

13Minutes of Foremost School Division Principals* 
Association, October, 1943• 

1 ^Ibid. 


15 Ibid 



































22 


l^Letter to the writer from Mr. F.W. Riddle, 

Charter member, Eastern Irrigation District School Division 
#44 Principals’ Association, August 11, 195&* 

17statement by Dr. A.W. Reeves, personal interview, 
July 16, 195&. 

l^Letter to the writer from Mr. F.W. Riddle, 

August 11, 195$. 

l^Report prepared by a committee of the Camrose 
Principals 1 Association for the Official Handbook, 195&* 

20Minutes of Calgary Rural Principals’ Association, 
1946-47. 

2lLetter to the writer from Mr. Ralph Ringdahl, 
Charter member, Taber School Division Principals’ 
Association, June 20, 195$. 

^Minutes of Taber School Division Principals’ 
Association, 194&. 

^Letter file of Taber School Division Principals’ 
Association. 

^Statement by Mr. R. Shields, Principal, Cardston 
High School, personal interview, June 7, 195$. 





c 


'1 :j ‘ 




• ■ : t ■ 











c 









r 5 










c 








CHAPTER III. 


AIMS AND PURPOSES OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS 

The questionnaire under the heading of "Aims and 
Purposes" asked Associations to express the need felt for 
such an organization* The writer suggested five possible 
needs in the order listed as follows: 

(a) To improve supervision of instruction 

(b) To coordinate the work of principals 

(c) To get more uniformity in school administration 

(d) To advise the board regarding educational policy 

(e) To assist the superintendent in supervision of 
instruction* 

Associations were invited to rate the above using a 
one-to-five number scale if they found them applicable in 
their particular organization* All fifty-one made entries 
in the blanks provided* Forty-two replies used the rating 
scale completely. Seven others found only some of them 
applicable, and two did not use the rating scale, but 
checked them to show that they applied. 

The question as to whether Associations have consti¬ 
tutions in which aims and purposes are stated cannot be 
answered in this study. It is significant, however, that 
when Associations were invited to state other aims and 
purposes or to quote from their constitutions, only five out 














: J I: "to it;;' r( *>*[?■} 

• . . t •: tit •: 


/' /? 




f 








■> 




;• i ; 




r ‘ . 


•Ti 





















C 


v ii 


•: 






o 















24 


of the fifty-one made an entry in the space provided. One 
of these referred the writer to a county handbook, but used 
the rating scale completely on the suggested aims. Another 
rated three of the suggested aims and added the "Standardi- 
zation of the testing program” as another. The remaining 
three rated the suggested aims and indicated that they had 
no formal constitutions. It would seem that the suggested 
aims found a certain amount of favour since all Associations 
made positive responses. 

Forty-five Associations responded to the first 
suggested aim: "To improve the supervision of instruction". 
Eighteen of these gave it the highest rating, while eight 
and eleven marked it second and third respectively. Five 
marked it fourth, and three, fifth. Figure 1 would seem to 
indicate that most organizations regard it as an important 
purpose. 

5 

hO 4 

£ 

•H 

•p 3 
* 2 
1 

5 10 15 20 

Number of Associations 

Figure 1. Ratings assigned by Associations to 
suggested aim: improvement of instruction. 

















25 

Figure 2 shows that a great deal of emphasis is placed 


by Associations on the coordination of the work of princi¬ 
pals. Involved here is a cooperative and friendly spirit 
which principals regard most highly. This sharing of common 
problems and the bringing of harmonious action to bear upon 
them rated first with nineteen Associations, while twelve 
gave this aim their second choice and twelve, third choice. 
Forty-three out of the forty-seven Associations making an 
entry counted it in the first three categories. 


b Q 

c 

•H 

•P 

CD 



5 10 15 

Number of Associations 


Figure 2. Ratings assigned by Associations to 
suggested aim: to coordinate the work of principals 

tT To get more uniformity in school administration" 
was recognized by forty-eight Associations; the most 
popular rating for this aim was second, eighteen marking it 











• '■> 


i 






v - : i 3 

t ’ j 

•• 


1 ? ‘ . • 

• ; • ... • • -v.-f 

■ 

■ ' ‘T'O &'H> ■ ' 


... •. ■ ■■ 


■ 









26 


so. While it had only ten first choices, it was favoured 
by eleven for third; only six marked it fourth; and three, 
fifth. Figure 3 indicates that uniformity of practice in 
divisional schools is favoured by a high percentage of our 
principals. 



Number of Associations 

Figure 3* Ratings assigned by Associations to 
suggested aim: to get more uniformity in school admini¬ 
stration. 

Figure 4 indicates that advising the board regarding 
educational policy is not considered to be one of the most 
important objectives. Not one of the forty-three Associ¬ 
ations responding to this objective gave it the first rating. 
Only three rated it second; and five, third. Over eighty- 
one per cent of the Associations gave it the fourth and 
fifth place. 












27 


Even though a principal is often regarded as an 
educational expert, the Alberta divisional principals, as 
a group, generally appear to believe that advising on 
educational policy is the function of the superintendent, 
a function designated as his by the Alberta School Act. 



Number of Associations 


Figure 4. Ratings assigned by Associations to 
suggested aim: to advise the board regarding educational 
policy. 


It would seem, too, that Associations do not see 
themselves as agents of the superintendent. Replies to the 
purpose, TT To assist the superintendent in supervision of 
instruction", would seem to indicate this, since only one 
Association gave it the first rating. Only three out of 
the forty responding gave it the second choice and eight 
gave it the third place. Seventy per cent (twenty-eight) 










28 


of the Associations marked it either fourth or fifth. 
Figure 5 shows that this aim of Associations does not rate 
too highly with the membership. 



Figure 5* Ratings assigned by Associations to 
suggested aim: to assist the superintendent in supervision 
of instruction. 

In order to arrive at a rank=order of the five aims 
and purposes discussed, the writer assigned a value of five 
to the first rating, four to the second, three to the third, 
two to the fourth, and one to the fifth. Using this method 
ranks the aims and purposes of Associations in the follow¬ 
ing order of importance: to coordinate the work of princi¬ 
pals ; to improve the supervision of instruction; to get more 
uniformity in school administration; to assist the superin¬ 
tendent in the supervision of instruction; and to advise the 
board regarding educational policy. 












29 

Table I shows the aims in order of importance, 
and lists their numerical value derived by the method 
described. 


TABLE I 

SUGGESTED AIMS OF ASSOCIATIONS RANKED ACCORDING TO 
RATINGS GIVEN BY THE ASSOCIATIONS 


Aim Numerical Rank 

Value 


To coordinate the work of principals . . . 1$6 1 


To get more uniformity in school 

administration. 170 2 

To improve supervision of 

instruction.16$ 3 

To assist the superintendent in the 

supervision of instruction ....... 103 4 

To advise the board regarding 

educational policy . .... 72 5 


A summary of the ratings given by Principals 1 
Associations is shown in Table II. It would seem that the 
aims and purposes suggested in the questionnaire were 
generally found acceptable since only one other was 
suggested in the space provided on the questionnaire. 

It is interesting to note that the two aims referring 
to coordination and uniformity found the greatest favor, 






















r ■ ■: .' I ■ ! 







' 














^ r 






















>'< 











' 





30 

with the purpose of improving the supervision of instruction 
close behind. The remaining two aims do not appear to rate 
highly with Associations and one would be forced to conclude 
that Association work is presently aimed at neither serving 
the supervisory plans of the superintendent nor assisting in 
the development of educational policy. 

TABLE II 

SUMMARY OF SUGGESTED AIMS AND PURPOSES EVALUATED 
BY PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 


Aims Number of Associations 



1 

2 

Rating* 

3_4 

5 

Rank a 

To improve supervision of 
instruction . . 

16 

6 

11 

5 

3 

3 

To coordinate the work of 
principals . 

19 

12 

12 

3 

1 

1 

To get more uniformity in 
school administration . . . 

10 

16 

11 

6 

3 

2 

To advise the board regarding 
educational policy .... 

0 

3 

5 

10 

25 

5 

To assist the superintendent 
in supervision of 
instruction . . . 

1 

7 

6 

id 

10 

4 


* 1 - high, 5 - low 
a Taken from Table I 














. : : ' ■ "■ • . 

J ’ • - '• • ' 

4 i<; : ' : .■ ;C I v', ■' :: : • ■ v..[ri: iff 




' 




- 



tfi 






























■ 





t 








31 

To decide what aims and purposes Associations should 


have is a difficult problem. It is certain, however, that 
they should be in harmony with our general educational aims 
for Alberta school children. It would seem, therefore, that 
the work Associations do towards improving the learning 
situation for teachers and students should be of primary 
importance. The aims and purposes discussed in this chapter 
will be assessed by a panel of experts later in this work. 




CHAPTER IV 


MEMBERSHIP IN PRINCIPALS* ASSOCIATIONS 

It is the purpose of.this chapter to discuss the 
membership in divisional Principals* Associations. The 
questionnaire revealed certain relationships of super¬ 
intendents, trustees, secretary-treasurers of divisions, 
and high school inspectors, as well as principals and 
vice-principals with respect to membership and attendance 
at meetings. An interview with a high school inspector 
provided information with respect to how inspectors work 
with Associations. A brief discussion on membership fees 
concludes the chapter. 

Over £00 principals, vice-principals, superintendents, 
and perhaps some school board members make up the total 
membership in the Principals* Associations in Alberta 
divisions and counties. Only six of the fifty-one organiz¬ 
ations confine their membership to principals only. In 
forty-five Associations, the vice-principals also are 
members. A list of Associations together with their total 
membership may be found in Appendix A. 

Membership and attendance of superintendents . Figure 
6 shows the relationship of superintendents to Associations 
in regard to membership and attendance. In thirty-eight 
Associations, the superintendent becomes a regular member. 









33 

In another six he becomes an honorary member. The remaining 


seven Associations do not regard him as a member, but five 
of these report that the superintendent attends regularly, 
while two state that he attends only when invited. 

The Department of Education regards the superintendent 
as an Tt ex-officio Tt member.Apparently the Associations are 
considered important enough for the superintendents to take 
it upon themselves to give these organizations assistance 
and guidance. In reporting yearly activities to the depart¬ 
ment most superintendents list accomplishments of Principals’ 
Associations under ’’Cooperative Supervision”. 



Regular member 


Honorary member 

No member but attends 

No member, attends when invited 


g 12 16 20 24 23 32 36 40 

Number of Associations 


Figure 6. Membership and attendance of superintendents 
in Principals’ Associations. 


Trustee membership and attendance . Since principals 
are the chief administrators and supervisors within their 
schools, it might reasonably be expected that school trustees 





























34 

would recognize the value of Principals’ Associations as 
organizations with which they could work cooperatively. 

Only three Associations of the forty-nine reporting 
stated that trustees can become regular members, and in 
another three they are free to become honorary members. In 
the remaining forty-three, they do not become members. In 
most of these, however, board members are invited to par¬ 
ticipate. Thirteen Associations reported that trustees 
are welcome to attend if they desire. Four organizations 
stated that trustees would not attend even though invited. 
Seventeen, however, claimed that theirs attended when asked. 
Only nine Associations reported that their trustees never 
attend meetings. Table III shows how Associations stand 
with respect to trustee membership, while Table IV shows 
trustee participation even though they are not members. 

TABLE III 

TRUSTEE MEMBERSHIP IN ASSOCIATIONS 


Membership 


Number of Associations 


Trustees may become regular 
members . 


3 

3 

43 


Trustees are honorary members 
Trustees are not members . . 























) 


J 


r 


c 



' 


: 









■■ r - - ' 


^ i 













35 


TABLE IV 

ATTENDANCE OF NON-MEMBER SCHOOL TRUSTEES 
AT ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 


Attendance of Trustees 


Number of Associations 


May attend if they desire. 13 

Attend if invited. 1? 

Invited but do not attend. 4 

Never attend.*. 9 


Secretary-treasurer membership and attendance . The 
secretary-treasurer is not a regular member of any one of 
the fifty Associations reporting. Only in one does he take 
the position of an honorary member. Four Associations 
reported that he attends meetings on behalf of the board. 

A tendency to attend if invited is clearly shown by twenty- 
eight Associations reporting in the affirmative. Seventeen 
bodies of principals flatly stated that he "never attends". 
Figure 7 illustrates the relationship of the secretary- 
treasurer to Principals 1 Associations with respect to 
membership and attendance. 




















0 

7h 

3 

0 O 
CO -P 
0 

U CX 0 
E-* -H £ 
I ^ O 
>■> 0 *H 
C -P 
0 O 0 
-P *H -H 
0 -P O 
P. 0 O 

O r—I 0 
0 0 0 
cn C£ < 




An honorary member 

No member but attends on behalf of the board 


No member, attends when invited 


36 


No member, never attends 



10 15 20 25 30 

Number of Associations 


Figure 7. Membership and attendance of divisional 
secretary treasurers in Principals’ Associations. 


High school inspector membership and attendance . 
Table V indicates how the high school inspector is related 
to Associations with respect to membership and attendance. 

TABLE V 


MEMBERSHIP AND ATTENDANCE OF HIGH SCHOOL INSPECTORS 

IN ASSOCIATIONS 


Membership Number of Associations 

A regular member... 1 

An honorary member . ...... 3 

No member but attends on 
invitation . 


No member and never attends 


Id 

25 






























V . , . : v 

■ •. . ■ • . • ■ ■. r > 


: 




- 













37 


In most of the Alberta divisions (forty-three), 
the high school inspector is not a regular member of the 
Associations, Only one Association regards him as such, 
while another three name him an honorary member. Willingness 
to cooperate is indicated, however, since eighteen Associ¬ 
ations stated that inspectors usually attend when invited. 
Over half (twenty-five) of the replies, however, indicated 
that they never attend meetings. 

In an interview, Mr. C.B. Johnson, High School 
Inspector for southern Alberta schools, stated that it is 
certainly not lack of interest that keeps inspectors from 
more direct and frequent participation in Associations’ 
affairs. He feels that it is impossible to ignore a group 
of local administrators with whom much of the inspector’s 
work is done on an individual basis. 

Some of the reasons mentioned by Mr. Johnson that 
keep inspectors from many meetings are the distances 
involved, the numerous and often conflicting demands made 
upon inspectors, and the pressure of work that accompanies 
their office. Then, often the Principals’ Association’s 
business is of no direct concern to the high school 
inspector, as, for example, when administrative and super¬ 
visory detail in the elementary grades is being discussed. 

Mr. Johnson also emphasized that inspectors often 
render assistance to Associations indirectly, through 










conferences with superintendents or in informal meetings 
with principals who in turn take suggestions to meetings, 2 
Membership fees. Collecting membership fees is not 
a widespread practice among Alberta Associations. Forty- 
four out of fifty reporting do not collect fees from the 
principals. The six remaining collect fees ranging from 
twenty-five cents to one dollar. Five of them collect 
annually and one semi-annually. Two southern Associations 
collect a yearly fee of fifty cents per member. Of the 
three in central Alberta which follow this practice, two 
collect an annual fee of one dollar (one collecting semi¬ 
annually) while the third charges twenty-five cents. One 
organization in the north has an annual membership fee of 
fifty cents. Tables VI and VII report the practices with 
respect to fees. 

TABLE VI 

MEMBERSHIP FEES IN ASSOCIATIONS 


Number of Associations 

Number of Associations having no fees ... 44 
Number of Associations charging fees ... 6 










■ > c 


‘TO ' 






J 


■> \i 










v 




) 












r 


A . ' < 

























; ■ 








{‘ 







39 


TABLE VII 

MEMBERSHIP FEES PAID BY SIX PRINCIPALS’ 
ASSOCIATIONS 


Number of Associations 

When collected 

Amount paid yearly 

1 

Annually 

$1.00 

3 

Annually 

.50 

1 

Annually, 

.25 

1 

Semi-annually 

1.00 


Conclusion . Most Associations in Alberta consist 
of both principals and vice-principals. The superintendent 
attends regularly and is most commonly a regular member. 

The Department of Education recognizes that he should 
participate. It seems to be common practice to invite the 
secretary-treasurer when his help is required, but he has 
no regular membership. Some high school inspectors and 
many school board members will attend meetings when invited, 
but often do not attend regularly. Membership fees are 
charged by only six Associations, which indicates that 
Association expenses are met by other means. 














FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER IV 


^- Forty-Eighth Annual Report , 1953, Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen’s Printer 
1954, p.33. 

^Statement by Mr. C.B. Johnson, personal interview, 
July 2$, 1958* Permission to quote secured. 







c 















\ 


t r ,. ; •• 

■ . ■ < 


) r 




*/ 

1 









CHAPTER V 


OPERATION OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 

The purpose of this chapter is to discuss certain 
phases of operation of the Principals’ Associations in 
Alberta divisions and counties. One of these phases is 
the cost of transportation, since it constitutes the major 
expense in financing. Meetings will be dealt with, 
especially with respect to their frequency, place and time, 
the distances travelled by members, and attendance. Associ¬ 
ation officers and their election constitute the third phase 
of this discussion. 


I. COST OF TRANSPORTATION 

Since many principals travel great distances to 
attend meetings, the cost of transportation becomes an 
important factor in the success of Associations. This 
cost is being met in three different ways. Table VIII 
shows that members in fourteen of the fifty-one Associ¬ 
ations pay their own mileage; thirty-six school boards pay 
mileage at various rates, and one Association gets 
assistance from the Alberta Teachers’ Association Local 


in its area 


: ' ' x 


■ 


c 


c 


A- 




■ 




■ 






. 











42 

Table VTII also indicates that over two-thirds of the 


Associations in the province are receiving financial 
assistance from their boards. This conveys the idea that 
financial assistance may have come mainly in the last few 
years, since a 1956 report of the Department of Education 
states: "A few divisional boards defray a part of the 

expenses involved".1 


TABLE VIII 

METHODS OF MEETING TRANSPORTATION COSTS OF MEMBERS 
OF FIFTY-ONE ASSOCIATIONS 


Methods 


Number of Associations 

Members pay their 

own mileage 

.14 

School boards pay 

mileage . • . 

.36 

A.T.A. Local pays 

mileage . . . 



Would it be safe to assume that boards recognize 
the need and value of Associations to the extent that they 
are willing to use taxpayers 1 money to give them encourage¬ 
ment? How far such encouragement should go cannot be 
answered here, but it would seem that if the principal 
had no expense in connection with such a meeting, he would 
certainly feel more obligated to attend. Another form of 














43 


encouragement would be the holding of meetings during the 
school day* Under these conditions, however, attendance at 
meetings would in effect become compulsory. 

The mileage paid to principals by boards varies from 
twelve cents per mile to the equivalent of railway fares. 
Figure & illustrates the various allowances. 



Twelve cents per mile 
Ten cents per mile 

Nine cents per mile 
Six cents per mile 
Five cents per mile 
Four cents per mile 
Railroad fare equivalent 
Flat rate 
Unstated 

5 10 15 

Number of Associations 


20 


25 


Figure Mileage received by Association members 
travelling to and from meetings* 













: 


s':. j 






• r. . r 


th\ f. 









' 






















44 


Of the thirty-six Associations which get assistance 
through mileage, twenty-one, by far the largest number, 
receive ten cents per mile; two receive twelve cents; one, 
nine cents; two, six cents; one, five cents; one, four 
cents; and one gets an allowance equal to railroad fare. 
Two Associations fail to state the rate at which they are 
paid, and five report getting a flat "per meeting" or a 
yearly rate. Other forms of financial assistance will be 
discussed later in regard to Association-board relation¬ 
ships. 


II. MEETINGS 

Frequency . By far the greatest number of Associ¬ 
ations meet monthly, as Table IX illustrates. There are 
thirty-one which meet each month; eight meet every second 
month; while the twelve remaining meet irregularly. 
Excepting special meetings, no organization meets more 
frequently than once a month. Although the questionnaire 
did not give any indication, the writer is convinced that 
most Associations do not have meetings in July and August. 
One does have a meeting in August, however, for the purpose 
of electing officers and organizing high school programs 
for the new school term. 








45 


TABLE IX 

FREQUENCY OF ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 


Frequency 

Number of 
Associations 

Per cent of total 

Monthly 

31 

61 

Bi-monthly 


16 

Irregularly 

12 

23 


Of the twelve Associations meeting irregularly, one 
reported meeting three times per year; one averaged three 
and a half per year; four met four times; one assembled 
four and a half times; three, five times; one averaged six 
and a half; and another eight times per year. Table X 
summarizes the findings on these twelve organizations, 
together with the average number of meetings held per year. 

With the exception of two Associations, the ones 
which meet irregularly operate in the outlying school 
divisions where great distances are involved. It is 
interesting to note that eleven of these organizations have 
unorganized territory adjacent to their boundaries, or 
else they border on Saskatchewan or Montana. The 
remaining one, although quite compact, is only in its 
fourth year of existence. The payment of expenses must 









C 


• ' ' 








1 X J 




> { y 












!£$&>• 



46 


also be discounted as a factor, since all but two organiz¬ 
ations receive mileage or some other form of assistance. 
There appears to be no marked difference in attendance in 
these twelve Associations. 


TABLE X 

AVERAGE NUMBER OF MEETINGS PER YEAR OF ASSOCIATIONS 
CONVENING IRREGULARLY 


Average number of meetings 
per year 


Number of Associations 


3 . 

3.3 

4 . 

4.5 

5 . 

6.5 

8 . 


. . . 1 
. . . 4 

. . . 1 
. . . 3 

. . . 1 
. . . JL 

Total 12 


Average frequency - 4.7 meetings per year 


Time of meetings . Most of the Associations report 
meeting on a weekday. Thirty-seven hold their meetings 
regularly during the school week. Sixteen Associations 
meet in the afternoon; four, during the supper hour; and 
another sixteen in the evening. Five organizations meet on 
Saturday; two in the forenoon, and three in the afternoon. 
Another nine Associations vary their meeting day; four of 

















- 6 ," 


. •' ,/:0 P ■ < ■ 




, &on f .*vt a.■*. 

j ' ■ ■ c : • j 


■ v 1 p}-If ;(":■ p.?.p" *::<• ■ : ■ 


1 . co * ■ : J ' rn 


'■ ■ 

■. ‘ ; ' 

. ■j - i ■ 




■i ip.',»■ “..toor. P .■ ‘-.oci; 


■ <’V 






: .1 


■ 


C ... ■ - • • 



' . » • : P . ; ... ^ 


r: v.m-- "rc.ir; flc r p 

'• • ■ . . 

' 

i J "o v P ■ ^ ,1 • v!-',.;: .: 

* £ : 

' 

, 

• . • .' 

' 


: ■ ■ 

P ' 

* 

■ 

' : 

' . : 

' f P i i J ')J pop ’ P ' <■ 

















47 


these assemble on a weekday; and five shift from Saturdays 
to weekdays. Three of the latter group hold their meetings 
during school time and alternate with a Saturday morning 
meeting, while the other two alternate with evening sessions 
in the school week. 

Of the thirty-seven Associations meeting regularly 
during the school week, only one did not state a time. 

Figure 9 shows the times chosen by thirty-six division and 
county organizations. It will be noted that eleven of the 
Associations meet during school time. 

Place of meeting . Most Associations meet at or near 
their place of work. Seventeen assemble in the divisional 
board or county office; fifteen, at one school centre; 
another sixteen, at various school centres chosen in rotation, 
or decided upon at a previous meeting. Only three Associ¬ 
ations make arrangements other than the ones cited above. 

One states a cafe as its meeting place. Table XI refers to 
place of meeting. 

It would appear logical that organizations should 
meet in schools or in board offices. The facilities are 
usually adequate, and there is no cost involved which 
affects members. 








j 

hr j ; - ' : ; . ' ■ ' • ".o' 


? '■ . ■ . ■ ■ 1 

, 

•i : ■; ■ .■ o ' =: ■ I'd- ■ 'Or' h-, . 

• I. ' ’■ . ' ; 


• , . ' ■ • / 

rorh.’ J.o .ho ?: ..r '". r v.-: o_..0‘.; 

' : 







.t • f. 








■ ■ < (•: f : ' ; . .■ 

J "O'.> O' t ' * 






■ • 1 


■ < . ; 













Meeting Time—P.M 



1 2 3 4 5 6 

Number of Associations 


Figure 9• Time at which thirty-six Associations 
meet regularly during the school week. 





























49 


TABLE XI 

MEETING PLACE OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS 


Meeting place 

Number of 
Associations 

At board or county office 

17 

At one school centre 

15 

At different school centres 

16 

Other arrangements 

_2 


Total 51 


Length of meetings ♦ The length of Association 
meetings varies from two to five hours. This variation 
seems at times to be governed by the time of year, since 
fall meetings, when Associations organize for another school 
term, are usually characterized by heavy agendas. Sixteen 
organizations report a meeting period of two hours, fourteen 
of two and one-half, and seventeen hold a three-hour session. 
One varies its length between one and three hours, and three 
meet from four to five hours. The latter group usually takes 
a lunch or supper break. Figure 10 summarizes the length 
of Association meetings. 











,n‘J! 














y 







( 







O 


■ 



i «'. 3 














' 

















i 














It may be interesting to note here that when Associ 
ations were invited to state methods of improving their 
work, eight organizations made suggestions in regard to 
time and length of meetings. Table XII shows that two 


w 

g 

3 

O 

K 

G 

•H 


CO 

hO 

G 

•H 

-P 

<D 

CD 

S 

cm 

O 

,G 

-P 

txO 

G 

CD 

►G 



Number of Associations 


Figure 10. Length of meetings in hours held by 
fifty-one Associations in Alberta divisions. 

Associations require more time for meetings; two wish for 
more strict adherence to the length of meetings; another 
desires shorter meetings held more frequently. Three 














V , . ;• • •>: i : • <r J , ’; "i‘ \ 

• v-; • • v . - .• 1 • = •' ^ j ■ 

■ - ' j ! ’ - ? ' ' 




; n - 


■ 

. ; .i ■ ‘ ; ■ 'i' : ’ 

■ 


■ 

Ui‘ ::,V'X !■'[ | 


■ 

• 



;/ ' • : rr.-' -TOl" 




' 


















51 

Associations stated that some meetings should be held on 
school time. 


TABLE XII 

SUGGESTIONS MADE BY ASSOCIATIONS FOR IMPROVING 
LENGTH AND TIME OF MEETINGS 


Suggestions Number of Associations 


Strict adherence to length of meetings 2 
More time required for meetings 2 
More and shorter meetings 1 
Some meetings should be held on school time 3 


Distance travelled to meetings . The investigation 
revealed that many principals travel great distances to 
Association meetings. Table XIII gives the miles travelled 
by the total membership of fifty Associations in Alberta. 

The replies from the fifty Associations indicate 
that nearly half (forty-nine per cent) of the total member¬ 
ship make round trips ranging from forty-two to one hundred 
and twenty miles to attend meetings. 

Attendance . In spite of the long distances travelled, 
the attendance reported is excellent. Table XIV shows 
that, of fifty-one Associations, thirty-six have an average 

















52 

attendance between ninety and one hundred per cent. Twelve 
report an average of between eighty and ninety; one, between 
seventy and eighty; and only two, between sixty and seventy 
per cent. 

TABLE XIII 

MILES TRAVELLED (ONE-WAY) TO MEETINGS BY MEMBERS 
OF FIFTY ASSOCIATIONS* 


Miles Travelled Percentage of Total Membership 

(One-Way) 


0-5.17 

6-10...10 

11-15. 9 

16-20...15 

21-30. 24 

31-40. 16 

41-50. 4 

51-60. 2 

Over 60. 3 


*0ne Association did not report on this item. 

The evidence presented in regard to attendance and 
distances travelled, seems to indicate that principals are 
convinced of the value of these Association meetings. This 


















: 


J 












' 
























53 


suggests that this group of over gOO men and women is 
becoming increasingly aware of its professional responsi¬ 
bilities and is making some conscientious effort to discharge 
them. 


TABLE XIV 

AVERAGE ATTENDANCE BY MEMBERS AT PRINCIPALS 1 
ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 


Number of Associations 


Percentage of Attendance 


36 .. 90 - 100 

12 . ^0 - 90 

1 ................. 70 - go 

2 .. . 60 - 70 ' 


The data summarized in Table XV attempts to establish 
a motive for attendance at meetings. The questionnaire 
invited Associations to determine If the attendance of 
members was compulsory or voluntary. At best the answers 
are opinions, perhaps expressed by single officers in the 
various groups. Only one Association reported that 
attendance was compulsory. Of the fifty who answered 
"voluntary”, however, twenty-nine expressed that it was 
"voluntary”, but members ”felt compulsion”. The question¬ 
naire did not invite an explanation of where the compulsion 





















54 


came from. 


TABLE XV 

REASONS GIVEN BY ASSOCIATIONS FOR ATTENDANCE OF MEETINGS 


Reason 

Number 

of Replies 

Attendance compulsory . 


. 1 

Attendance voluntary. 

Attendance voluntary but members 


, 21 

feel compulsion . 

Total 

• 22 

51 


III. OFFICERS 

All Associations of course have their Presidents, 
but only thirty-seven of them have Vice-Presidents. 

Table XVI lists these, as well as the other officers which 
the organizations use. Only two reported having Honorary 
Presidents, usually in the person of the high school 
inspector or the superintendent. 

It is worth noting that more Associations have 
Secretaries than Secretary-Treasurers. One reason could be, 
as pointed out earlier, that many organizations do not have 
membership fees. 

The most popular slate of officers is President, 














55 


Vice-President, and Secretary. Nineteen Associations have 
executives of this type. Figure 11 shows that the next 
most prevalent group is that of President, Vice-President 
and Secretary-Treasurer. Nine Associations find only a 
President and Secretary necessary, while five require 
Presidents and Secretary-Treasurers. Two Associations name 
an Honorary President, a President, a Vice-President and a 
Secretary-Treasurer. 


TABLE XVI 

OFFICERS DESIGNATED IN PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS OF 
FIFTY-ONE SCHOOL DIVISIONS 


Officers 


Number Designated 


Presidents. 51 

Honorary Presidents. 2 

Vice-Presidents.37 

Secretaries.28 

Secretary-Treasurers . 23 

Standing Committees.8 


There does not appear to be any particular reason 
why Associations choose different executive officers. 
Usually Associations requiring three and four officers are 
somewhat larger than the ones with two officers in charge. 















■ ; . * ; ■ , ■ 


, ; y. i. 


: ' 


o:-/ 


o 














. * . ; • 






; - ‘ f:) 


C. . j, 









56 


Table XVII shows that the difference in average membership 
between the larger and smaller executive organizations is 
not more than about four. The largest Association, with a 
membership of thirty-three, has a President, Vice-President 
and Secretary Treasurer, but there are a number with a 
membership of over twenty who just have the two officers. 


President, Vice-President, 
and Secretary 


CD 

> 

•H 

■P 

3 

O 

CD 

X 

W 

Ch 

O 

w 

CD 

Oh 

>, 

E-i 



President, Vice-President 
and Secretary-Treasurer 

Honorary President, President, 
Vice-President, and 
Secretary-Treasurer 



President and Secretary 

President and 

Secretary-Treasurer 


20 


Number of Associations 


Figure 11. Officers used in the executives of 
divisional Principals* Associations. 


Eight Associations listed "Standing Committees". 
These committees most commonly dealt with libraries, in¬ 
cluding records and filmstrip, school supplies and equip¬ 
ment, textbook rentals, and sports. 



















57 


TABLE XVII 

AVERAGE SIZE OF FORTY-EIGHT ASSOCIATIONS AND THEIR EXECUTIVES 3 


Type of Executive 


Number of 
Associations 

Average 

Membership 

President, Vice-President, 
Secretary. 

and 


18 

President, Vice-President, 
Secretary-Treasurer. . . 

and 


17 

President and Secretary. . 


. . . 8 

15 

President and Secretary- 
Treasurer. 


. . . 5 

14 

Honorary President, President, 
Vice-President, and Secretary- 
Treasurer. 


* 


a Three Associations failed to state total membership 
*The present membership of this Association is 25 


Elections . All Associations except one report that 
their officers hold one-year terms. Thirty-three of them 
conduct elections in September. Another seven hold their 
elections in October, and four state that their elections 
are held in the fall. Five Associations elect their officers 
in May or June; one, in August; and another in November. Only 
one Association’s officers are elected for a two-year term. 























5 $ 


IV. SUMMARY 

Generally speaking, the cost of operating Principals 1 
Associations is small. The majority of Associations are 
being assisted by school boards and committees by way of 
mileage paid, school time in which to meet, and lunch. 
Meetings are held monthly in most cases and vary in time of 
day, and day of the week. Many Associations are hampered 
by great distances, resulting in fewer meetings than might 
be desired, but the attendance is good. Most Associations 
meet in schools or in school board offices with a central 
location, although some practice rotation. All but four 
Associations meet from two to three hours. 

The average membership per Association in divisions 
is sixteen and seven-tenths, and most of them have executives 
consisting of a President, Vice-President, and Secretary or 
Secretary-Treasurer. Most Associations also include vice¬ 
principals in their membership. 

Good attendance, despite great distances, pressure 
of work, and voluntary membership, would seem to indicate 
that principals and vice-principals are cognizant of their 
responsible positions as educational leaders in their 
communities. 



f 


5 






\ 






c 


t 














• f; / 


> ’ 


t,;j J - , ;i 



■t 




):) 













■: 




- 



















FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER V 


^- Fifty-First Annual Report , 1956 , 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton 
1957, p.30. 


Department of 
Queen 1 s Printer 











CHAPTER VI 


PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATION RELATIONSHIPS WITH SCHOOL BOARDS, 
SUPERINTENDENTS, AND TEACHERS 

Principals try to work efficiently with the school 
boards, the superintendents, and teachers. Good adminis¬ 
tration requires cooperative teamwork, so a chapter of this 
study is devoted to discovering how Associations work with 
their superior administrators and their teachers. It would 
seem to the writer that a body of principals would offer 
an excellent avenue through which cooperative work could be 
carried out for the purpose of improving the educational 
program for Alberta school children. This chapter will 
reveal certain relationships of Principals T Associations 
with school boards, superintendents, and teachers. 

School board and Principals’ Association relationship . 
Most school boards realize the importance of Principals’ 
Associations in this province. As has been previously 
stated, many of them pay mileage to principals in atten¬ 
dance, some provide dinners or luncheons, and some even 
authorize the use of school time in which to meet. Some 
trustees are officially delegated by their boards to 
attend meetings. In one Association, a committee of three 
trustees attend every meeting, for which they are paid 
mileage and expenses, the same as if it were a regular 







t 








« 

























c 


f 


i 










61 


board meeting.^ 

The questionnaire circulated to Associations for 
this study invited them to state how they worked together 
with school boards. A number of possible methods which they 
might use were suggested; those which they did use were to 
be checked, and those not listed, which they had found use¬ 
ful, were to be added. 

Table XVIII shows that five Associations work 
together with school boards in meetings; twenty-five make 
recommendations regarding school policy directly to the 
board, while forty-five Associations use the superintendent 
as a channel through which recommendations are made. 

TABLE XVIII 

HOW ASSOCIATIONS WORK WITH SCHOOL BOARDS 


Method Number of 

Positive Replies 

Work with school boards in meetings. ..... 5 

Make direct recommendations to the 

board. 25 

Recommend to the board through the 

superintendent . 45 


It should be understood that Associations do not use 












r 


" ( 


f r., ’ t 


. ', : ■ i i 


x 








. i « 1 


( 






Jo- :) 


















) , i . z> £j* . ; 'ii:,; cl ;) 




. 










■M 


. 


■ 











62 


only one method of working with boards, but that various 
methods might be employed, depending on the nature of the 
work undertaken. For this reason we get a larger number of 
positive replies than the total number of Associations. 

A commendable practice in communication was noted by 
the writer in that some Associations have a summary of their 
minutes mimeographed and distributed to board members, to 
the superintendents, and to the various schools. In this 
manner all that are interested become well informed 
regarding Association activities. 

Table XIX should help to explain the attitude of both 
trustees and principals with respect to working together 
in Association meetings. Although forty-three Associations 
stated that trustees were not members, thirteen of these 
stated that trustees were welcome to attend, and seventeen 
affirmed that they did attend when invited. Four organi¬ 
zations reported that they had issued invitations but that 
board members had not attended, and nine stated that 
trustees "never attend T? . 

The majority of the trustees, apparently, see the 
value of working cooperatively with their principals, since 
only thirteen replies indicate that they do not attend. 

Figure 12 is designed to show the means by which 
school boards encourage Associations. Some of the methods 
have already been referred to in the chapter on operations. 















r 


. v , 









c 




' I '■' 5 




i ■ 









vt- i 







t 





■ 


< - 




V • 













63 


TABLE XIX 

ATTENDANCE OF TRUSTEES AT ASSOCIATION MEETINGS 


Attendance Number of 

Associations 

May attend if they desire.13 

Attend if invited...17 

Are invited but do not attend. 4 

Never attend... 


Total 43 


Q) 

O 

£ 

co 

P> 

co 

•H 

CO 

CO 

<u 

cm 

O 

0) 

3 

-P 

c 0 

!S 


Sponsor dinner meetings 

—A— 


3 


Pay mileage to meetings 


A—‘Occasionally 
B—Regularly 


Some school time fo r meetings 
Provide meeting place 



Financial assistance in pro.jects 


10 20 30 40 
Number of Replies 


50 


Figure 12. Assistance given to Associations by 
school boards. 

































xlc 3 

... . yny• . v..:j 



« . ■••• a ' ■ v " i: r ' ’ - ;;v V ' 


>.n; v-‘ 


! 




- v .. . - .. .• •:. . ,.:.V \. T . 








- 















&. .. ■■ 















Forty-two boards (over eighty-two per cent) provide financial 
assistance for Associations 1 projects which meet with their 
approval. These projects, as will be seen later, are varied 
and many, from a comprehensive testing and remedial program 
to the organization of track meets. Even the cost of stamps 
and stationery must be considered since most Associations do 
not have membership fees. More specifically, twenty-five 
boards give stenographic help to Associations when it is 
required. This often means a sizeable contribution, since 
the organization of many projects on a divisional basis 
becomes quite elaborate and involves a great deal of work 
both on the part of the membership and of its stenographer. 

Thirteen boards cooperate in Association projects by 
giving direct help and advice. Many school projects 
naturally involve school policy, and these boards must 
realize that work can be accomplished much more quickly and 
economically by sitting in committees with Association 
members. The principals have trustees in their work group, 
and so these projects are evolved, not just by a body of 
experts, but together with the layman 1 s point of view. 

As stated in Chapter V, most meetings are held in 
schools or board rooms. Figure 12 shows that thirty-four 
Associations use such rooms with permission of the board. 
Expenses involved regarding the use of these places would 
likely be janitor services, light, and heat. Having to rent 


: r'Y> : 


■ ■ :• n . - f . ' ■ ' 

, ■ 

; ' • < > . \ :■ , '1 • •. ' ' f ' c 

f, ; , ' . - . •' ■ • \ 

... •>.;>.*: v- -C- ' ■ ■' *- r ’ . / • " j ■' '-' ■ ’ V s ■ li 

... . { • ' •' 

• i . , , - ■ . i- •• ' rv ’ ’ '• 'x VhKC. , •• 






. 




■ c 


i / - t , • • ' - : • ' 

. •• ■ ■ 


n 


f: 




* ' 

* . t • 

, t,~- r' >y. I [ , I . . 'j-i "• '0- 1 ! ■X v . y . O ' r4’t 

■ \ , * . : . i . v> v' r 1 I .:•> i.. /. >• 

. 

c mods' 

, ] ■ ' , - vi ' . ' 


: i:i) 

\h.\yi • V J •UK ■ - r - l aU 


. 


« " - ; : t:;J 

« 




U 

. 


* 

0 

■ ■ r 


. not ■ 










65 

a meeting place would result, over a long period, in 
considerable expense. 

Similarly the payment of mileage is becoming very 
common, with nearly three-quarters of the Associations being 
helped in this manner. This practice seems to place the 
official stamp of approval on Associations, since the School 
Act lays down conditions under which trustees may receive 
mileage. Apparently the boards of the thirty-six Associ¬ 
ations have agreed that the business carried out by 
Principals 1 Associations is official school business. 

The fifth method revealed in Figure 12 is the fact 
that twenty Associations (over thirty-nine per cent) have 
now been authorized to hold meetings occasionally, partly, 
or fully on school time. It would seem that the boards in 
these cases feel that principals’ meetings are an integral 
part of a principal’s working day, and should therefore be 
held during working hours. 

The last method shown by which Associations are 
encouraged, is to provide a meal during the meeting. Only 
three boards, however, follow this practice regularly, 
while another eight do so occasionally. 

Table XX attempts to show the amount of assistance 
given by individual boards to their particular Associations. 
Of the fifteen organizations not receiving mileage, two of 
them get an occasional lunch or dinner and four of them are 





66 


allowed to meet on school time. One Association gets all: 
mileage, dinner, and school time in which to meet. Of the 
thirty-six who get mileage, fifteen receive just that, but 
three others get school time and occasional dinners; another 
three get dinners always; two receive an occasional dinner; 
four always meet on school time; eight get school time 
alternately or occasionally, and one Associations expenses 
are paid by the A.T.A. Local. 

TABLE XX 

SUMMARY OF ASSISTANCE GIVEN BY SCHOOL BOARDS 
TO THEIR ASSOCIATIONS 


Type of Assistance 


Number of 
School Boards 


Mileage paid to attending members.15 

Mileage and school time for meetings . 4 

Mileage and partial school time. S 

Mileage, school time, and dinner . 1 

Mileage, school time, and occasional 

dinner . 3 

Mileage and dinner... 3 

Mileage and occasional dinner. ........ 2 

School time only . ......... 4 

Dinner occasionally only.. . 2 

No assistance in the above. 9* 


*0ne of these gets expenses paid by A.T.A. Local 


When Associations were invited to state other board- 
Association relationships, four responded with some inter- 


























67 


esting comments. Two asserted that relationships were 
TT good TT , and one of these was able to cite two workshops held 
jointly with the board. Another stated that the board’s 
attitude was "pleasant but business-like". A fifth reported 
cooperation in the development of a handbook. 

It is hoped that Principals’ Associations will be 
able to cooperate even more fully with school boards and 
school committees in the future, for the improvement of 
Alberta education. 

Superintendent-Principals’ Association relation¬ 
ships . The way in which superintendents work with Princi¬ 
pals’ Associations has already been partly discussed under 
Membership in Chapter IV. It was there reported that the 
superintendent most frequently becomes a regular and some¬ 
times an honorary member. There were only a few cases when 
he is not in regular attendance. Table XXI reveals that in 
the fifty-one Associations operating in the province, forty- 
five superintendents attend all meetings; four others attend 
most meetings; two come only when invited. 

It is not surprising to find superintendents so 
interested. A departmental report states that Associations 
are "giving valuable aid to the superintendent in school 
administration, testing programs, promotion policies, 
direction of special projects, and public relations".2 










■ ■ ' 

. 

































- 






. 


■ 






. 






■ 















■ 

• 


. 


















< 



t 


























Exactly how highly the superintendents regard Associations 
will be dealt with in a later part of the study, 

TABLE XXI 

ATTENDANCE OF SUPERINTENDENTS AT ASSOCIATION 

MEETINGS 


Attendance Number of 

Superintendents 

Attend all meetings. 45 

Attend most meetings . 4 

Attend when invited only.. . _2 


Total 51 


In regard to participation in Association projects, 
twenty-two organizations affirmed that the superintendent 
is a definite leader. Another twenty stated that he is an 
active member; only nine term him an advisor. Table XXII 
summarizes these statements. 

It should be re-emphasized here that most of the 
early Associations were started by far-sighted superin¬ 
tendents while World War II was still in progress. The 
writer would suspect that many other Associations were 
organized with the help and initiative of superintendents 
in the field. The fact that over eighty-two per cent of 













• ■ ." ■ ■ «oji l cIjl; r ' 

. i;. > ; ' 'j .:r h o . ' ■ : 




i ' : : ■ 


O ‘I U‘ 

’ 


oo .. o • :u - 

, - t 

3 


* ■ : o.;..' j u.j i j;: • c ’' ■ : ' /: ‘ C 

'■' i - Oooo . j,■- j . • ;• •;,.f • a, ■ •; j ■ • / ■ • a oj- -.Oro/i 0 


oo o 


;• ,7 : 


. ■ ■ * : • .. . f\: i 


* ' 




■v; ’ 


. 

. • ; t ■ O ; . 'T ? ; • 

■ : j- i: J'j J •> i I I t ■; ” o i ‘ 1 :?;r , % q$ 

' rj ' ■ ' • i ■ . ■ . o CtC 1 : 0 . 0 •; . ■ ■ 

:o- • • i'; 'O ■ ■ r ro :,i j; , ' £. i •• ,rt ; >:" . ■ , ' 0 v : 1 • *•:'."!? v a 

■ - • . ' : 








69 


the Associations call their superintendents active members 
or even TT definite leaders" would lend some weight to this 
assumption. 


TABLE XXII 

DEGREE OF PARTICIPATION OF SUPERINTENDENTS 
IN ASSOCIATION WORK 


Participation 


Number of 
Superintendents 


A definite leader . 22 

An active member.20 

An advisor only.. 


Total 51 


It is possible that leadership of superintendents 
and school boards could become so strong that harm could 
result to a principals T group. When invited to state how 
their Association might be improved, three presidents 
replied that they wished for less domination by school 
official’s. 

To ascertain further how superintendents work and 
cooperate with their Associations, the questionnaire asked 
the Associations whether the superintendent "initiated 
studies", whether he asked their help in "supervisory or 













































>■ 








I 












■ 




c 


















70 


administrative matters", and whether he "petitioned the 
board" on their behalf. To the first question thirty-nine 
Associations answered in the affirmative. This compares 
favorably with the previous statement of superintendents 
being "active members", and "definite leaders". Thirty- 
seven superintendents were reported as liking to cooperate 
with Associations and asking their help in supervisory or 
administrative matters. In return for Association help, 
forty-one superintendents act as the "go-between" from 
Association to board. They are able to get the sanction of 
school boards for projects or practices which the Associ¬ 
ations deem beneficial to the schools under their charge. 
Table XXIII summarizes this phase of Superintendent- 
Association relationship. 

In answer to the question concerning other ways in 
which superintendents work with Associations, a number of 
interesting replies were received. Three of them emphasized 
the role of the superintendent as the liaison officer, or 
"channel of communication" between the school boards, school 
policies, other Associations in the province, and their own 
group. Two other groups asserted the value of superin¬ 
tendents as members of Association committees in all 
educational problems undertaken. Another Association speci¬ 
fied that in-service training of teachers was especially 
suited for cooperative work. One stressed the value of the 





f. "ro-'Jii J 0 




';o >: 





























r 



















71 


superintendent to individual members by talking to them 
during the meeting about a specific problem in their par¬ 
ticular school centre. In another Association, the 
superintendent is on the agenda committee and gives valuable 
assistance in planning meetings. 

TABLE XXIII 

SOME WAYS IN WHICH SUPERINTENDENTS AND ASSOCIATIONS 
ASSIST EACH OTHER 


Method 

Number of 
Superintendents 

Per Cent 
of Total 

The superintendent 

initiates studies. . . . 

.39 

77 

Asks Association help in 
supervision and 
administration . 

.37 

73 

Petitions the board on 
behalf of Association. . 

.41 

go 


Principals* Associations and teachers . One of the 
main functions of the principal is to help teachers to 
improve the learning situation in their classroom. Much 
has been said and written about teacher-and-principal 
relationships, but not too much has been done on how Associ¬ 
ations of principals might be of value to teachers as 
individuals and to teachers as groups. Evidently the work 



















72 


of Associations would affect groups of teachers regardless 
of what educational projects were undertaken. Since it is 
necessary that teachers’ cooperation in Association projects 
be secured, a consideration of methods on how Associations 
work with teachers becomes an important part of this study. 

The first question one might ask is how teachers are 
made aware of the activities undertaken by Associations. 
Figure 13 shows various means used to communicate with 
teachers. 



10 20 30 40 
Number of Associations 

Figure 13* Channels of communication between 
Principals’ Associations and teachers. 















73 


Thirty-five Associations state that principals take 
discussions, resolutions, and activities home to their staff 
meetings where local action might be undertaken. Here a 
good part of the work done by Associations is carried over 
to the teachers who try suggestions in their schools or 
classrooms. 

Only five Associations reported channelling their 
information through locals or sublocals of the Alberta 
Teachers 1 Association, but fifteen others used both staff 
meetings and A.T.A. meetings. 

Twenty-six Associations reported their activities 
through school board or superintendent’s bulletins. The 
latter was by far the most commonly used, since twenty-one 
of the above reported using this method. Another five 
Associations suggested other methods which they had used. 

The fact that the number of replies by far exceeds 
the number of Associations indicates that some use more than 
just one method of communicating with teachers and Table XXXV 
summarizes the combination of methods used by the various 
Associations. 

It will be noted, therefore, that the majority of 
Associations use more than one way of acquainting the 
teaching staff with what the principals have at hand. The 
use of superintendents’ or school board bulletins should be 
effective, since it indicates that the Association has the 


\ 

ft C: ■ ■ J 


p -I - ' * ’> ' - 


< ■ 


& y ' : f ' 


|1 ■ !• 




1 , 


’■ • -rr: ; , X. , -r. 


. . - 

v • h ; ■ ■ V:; . -• ;; j v.f 

i , • ■ ■■■ 

i )■.:• ‘O <« ... >: • •• V vo • 

■ . ' * . - ‘ ,1 ■ /■■■:. ,? • u 

■ , ■ ' ■ : ' 

• • ■ J * X ' ■ ■ 'X i in ' ■ "'V; xt 

• ! : 1 [ ' r Iff! 

-• .. : ' r< 

'' c ? : 



74 


backing and full support of officials in authority. 

TABLE XXIV 

METHODS OF COMMUNICATION WITH TEACHERS 
USED BY ASSOCIATIONS 

Method Number of 

Associations 

Staff meeting only.12 

Staff meeting and A.T.A. 8 

Staff meeting, A.T.A., and 

superintendents T bulletins. 6 

Staff meeting, A.T.A., 

superintendent and school board 

bulletins .. 2 

Staff meeting and superintendents 1 

bulletins.12 

Staff meeting and school board 

bulletins ........ . 3 

Staff meetings and minutes to 

members. 2 

Staff meetings, minutes to schools, 

and superintendents 1 bulletins. 2 

Staff meetings, A.T.A., and circular 

by secretary-treasurers . 1 

None of the above - not listed. 


Total Associations 51 




















75 


Only one Association indicated that the local press 
is also used. This method was not suggested by the question¬ 
naire, so there could be more Associations who inform their 
community through the press. 

In answer to the question about teachers’ attitude 
toward Association projects, organizations were asked their 
opinions as to whether they cooperated willingly, or whether 
they felt some degree of compulsion. Table XXV shows that 
ten Associations felt that teachers cooperated in various 
projects, "with willingness and great interest". The 
heaviest vote was recorded under the heading: "because they 
see the educative values in the projects undertaken". 
Thirty-five affirmative answers were received. Twenty 
answered that teachers felt some degree of compulsion. 

TABLE XXV 

ATTITUDES OF TEACHERS TO ASSOCIATION PROJECTS 


Attitude Number of 

Replies* 

Willingness and great interest.10 

They see the educative values.35 

They feel compulsion...20 


^Associations were permitted to check more than one item. 














76 


It should be obvious that Principals 1 Associations 
must communicate their ideas and projects to teachers in 
order to carry them into the classroom. Another interesting 
question might be: do teachers communicate with Associ¬ 
ations? Thirty-one Associations answered that groups of 
teachers made recommendations to them, while twenty said 
that they did not. One Association stated that sometimes 
recommendations were received from individual teachers 
instead of groups. Another two indicated that all teachers 1 
recommendations should come to the Association through their 
principals. 

Of those Associations receiving suggestions from 
groups of teachers, twenty-six stated that the suggestions 
came from the staffs of individual schools. Two had dealt 
with groups of elementary teachers; three had heard from 
teachers of certain subjects in the junior high school. 

Five Associations had received recommendations from groups 
of senior high school teachers in certain subject fields. 

Ten more were able to assert that they had heard from the 
Alberta Teachers 1 Association locals or sublocals. Figure 14 
illustrates how groups of teachers communicate with Princi¬ 
pals 1 Associations. 

A significant number of Associations report that they 
are able to cooperate with the Alberta Teachers 1 Association 
locals and sublocals. Thirty-two out of fifty replying 




77 


indicated that some cooperative work had been done. When 
asked whether there was any active liaison between the 
principals 1 groups and the A.T.A., however, twenty-one 
answered yes while twenty-five answered no. 



Figure 14. Lines of communication—teachers 1 groups 
to Principals 1 Associations. 


It would seem then, that it is not the practice of 
the majority to have Teachers 1 Association representatives 
at Principals 1 Association meetings or vice-versa. 

It would be difficult to establish the dividing line 
between the Principals 1 Associations and the A.T.A. The 
question is often asked: should principals, when in 







« , ' ■ t • ' •. , 1 : - ■ > < '• . • , : 

1 . ;• 1 .< • f r ■ v :: •. ■ 

. •• . . t ' ( . . . .. . . r r T ‘ ;-p--I - 

. .. ' ' / ’■ . .- : ,.. i ' >: ■ •• 





























. iOJ. . -• 




. 




, 


■ 


5 --f .s :-■ ‘ ■ 


'■. • :■ I:J ■ ■ • 


•• ■ .. • • . 10 

. . i ,j ' ■ ■ k . 


. 


■ 





. < • ' ?.) ,i ; • .: • - ’ ■ i 






















meetings of their own, always remember that their first 
loyalty belongs to the Teachers 1 Association? A past 
president of the Provincial Executive, in an interview, 
stated that he could not see any Principals 1 Association 
outside the framework or sponsorship of the Teachers 1 Associ¬ 
ation, On the other hand, one Principals 1 Association 
definitely states in its constitution: T1 The Association is 
to be regarded as an organization of administrators of the 
... and not a committee of the Alberta Teachers 1 Associ¬ 
ation tT .3 

Summary . This chapter has discussed relationships of 
Principals 1 Associations with school boards, superintendents, 
and teachers. It has been shown that most Associations make 
recommendations to school boards through superintendents, 
but also that over half of them make direct recommendations. 
Attendance of trustees is not as good as might be desirable. 
It has been shown that boards assist Associations by paying 
for expenses to carry out projects, for travelling, and for 
stenographic services. A good majority of boards provide 
a meeting place and a significant number authorize school 
time for meetings. 

It has been revealed that all but two superintendents 
attend meetings regularly and that they give leadership to 
Associations, Of valuable service to many Associations is 





79 

the practice of superintendents carrying the plans and 
wishes of Associations to school boards. 

Because their activities are certain to affect 
teachers, Associations have devised various means of communi¬ 
cation. The methods most commonly used are staff meetings 
and superintendents’ bulletins. It has also been shown that 
teachers communicate with Associations through the staffs 
of schools, through A.T.A. groups, through teachers of the 
elementary grades, and teachers in subject fields in the 
junior and senior high school. 












. 










- 



















? . 






. 


>1 
















FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER VI 


^Voluntary statement made on questionnaire by an 
official of Smoky Lake Principals 1 Association. 

^ Fiftieth Annual Report , 1955 . Department of Edu¬ 
cation, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queens Printer, 
1956, p.27. 

^From the constitution in the minutes of the Taber 
School Division Principals 1 Association. 















.. 1. ■ ■ :J " 

. 



















CHAPTER VII 


THE WORK OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS 

The work done by Alberta Principals 1 Associations 
covers a wide range, from ambitious cooperative super¬ 
visory practices, to the smallest of administrative 
details. However, throughout all Associations’ activities, 
one common goal seems to be the achievement of a certain 
amount of uniformity of practice in problems of educational 
supervision and administration. There are, for instance, 
only three Associations who have not set up some type of 
testing program on a divisional basis. Early in 1942, the 
Lethbridge School Division Association struggled with 
finding a suitable report card for its division. Associ¬ 
ations just recently organized are working on this problem 
now. There seem to be certain problems in education which 
might best be solved by a group of principals who work in 
one geographical area under one school board, and with one 
group of teachers. 

This chapter is devoted to examining the work being 
done by the fifty-one Associations now operating in the 
Alberta divisions and counties. The questionnaire asked 
Associations to indicate the amount of work which they had 
done in particular fields. There is a great difference, 
for example, in an hour’s discussion on school discipline, 




and in a major investigation on this complex problem that 
might take the better part of a year. Associations were 
therefore asked to indicate whether they had done "some 
work" or a "great deal of work" in a particular area. This 
study will attempt to maintain this distinction throughout 
this chapter. Tables and figures will frequently use the 
expressions "light" for a little work and "extensive" for 
a major study, or an ambitious program. It will be noted 
throughout this chapter that generally the term "some work" 
is far more often applied than the one indicating that 
"extensive" work has been done. It might be worth keeping 
in mind that many Associations have only recently been 
organized. 

The presentation in this chapter categorizes the work 
of Associations into seven main divisions. The first 
category discusses the work done by these organizations to 
improve their members as principals. Duties and super¬ 
visory practices are mentioned, and the Principals 1 Leader¬ 
ship Course as an influence in improving the principalship 
will be dealt with. Secondly, work in connection with 
board policy will be discussed, especially in regard to 
policy recommendations, divisional handbooks, and disci¬ 
plinary problems. In-service training of teachers will be 
the next category studied, and this will be followed by a 
report on the work of Associations with regard to pupils 


. 






*i" ji ; •’ :?; \c 

' 




.1 M- 


' .. i ■ ■ 


:•>: ‘J& 






• ' 

■ ■ ■ . 






. • ■ . 1 . , 




.Or: l i9'U-VYl^U>0^‘t V Lay 


•..•to .■ • : ' • ■ 


|3> '•? ( T i 


/ T • i 




v. v* , o. 

• £ 






/•> ! ■ 


: • • ' ..T.T; ■ u 


. . ■ ) 


a' . o a.\ a ay. a : ., : a” y jo l 

< . . 


• ■ . < 






. 


W 


a J ' i.Oi'TT 


! . ' * 

:• ■ ■ a ■£ 



















and pupil progress. Testing will be a major part of this 
discussion. Two brief sections dealing with Association 
work on the school plant with its equipment and supplies, 
and the other on public relations, will follow 7 . A summary 
will conclude the chapter. 

I. WORK TO IMPROVE THE PRINCIPALSHIP 

This part of Association work might be termed as 
in-service training for the principal. It is generally 
accepted that people learn a great deal from each other, 
and so it would seem to the investigator that principals, 
with their exceedingly complex responsibilities, can learn 
a good deal from colleagues who are facing similar problems. 
A charter member and first president of one of the early 
Associations expressed it as follows: "Our Principals 1 
Association has been a training ground for new principals 
who have come to work with us’’.^ It happens that this 
organization operates in an outlying area where staff 
changes, even in the principalship, are very frequent. 

As previously stated, today’s principal is becoming 
quite conscious of the professional standards demanded of 
his position. One superintendent reports to the Department 
of Education: "This (Principals’ Association) is becoming 
more and more a professional group interested in the welfare 
and well-being of the pupils. The principal is slow r ly 






assuming a more vital role and is giving leadership to his 
staff.” 2 


The principal works at making himself a more efficient 


administrator. Figure 15 corroborates this by showing that 
nineteen Associations have done a great deal of work on 


"Considering the duties and recommended practices of princi¬ 
pals". Another thirty have given it some consideration. 


Only two organizations have not considered the basic question 
of what the responsibilities of Alberta school principals 


are. 


0) 

A 

-p 

ft 
<1) *H 
> X 
o co 

J-t i—i 
ft CO 
B ft 
H »H 
O 

o c 

■P *H 

u 

M ft 

u 

o 


10 20 30 40 
Number of Associations 


Figure 15. Work being done by Associations to 
improve the principalship. 


Principals ! Leadership Course . The same figure also 
shows that Associations are extremely interested in con¬ 


sidering the findings and hearing reports on the Principals’ 


Studying duties and practices 
of principals 


Considering Principals’ 
Leadership Course 



Some work 
Extensive work 



























. 











« 


































































. 









- 




. 








35 


Leadership Course. This course, mentioned early in this 
study, is certainly a fine example of in-service training of 
principals. The questionnaire in this study has revealed 
that the men attending the course are given an opportunity 
by their Associations to report or to lead discussions on 
the findings of this group of principals from all over the 
province. Thirteen Associations have spent a good deal of 
time giving consideration to these findings; another thirty- 
four have given them some attention. Apparently the influ¬ 
ence of the Leadership Course has spread province-wide, since 
only four organizations do not report any activity in its 
connection. 


II. PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS AND BOARD POLICY 

Certain phases in the educational structure lend 
themselves particularly well to cooperative effort. One of 
these phases might well include policy-making for a particu¬ 
lar school division. The principals, together with the 
superintendent, represent a body of educational experts 
whose advice and recommendations are often valuable, par¬ 
ticularly in regard to the more technical matters which the 
lay members of the board often find difficult to understand. 
One superintendent was encouraged to start a Principals’ 
Association because he was continuously confronted by board 
members with the question: "What do our principals think?’’3 




\ 




. 





■ 




■ ! 







: ; ■ i i 


■ ■ ■ ■ v;.; i 







■ 


. 


5 









C 






f 


’ 





■ ( 





36 


The investigator is not attempting to suggest that 
Principals 1 Associations should have a major share in school 
policy-making. This is a prerogative which the School Act 
assigns to the elected representatives of our society. The 
point must be made, however, that board members sometimes 
lean heavily on advice from their superintendent, and fre¬ 
quently also on advice from their principals. Five Associ¬ 
ations in Alberta have done extensive work in "studying 
board policy and making policy recommendations to the 
board". Thirty-four others have served to some extent in 
this capacity. In other words, over seventy-six per cent 
of Alberta Principals 1 Associations have assisted their 
boards to some degree in policy-making. One superintendent 
writes: "It (Principals 1 Association) assists the super¬ 

intendent in forming educational policy and in amending 
current administrative policies." 

Handbooks . The development of divisional and county 
handbooks containing board policy is a concrete example of 
how Associations assist in establishing administrative 
practice. These booklets, produced by school boards and 
county committees, are frequently compiled by the members 
or a committee of the Principals 1 Association concerned, 
then later approved by the board. Other boards choose to 
cooperate actively with Associations in their composition. 





• t . ■ j , ■ . 




■ 













© 


-! ' 




".I 






^ i 



' 


i 




7 








■ 








. 




jfi 




■ 











« 


■ r:o > ■^ 


. 






The handbooks usually contain information about the school 
unit, its schools, its customs and practices, and some board 
policy governing the operation of their schools. The hand¬ 
books are made available to principals, teachers, board 
members, and often to parents who wish to be informed regard¬ 
ing educational practices in their area. 

The questionnaire revealed that sixteen Associations 
have done extensive work in developing a divisional hand¬ 
book setting forth policies, practices, and regulations 
governing the operation of the school system". Eighteen 
others have done some work or are still working on a policy 
handbook. Two-thirds of the Alberta Associations have 
worked at policy-making through this medium. 

Disciplinary problems . School discipline is always 
a weighty problem with principals, likely because they 
realize that without good behaviour and the proper attitude, 
learning cannot take place. Forty Associations report 
taking time at meetings to discuss problems of discipline. 

Ten of these assert having done a considerable amount of 
work on this topic, while the remaining thirty have had it 
on the agenda. 

The "laggard" student has caused a certain amount of 
concern in the last few years. These students, who are 
either not working at all, or working far below their 




' 






i;o.'"i 


* 


















. 






.. i . 

■ 




: ' ' , 









' 









capacity, appear to be causing harm to the achievement and 
progress of high school classes. Many school boards have 
taken a stern attitude toward these "sitters” who do no 
work and often prevent the rest of the class from working. 
Some Principals 1 Associations have assisted boards and 
committees in setting up definite policies in regard to the 
"laggard student" in Alberta high schools. 

Figure 16 illustrates how Associations assist their 
boards in regard to shaping board policy, creating divisional 
or county handbooks, and solving disciplinary and "laggard 
student" problems. Of the thirty-nine Associations working 
on board policy, five have done so extensively, while the 
other thirty-four have given some assistance. Thirty-four 
have worked on a policy handbook, sixteen of which have 
done a considerable amount. Forty Associations have studied 
school discipline, ten of these extensively, and made some 
recommendations. 

From the responses obtained, it would seem that 
Associations are deeply concerned about the administrative 
problems discussed. These organizations are apparently 
ready to make recommendations to boards when called upon to 
do so. Over thirty-one per cent have done extensive work on 
a policy handbook. The problem of school discipline has 
been on the agenda of seventy-eight per cent of all Associ¬ 


ations 







39 



Number of Associations 


Figure 16. Areas in which Principals 1 Associations 
work in cooperation with or by request of their divisional 
board. 


III. IN-SERVICE TRAINING OF TEACHERS 

Most educational authorities will agree that perhaps 
the most important function of the principal is to facili¬ 
tate the work of the teacher in her classroom. It is not 
surprising, therefore, to find that Principals’ Associations 
spend a considerable amount of time in fostering projects 
which are designed to improve instruction in their schools. 
It is commonly recognized that in order to provide for 
improvement and growth in classroom practices an active in- 
service training program for teachers becomes highly 
desirable. 





























; r ;J 








■ > 0 










: . 

. 

• , ■ •' ■ : ■ 


- 




. 

p 







90 

Division-wide educational projects . The most popular 


method of fostering improvement in teaching, as Figure 17 
shows, has been the planning, organization, and direction 
of educational projects on a divisional basis. A total of 
forty-eight Associations report having worked to plan and 
carry out projects in various problem areas. Twenty-one 
of these Associations have done a good deal of work, while 
the remaining twenty-seven have done some work in this 
field. If it is remembered that over eighty-six per cent 
of the Associations have been organized since 1950, it 
becomes even more evident that these educational projects 
are considered of primary importance. 

Educational projects in individual schools . Doing 
some work to promote educational projects in individual 
schools through their respective staffs has taken meeting 
time in thirty Associations, only two of which, however, 
report having done a considerable amount. The investigator 
would suspect that one of the reasons why twenty-eight 
Associations have done only TT a little work TT promoting these 
types of projects is that the major role in organization 
and execution must be left to the individual principal and 
his staff. Many of the projects are likely initiated by the 
superintendent at a principals 1 meeting, and then carried to 
individual centres by the principal. 















i 


•) ",;"T 


1 iiOJ > COO 




? 


' 







rrrr 






c 


c 




91 

Staff meetings . The attitude of Associations toward 


staff meetings appears to be very similar to that toward 
staff projects in individual schools. Although fifty-three 
per cent of the organizations have spent some time on staff 
meeting improvement, Associations must feel that the 
effective meeting still has to be organized by one principal 
and his staff. Only one Association reports having done a 
"great deal of work” to improve the calibre of staff 
meetings. 

It would seem to the investigator that since the 
Alberta School Act makes these meetings mandatory, a good 
deal of thought and planning is time well spent so that 
meetings will become useful, interesting, and even enjoy¬ 
able to teachers. How this may be done, how various 
principals are doing it, what experts say might be done, 
could very easily take up the time of a series of Associ¬ 
ation meetings. Since the principal is the educational 
leader in his school, he must shoulder the responsibility 
of conducting staff meetings that are of benefit to all 
teachers. Four superintendents deem the subject of better 
staff meetings in Association discussions important enough 
to mention them in their 1957 annual report to the Depart¬ 
ment of Education. 

Figure 17 reveals that twenty-seven Associations have 
taken some meeting time to discuss staff meetings, only one 






i 0 


■'\X o 












. : ; • i ■■ 


















* 







■ 






■ 




< 


. 





Eli : \ 

> l 



.■ '■ ■ ; , J ’ . ' 

■ 

. j: ■' .} O , ' • ' I 


■ . 






92 


reporting extensive work. 


(0 

c 

o 


-p 

CO CO 
•H G 
O Q) 
O J2 
w o 

(0 CO 
<D 
&-• 

O JG 


•H P 

Jg *h 


£ ^ 


c ^ 

•H G 
O 
co 
co 
CD 


u 



Division-wide educational projects 



Educational projects in individual schools 



5 10 15 20 25 30 35 

Number of Associations 


Figure 17. Activities in which Principals’ 
Associations cooperate with teachers. 


Teacher orientation programs . This is a field of 
work in which Principals’ Associations have as yet done very 
little. Living in a period of rapid teacher-turnover, these 
programs would certainly seem advantageous, and yet only 
fifteen of the fifty-one Associations (twenty-nine percent) 
assert that they have done some work in teacher orientation. 
It appears that pressure of organization in the fall leaves 
little time for Associations to engage in work of this kind. 
Figure 17 shows that no organizations in Alberta divisions 
have done a large amount of work in introducing new teachers 
to their new jobs. 























93 


Curriculum study . Only thirteen Associations have 
taken time for curriculum study in their meetings. Figure 18 
indicates that two of these have done extensive work while 
the other eleven have only done a little. It would appear 
that principals could well use some time in the organization 
of study-groups for teachers if the time could be found and 
teachers were receptive to the idea. Five superintendents 
in their 1957 reports to the Department of Education mention 
curriculum study as a commendable activity in their Associ¬ 
ations. 


Cooperative supervision . The modern concept of 
cooperative supervision in the place of rigid inspection to 
improve the quality of instruction has been considered, as 
Figure 18 indicates, by nineteen Associations, only one of 
which reports having gone into it thoroughly. Superinten¬ 
dents, however, see Associations as a wonderful means for 
cooperative supervision since sixteen of them gave their 
organizations credit for assisting in this field of work. 

It is possible that officials answering the questionnaire 
did not. fully understand the term. 

Institutes and conventions . Institutes and con¬ 
ventions, frequently considered a particular phase of 
cooperative supervision, are activities which Associations 
have dealt with quite extensively. Figure 18 shows that ten 










'■■■ . : I . V ' 

Ki l'i.‘ 


i ii',' 


K 




.i 


■SO : : ' 'T ; Li 


' • y 








■ 1 ; 




o . 










c ' / --j : 


i 


. J - v 






i : 


■ 









94 


organizations have done a great deal of work in planning, 
organizing, and directing teachers’ institutes and con¬ 
ventions. Another twenty-six report having done some work 
in this field. Seventy-one per cent of all Associations 
have taken time with institutes, usually organized on a 
divisional basis, and with conventions which might include 
several divisions and counties. 


w 

g 

u o 

O .|H 
4-5 
CO 


T 3 

0) 

G 

C 


CO CO 

rH <n 

Oh 

to JD 
<1) 

•H to 
•P U 

•H Q) 

> s: 

•H O 
«P CO 
O <0 

< E-* 



Institutes and conventions 


Self-evaluation of teachers 



10 20 
Number of Associations 


Some work 
Extensive work 


30 


Figure IS. Activities planned and executed by 
Principals’ Associations for teachers. 


Self-evaluation of teachers . The subject of self- 
evaluation has been dealt with by sixteen Principals’ 
Associations. Figure 1& shows that four organizations have 
done a considerable amount of work in this regard, while 
another twelve have given it some attention. It would seem 






















r j; ii ■ i 1 


— » . , 







. 




o 


i jf 










&■£ 


J 7 























j:, j ; 

■ ■ 



.. 




*7 . 











i '' 




' 


: 















95 

that self-evaluation by teachers would require a good atti¬ 
tude and a high degree of professional responsibility. It 
is perhaps something that teachers should wish to do them¬ 
selves, rather than to have it imposed by a body of 
principals. 

IV. WORK IN RELATION TO PUPILS AND PUPIL PROGRESS 
Testing 

The results from the questionnaire would seem to 
indicate that testing is by far the most important and 
widespread activity of Principals’ Associations. Only three 
Associations have no testing program whatsoever. Twenty- 
eight superintendents of Alberta divisions and counties 
reported to the Department of Education in 1957 that their 
Associations were engaged in division-wide testing programs 
of subject matter or, in general intelligence. Responses 
were heavy in all but one of the four questions set aside 
for the purpose of revealing whether Associations carried 
out a testing program. The four categories chosen by the 
investigator were the following: testing for the purpose 
of remedial instruction in certain subject fields throughout 
the grades; testing for the purpose of comparison and 
promotions at the end of the school year; testing for 
instructional guidance in grades nine and twelve; and test¬ 
ing for the purpose of determining mental age or the 







96 


intelligence quotient. Associations were again invited to 
state whether they had done a TT great deal of work", or 
whether they had "done some work" in the four phases and at 
certain grade levels. The words "extensive" and "light" 
will be used in the text, tables, and figures in place of 
these phrases. 

Testing for the purpose of remedial instruction . The 
investigation reveals that testing for the purpose of 
remedial instruction receives the most attention of the four 
phases of testing under discussion. The totals in Table 
XXVI show that this type of testing is most frequently 
carried out in Division I, but is closely followed by 
testing in Division II, which has four less in the total 
number of programs. Testing in grades seven to nine is 
third with a total of fifty-four, while the high school has 
only twenty-seven testing programs in the fifty-one Associ¬ 
ations. 

Testing for remedial instruction in Reading receives 
the most attention in Division I, a total of twenty-four 
Associations reporting a program in this subject. Six of 
these report extensive activity, while the remaining 
eighteen report having done some work. Arithmetic, however, 
is not far behind with a total of twenty-two reporting a 
program, while Language follows closely with twenty-one. 








97 


Table XXVII summarizes the findings and shows how many 
Associations have an extensive program and also the number 
which have done some work. 


TABLE XXVI 

TESTING BY PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS THROUGHOUT THE GRADES 
FOR THE PURPOSE OF REMEDIAL INSTRUCTION 


Subject Number of Testing Programs 


Elementary and 

Junior High School 

I 

Divisions*' 
II III 

IV 

Total 

Reading 

24 

22 

19 


65 

Language 

21 

21 

19 


61 

Arithmetic (Math) 

22 

20 

16 


53 

High School 






English 




7 

7 

Mathematics 




12 

12 

Science 




7 

7 

Social Studies 


__ 


_1. 

_1 

Totals 

67 

63 

54 

27 

211 


'"Division I—Grades 1 to 3 

Division II--Grades 4 to 6 
Division III—Grades 7 to 9 
Division IV—Grades 10 to 12 


In Division II the same three subjects have a very 
similar distribution as in the primary grades. There is a 















93 


difference of one between each of Reading, Language, and 
Arithmetic. Table XXVIII shows that twenty-two Associations 
have a Reading testing program, six of which are compre¬ 
hensive; twenty-one have a Language testing program, of 
which five are comprehensive; and twenty Associations 
sponsor an Arithmetic test of which five are again compre¬ 
hensive. 


TABLE XXVII 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN THREE SUBJECT FIELDS 
IN DIVISION I 


Subject 

Number 

of Associations 


Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Reading. 

. 6 

18 

24 

Language . 

. 5 

16 

21 

Arithmetic . 

.Jt 

18 

22 


Totals 15 

52 

67 


Division III does not receive quite as much attention 
as the first two, although the difference is not marked. 
Table XXIX shows that Reading is tested by nineteen Associ¬ 
ations, four of which do so extensively. Language is also 
tested by nineteen, five having extensive programs. In 

















99 


Arithmetic, or Mathematics, thirteen carry out a testing 
program, three of which are termed extensive. 


TABLE XXVIII 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN THREE SUBJECT FIELDS 
IN DIVISION II 


Subject 

Number 

of Associations 


Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Reading. 

. 6 

16 

22 

Language . 

. 5 

16 

21 

Arithmetic . 

. 

11 

20 


Totals 16 

47 

63 


While Tables XXVII, XXVIII, and XXIX show the testing 
programs by Divisions, Tables XXX, XXXI, and XXXII reveal the 
number of testing programs in operation by subjects. The 
last three tables show a total of sixty-five programs in 
Reading, sixty-one in Language, and fifty-eight in Arith¬ 
metic. 
















100 


TABLE XXIX 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN THREE SUBJECT FIELDS 
IN DIVISION III 


Subject 

Number 

of Associations 


Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Reading. 

.... 4 

15 

19 

Language . 

.... 5 

14 

19 

Arithmetic (Mathematics) 

...._! 

12 

16 


Totals 12 

42 

54 


TABLE XXX 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN SUBJECT FIELDS—READING 


Grade Level Number of Associations 



Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Division I. 

. 6 

18 

24 

Division II ... . 

. 6 

16 

22 

Division III. .•. . 

. Jt 

11 

11 


Totals 16 

49 

65 





























101 


TABLE XXXI 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN SUBJECT FIELDS—LANGUAGE 


Grade Level Number of Associations 



Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Division I. . . . 

.5 

16 

21 

Division II . . . 

.5 

16 

21 

Division III. . . 

._£ 

14 

i2 


Totals 15 

46 

61 

TABLE XXXII 


TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN SUBJECT FIELDS—ARITHMETIC 


Grade Level 

Number 

of Associations 


Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Division I. 


13 

22 

Division II . 

.5 

15 

20 

Division III. 

._1 

11 

16 


Totals 12 

46 

5& 































102 


With respect to testing in subject fields in the 
high school for the purpose of remedial instruction, twenty- 
seven testing programs were noted in Table XXVI, page 97. 
Seven of these programs are found in English, three of which 
are "heavy TT and four "light”; twelve programs are found in 
Mathematics, three of which are extensive; another seven are 
found in Science, having also three extensive programs. One 
Association reported a light program of testing in Social 
Studies. Table XXXIII shows the distribution of the testing 
programs in four high school subjects. 

TABLE XXXIII 

TESTING PROGRAMS OF ASSOCIATIONS 
IN SUBJECT FIELDS —HIGH SCHOOL 
(GRADES X—XII) 


Subject 

Number 

of Associations 

English. 

Extensive 

. 3 

Light 

4 

Total 

7 

Mathematics. 

. 3 

9 

12 

Science. 


4 

7 

Social Studies*. . . 

. 0 

J. 

_JL 


Totals 9 

18 

27 


*Not listed in questionnaire 
















103 

Testing for the purpose of promotions and comparisons 
with other schools . The practice of testing to give 
teachers guidance in promotions also appears to be very 
common throughout the grades, particularly in the high 
school subjects of grades ten and eleven. 

Table XXXIV shows the results obtained from the 
questionnaire in regard to subjects in the elementary and 
the junior high school. A total of thirty-five testing pro¬ 
grams are carried out at these levels, seventeen of which 
are in elementary school subjects and eighteen in the junior 
high school. On the elementary level, five programs are the 
result of a tT great deal of work TT by Associations, while 
twelve are the product of "some work". In the junior high 
school subjects six are the result of exhaustive studies, 
while twelve received the lighter treatment. 

TABLE XXXIV 

TESTING PROGRAMS COORDINATED BY PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 
IN ELEMENTARY AND JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOL SUBJECTS FOR 
THE PURPOSE OF PROMOTIONS OR COMPARISON 
WITH OTHER SCHOOLS 


School 

level 

Number of 

testing 

programs 



Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Elementary 


5 

12 

17 

Junior High 

School 

_6 

12 

18 



Totals 11 

24 

35 























• .! ' 




. 


:? 











c 


o j: 






' ' 










1 






;! > t : 'i: 


i / • : • ■ - ,1 ci 




■ • ■ 






. 


I.• t i ' - 


















; 


r 








‘ ■ V- .r.•: 

. 

■ 


■ ' .... . f. . 














' 


















104 


Because indications led the investigator to believe 
that testing for the purpose of promotion in grades ten and 
eleven was taking the time of many Associations, the 
questionnaire was so constructed that it invited organizations 
to check five subjects, namely, Mathematics, Science, 

Language, Literature, and Social Studies, at both grade 
levels. Associations were also asked to list other subject 
tests in which they had worked. Completed questionnaires 
proved the supposition to be true, since all ten subjects 
listed brought positive responses, and two other subjects, 
French 20 and Biology 11, were added. Eight Associations 
were found to have a complete testing program for the 
subjects listed. 

Figure 19 shows the subjects tested in grade ten. 
Mathematics 10, with twenty-one testing programs in 
operation or in the construction stage, has a wide margin 
over Science and Language with thirteen each. Literature 
10 and Social Studies 10 follow the latter closely with ten 
and eleven testing programs respectively. It will again be 
noted in this figure that "some work" on these testing 
programs far outweighs the "great deal of work" category. 

The pattern shown by Figure 20 with respect to final 
testing in grade eleven is very similar to that shown in the 
previous figure. Mathematics 20 is the subject of sixteen 
programs; Science 20 has received the attention of thirteen 




105 


Associations; Language 20, fourteen; and Literature 20 and 
Social Studies 20, nine each. Most of the tests are the 
product of TT some work" by Principals 1 Associations. 


CO 

p 

o 

a> 

£> 

2 

CO 

X 

<D 

T3 

CO 

u 

o 

c 

•H 

W) 

a 

•H 

P 

CO 

o 

Eh 


Mathematics 10 



Literature 10 



Social Studies 10 



^^clogy 11 



Some work 
Extensive work 


5 10 15 20 
Number of Testing Programs 


Figure 19. Grade ten final testing programs in six 
subjects coordinated by Associations. 


It would seem imperative that principals receive the 
help and cooperation of high school teachers in the various 
subject fields in the preparation and administration of 
these tests. Comments made by Association officials and 
























106 


superintendents indicate that the work of the principals 
often consists of giving leadership and acting as coordina¬ 
tors to teachers instructing in these high school courses 
who construct the tests. 


CO 

-p 

o 

<D 

•o 

3 

CO 

M 

X 

0) 

CO 

u 

o 


hD 


■P 

CO 

0) 


Mathematics 20 



Literature 20 



Social Studies 20 



Some work 
Extensive work 


5 10 15 20 

Number of Testing Programs 


Figure 20. Grade eleven final testing programs in 
six subjects coordinated by Associations. 


Testing for the purpose of instructional guidance in 
Grades IX and XII . A number of Associations have developed 
testing programs for the purpose of surveying the achievement 






























107 


of students in grades nine and twelve. The results of the 
tests help the teachers in planning their instructional 
programs so that students in these grades will be able to 
overcome their most glaring weaknesses before their depart¬ 
mental examinations in June. Only a few Associations have 
testing programs to meet this need. Table XXXV shows that 
five organizations have worked on testing programs in grade 
nine, two of which are reported extensive, and three have 
done so in grade twelve, two of which are termed extensive. 

TABLE XXXV 

WORK OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS IN TESTING 
PROGRAMS OF GRADES IX AND XII 


Grade Level 

Number of testing 

programs 


Extensive 

Light 

Total 

Grade IX 

2 

3 

5 

Grade XII 

_2 

_L 

_2 


Totals 4 

4 

8 


Testing to determine mental age and/or intelligence 
quotient . Twenty-nine Associations (fifty-seven per cent) 
have set up testing programs to help teachers determine 
children’s mental capacity. Table XXXVI shows that six 
























;■« « ‘X ' . Cl t 


■ . . 

' 



' . ■ ■' : 




... ' 



•!. V/!' 


. 

■ 



. 
















< -i 










.. 












)V ' ' 














i :jo'J 


l , : ' ; > 








•, : • iJ 1 . . J ' >■ '■ - < 































108 

Associations have done a "good deal of work" in this type 
of testing and twenty-three have done "some work". The word 
"extensive" in the table again describes the former and the 
word "light" the latter. 


TABLE XXXVI 

WORK OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS IN THE 
INTELLIGENCE TESTING PROGRAMS 


Type of Program 

Number of Associations 

Extensive 

6 

Light 

21 


Total 29 


Reporting to Parents 

Methods of reporting pupil progress have become one 
of the major concerns of Principals’ Associations in Alberta. 
Forty-two organizations have worked in this important 
educational field. It is generally agreed that to get 
students working up to their mental capacity the parents 
must be informed in order to get their cooperation. Children 
must have encouragement, support, and understanding from 
parents. In order to get this assistance, teachers must 
give parents a clear understanding of their students’ 










. 


r 


' 






■ 




i; ■ ■ . ■ 









. 

. ■ ■ ■ 


I’ . : .. iX'j . ' < ■< - "■ ' • " •• 


: ' 


. 


■ 
















' ' • : 

. 


r ■ ■ l:, ■ ■ * 

• . n 




. ■ 


. 






109 

achievement. Better means of communicating with parents are 
therefore sought by teachers in the form of better report 
cards and parent-teacher interviews. In eighty-two per cent 
of Alberta divisions and counties the teacher receives 
guidance and leadership in these areas from Principals’ 
Associations. Seven superintendents, in their annual state¬ 
ment to the Department of Education in 1957, commend their 
Associations for work done on reporting. 

Figure 21 shows that twenty Associations have done 
"a great deal of work” in developing a good reporting system. 
Twenty-two have done "some work”, and a number of these have 
not yet completed their system, particularly in Associations 
which have recently been organized. 

Promotion Policies 

An Alberta-wide study of promotions appears to have 
encouraged Associations in divisions and counties to look 
at practices existing in their own school system.^ A total 
of forty-one of fifty-one Associations have either developed 
and adopted a definite promotion policy for their divisions, 
or developed one for the guidance of teachers, or are still 
in the process of evolving one. Fourteen Associations 
report having done ”a good deal of work” in regard to 
promotions and another twenty-seven have given it some study. 
Figure 21 shows the work done by organizations with respect 
to the problem. 










110 


Inter-School Sports 

Thirty-three divisional Associations have worked at 
setting up inter-school sports programs such as track meets, 
and basketball, hockey, and soccer leagues. Seven Associ¬ 
ations have sponsored extensive programs covering a number of 
sports and twenty-six have done some work in dealing with 
this phase of extra-curricular activities. Figure 21 sum¬ 
marizes Association activities in inter-school sports, 
reporting to parents and promotion policies. 


CO 

■p 
u 
o 
a 
o co 
p 

P G 
O CO 

a> 

Cl co 
co co 
a> 0) 
Pi 

bO 
X O 
P U 

£ 


G a 
O P 

p-i 


Reporting to parents 





10 

Number 


20 

of Associations 


Figure 21. Work of Associations related to: 
reporting to parents, developing promotion policies, and 
promoting inter-school sports. 






























- 




,: r 








r. . • 



















0 ' 





Ill 

V. THE WORK OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS RELATING 
TO SCHOOL PLANT, EQUIPMENT, AND SUPPLIES 

The organization of the principal’s school with 
regard to buildings, teacher and pupil supplies, instruction¬ 
al aids, and the supervision of pupils in the school building, 
on the playground, and in school vans, is one of primary 
importance* Because the various school centres in a division 
are under the control of one board, it is usually found 
expedient to develop a common policy in regard to most of the 
facilities and equipment mentioned above. There are other 
physical needs that school centres have, but they cannot be 
dealt with here, since the ones mentioned adequately cover 
the responses received from Associations in the question¬ 
naire. 

Pupil supervision in school buildings , on the play¬ 
ground and the school van . Without proper supervision of 
pupils during their free time or during their journey to and 
from school, a good educational atmosphere is difficult to 
maintain during the working hours of the school day. Many 
of the fifty-one Associations in the province appear to 
recognize that good conduct in school halls and classrooms, 
on the playground, and on the school van, is a prerequisite 
to good school tone and earnest endeavor. 

Twenty-two Associations report having considered the 










112 


common problem of supervision in school halls and classrooms 
during the times of the school day when formal classes are 
not in session. Only three of these Associations have done 
n a good deal of work TT in this respect, and the much larger 
group of nineteen have taken some meeting time to discuss 
this particular problem. 

Supervision on the playground has been on the agenda 
of twenty-seven Associations in Alberta. Figure 22 shows 
that two of these have made a major study of playground 
supervision while the much larger group of twenty-five have 
done some work in this respect. 


c 

o 

•H 

CO 

•H 


> 

U 

<D 

a 

3 

CO 


a 

3 

Oh 

<H 

o 


CO 

<D 

CO 

CO 

s: 

Oh 


Supervision in school building 



Some work 
Extensive work 


Supervision on the playground 



Supervision on school vans 



10 20 30 
Number of Associations 


Figure 22. Work of Associations with respect to 
pupil supervision in school buildings, on the playgrounds, 
and on school vans. 

















113 


Since most of the schools in divisions are rural 
centralizations, pupil transportation by school van has 
become a common practice. Pupil behaviour on these school 
vans, and the relation of the van driver to the school staff 
and the principal, has therefore become an important problem 
to school boards and principals. Twenty-seven Associations 
report having helped school boards set up regulations 
governing van drivers and pupil behaviour in school vans. 

Only two of the twenty-seven have made a thorough study of 
van supervision. 

Figure 22 summarizes the amount of work Associations 
have done with respect to supervision of pupils in the school 
buildings, on the playgrounds, and on school vans. 

The school office . Because of the rapid growth of 
centralizations in the last ten years, efficient school 
office procedure has become almost a necessity. School 
boards, and particularly their secretary-treasurers, are 
most concerned that proper records be kept in business-like 
files in school offices so that information regarding any 
phase of school operation is readily available. Most modern 
schools, of which many have been built in the last few 
years, provide ample office space for the principal. The 
business training required by principals to operate their 
offices efficiently is, however, frequently lacking. 
Principals, in the main, recognize the difficulty and often 







iT 


y 










5 . 


f 1 ry; ! v . ' • • :• 



. 













. ■ 









K ■ •. . Ql \ - : 




t 


i.l, 

















- 



















114 


hope to establish a certain uniformity for the division in 
office practice, 

A total of thirty Associations have considered the 
problem of keeping good records, particularly in regard to 
cumulative records of students. Twenty-seven of these, 
however, have not gone into the study of records too 
thoroughly. The three remaining, report taking consider¬ 
able time in regard to this phase of office procedure. 

In order to keep school records so they are readily 
available when needed, a good filing system becomes a 
definite necessity. Two Associations have worked on filing 
extensively, while twenty-three have taken some agenda time 
in its discussion. A number of divisions have bought 
standard filing cabinets for all their schools on the advice 
of their Associations. 

The problem of checking pupil attendance in division¬ 
al schools through the school office has not been a major 
concern of Alberta Associations. Only one reports doing 
extensive work in this field and only another nine affirm 
that pupil attendance has come up for discussion at their 
meetings. Figure 23 pictures the work of Associations with 
respect to school office procedure in keeping records, a 
good filing system, and checking on pupil attendance. 








115 

Instructional aids and supplies . Since instructional 


aids, school and pupil supplies are usually obtained through 
the divisional office, a uniform policy toward all schools 
is frequently demanded. Principals’ Associations have given 
valuable aid to boards and to principals themselves by 
assisting in the establishment of a board policy. Nine 
Alberta superintendents appear to be of this opinion since 
they mention in their reports the work their Associations 
have done with respect to instructional aids and supplies. 5 


o 

-p 


■p 

O CD 
<D 

a 3 

CD CD 

X u 
-p a« 


5 <d 
o 

X *H 
U <H 

O <H 

^ o 



Filing system 



10 20 30 
Number of Associations 


Figure 23. Work of Associations with respect to 
school office procedure in pupil records, filing systems, 
and pupil attendance. 


Thirty-six of fifty-one Associations have worked in 
the problem field of supplying the physical needs of.teachers 


























116 

and pupils in their schools. Thirty Associations have done 


some work with respect to this need, while six have clari¬ 
fied or developed an extensive policy. Figure 24 shows how 
Associations work in this regard. 


o 

-p 

CO 

P T3 
O *H 
<1) < 
a 

w i—i 

Q) to 

“g 

X, -H 
P P 
O 


5 3 
Sh 

X P 
G W 
O G 


Instructional aids, pupil supplies 



Textbook rental scheme 



Some work 
Extensive work 


10 20 30 
Number of Associations 



Figure 24. Work of Associations with respect to 
instructional aids, pupil supplies and textbook rental. 

Textbook rental . A particularly important phase of 
instructional aids is the procuring of student textbooks. 

A good percentage of the divisions are now making use of the 
textbook rental plan sponsored by the Department of 
Education. The 1956 report of the Department states: 

"There are now twenty-five school systems operating under 
the rental scheme, affecting approximately 23,300 students".^ 
More divisions and counties have since made use of the 




















117 


scheme. Although the plan saves the taxpayer money, one 
disadvantage cited in the same report is ”the increased 
clerical work for teachers and administrative officials”.? 
Consequently, many Associations have been concerned in their 
meetings with the operation of these plans in their schools. 
A total of thirty-four Associations (two-thirds of the 
total) have considered the plan. Eight of these have done 
”a good deal of work” in this respect. Figure 24 represents 
this information graphically. 

VI. PUBLIC RELATIONS 

It is commonly agreed that good public relations are 
a tremendous asset in any school system. The principal, 
being the educational leader in his community, is concerned 
that good relations exist among his school and staff, and 
the parents, students, and people who are served by his 
centre. 

At the 195$ Leadership Course for School Principals, 
held in Edmonton in the month of July, a group of twelve 
principals from scattered points throughout the province, 
and a high school inspector acting as consultant, included 
in their report on public relations the following state¬ 
ments : 

(1) Because of recent criticism against current 

practices in education and achievements of our 
efforts, we have the responsibility to ”sell” 






' ’■ '■ ' ' ■ " 





, 





■ 







. , ' J ’i ■' * ■ ■ 

. 


■ 

( . . ■ ■ ■' 

V: t : 

- i / • :i . : ; ■ ; ■ .. ■ ■ > • • 'r- : 

. vd ■ : ■" !■- • • : , ' - ■■ v.". ' { - ‘ " r ' 




* 

. ■ •• ■' - •/ 




v.' B 






















. 


> 










lid 

education and the school to the public since 
they are the ones who finance it. 

(2) Public relations can build or destroy a school. 

(3) The principal's responsibility is the direct 
organization of the program and to see that it 
is carried out. 

Apparently this group of principals was certainly aware of 
the importance of a good public relations program. 

The Annual Report of the Department of Education in 
1955, commenting on the activities of Associations, states 
that they are, "giving valuable aid to the superintendent in 
school administration ... and public relations”.^ 

Hencley in his thesis on the Alberta Divisional and 
County School Superintendent, discusses public relations in 
connection with what he terms, "problem areas” of superin¬ 
tendents. Thirty-five superintendents out of forty-seven 
mention ten different areas of public relations which 
present difficulty, the most often cited being that of 
"dealing with parent-teacher-pupil altercation”.9 

Even though many superintendents encounter problems 
caused by poor public relations, and even though Associ¬ 
ations might give the superintendent valuable assistance in 
this field, the principals 1 organizations do not report any 
extensive programs in this basic educational work. Out of 
the fifty-one Associations reporting on their work, only ten 
(less than twenty per cent) assert that they have "done 


. 

„ . : 

1 



. 

■ . • ; 


... 

... j • ■■ . • v i- ... ' T '.' ; :\ ! - . i .**< • ‘J 

■ - '• 

... £ ... 


. 

'‘.on ■ •’ . ' r, . ’ v '' ii'i'' c 


. : . O . '■ 

. J ■ >■ ■: , 

■■ 

. 


. ■ ' ' ; } 





119 

some work" in the public relations field. Table XXXVII 
pictures the work of Associations in this respect. 

TABLE XXXVII 

WORK OF ASSOCIATIONS IN PUBLIC RELATIONS 


Type of Program 

Number 

of Associations 

Extensive 


0 

Light 


10 


Total 

10 


It would seem to the investigator that Associations 
will not long be able to neglect the opportunity of working 
in so vital a field as public relations. 

VII. SUMMARY 

Principals’ Associations in Alberta divisions and 
counties have worked in many phases of education which 
concern our schools. Because many organizations are still 
only a few years old, this work has not been too extensive 
up to the present. It is likely that there are many 
immediate problems which need the attention of these newly- 
formed organizations and so in many cases the ’’surface has 
only been scratched”. 










. 


■ 















■ 


)'j 



• 




• ' 


• f >o 


. 







■ , 5 ' 














•«. . • ■ ' ■ 








* 


- 










. 













120 

Associations are interested in improving the 
principalship, since all but two have given it some 
consideration. Many send delegates to the Principals 1 
Leadership Course and hear and discuss their reports when 
they return. 

Even though making policy recommendations to the 
board rates low as an aim, over seventy-six per cent of the 
Associations have spent at least some time in this work. 
Thirty-four organizations have done at least some work in 
developing a policy handbook. Over eighty per cent of the 
Associations have studied school discipline and some have 
developed tr laggard TT policies in cooperation with their 
boards. 

Activities which promote in-service training of 
teachers have also taken the time of many Associations. 
Division-wide educational projects, such as testing for 
remedial instruction, for promotion, and for intelligence, 
have been the subject of extensive work. Educational 
projects for individual schools have been initiated, and 
some time has been taken by Associations in developing 
better staff meetings, and organizing institutes and con¬ 
ventions. Other phases of cooperative supervision and 
teacher orientation have not concerned the principals too 
much. Only two Associations have done extensive work in 
curriculum study. 








121 

Work in connection with pupils and pupil progress 
has received a good deal of attention. All except three 
carry on a testing program of some kind, with all grade 
levels being involved. Fourteen Associations report 
extensive investigations regarding promotional policies and 
another twenty-seven have given the matter some thought. 
Forty-two have studied better reporting procedures. Inter¬ 
school sports have been dealt with by nearly sixty-five 
per cent of Alberta Associations. 

Pupil supervision in and about the school, and in 
school vans has been considered by some Associations but it 
does not rank highly compared to other work already 
mentioned. Only a few have done extensive work here. Pupil 
records, filing systems, and pupil attendance fall into a 
similar category. There is a slightly greater interest 
shown in the problem of instructional aids and textbook 
rentals. 

Only ten Associations report tT some work" on public 
relations. 

Tables XXXVIII and XXXIX summarize the work of the 
fifty-one Associations in order of prevalence through the 
province. Table XXXVIII counts both "extensive" and "some" 
work, while Table XXXIX lists only those Associations who 
have worked extensively in the problems under discussion. 


o\. : : :J.l .1 r:- .1: 

J‘ f • t; ■ ... . i ; . 

. 

• •)! » \ ' ' i.v •- J l" • ' J • v' 

. 


■ 


. r;, 






V, '■ v ' 


, 


























r 


■ 








. ■■■/ 




TABLE XXXVIII 


122 


RANK ORDER OF ACTIVITIES IN WHICH ASSOCIATIONS 
REPORT HAVING DONE AT LEAST SOME WORK 


Type of Work 


Number of 
Associations 


Considering duties and recommended practices 

of principals. 

Promoting educational projects on a divisional 

basis. 

Studying the findings of the Principals 1 

Leadership Course. 

Testing for remedial instruction . 

Developing better ways of reporting to 

parents. 

Developing promotion policies for the division . . . . 

Studying disciplinary and laggard policies . 

Studying board policy and making policy 

recommendations. 

Testing for promotions . 

Studying and recommending re instructional aids, . . . 
Promoting teachers 1 institutes, conventions, etc.. . . 

Implementing a textbook rental plan. 

Developing a divisional handbook . 

Setting up an inter-school sports program. 

Encouraging staff projects in individual schools . . . 
Developing a cumulative record system for the 

division . 

Testing to determine M.A. or I.Q. 

Studying ways and means of holding staff meetings. . . 

Developing policies in playground supervision. 

Developing policies in van supervision . 

Developing a good school filing system . 

Developing policy re supervision of school plant . . . 

Developing a cooperative supervisory program . 

Developing evaluation instruments for 

self-evaluation. 

Studying and developing teacher orientation 

programs . 

Studying curricula and making recommendations. 

Setting up a public relations program. 

Implementing a good procedure re pupil attendance. . . 
Testing for instructional guidance in Grades IX & XII. 


49 

43 

47 

45 

42 

41 

40 


36 

36 

34 

34 

33 

30 

30 

29 

28 

27 

27 

25 

23 

19 

16 

15 

13 

10 

10 

8 





























TABLE XXXIX 


123 


RANK ORDER OF ACTIVITIES IN WHICH ASSOCIATIONS 
REPORT HAVING DONE EXTENSIVE WORK 


Type of Work 


Number of 
Associations 


Promoting educational projects on a 

divisional basis. 21 

Developing better ways of reporting to parents. ... 20 

Considering duties and recommended practices 

of principals. 19 

Developing a divisional handbook. 16 

Developing promotion policies for the division. ... 14 

Studying the findings of the Principals 1 

Leadership Course . 13 

Testing for remedial instruction. 10 

Testing for promotions. 10 

Promoting teachers 1 institutes, conventions, etc. . . 10 

Studying disciplinary and laggard policies. 10 

Implementing a textbook rental plan . 

Setting up an inter-school sports program . 7 

Studying and recommending re instructional aids ... 6 

Studying board policy and making policy 

recommendations . 5 

Testing to determine M.A. or I.Q. 6 

Testing for instructional guidance in Grades IX & XII 4 
Developing evaluation instruments for 

self-evaluation . 4 

Developing policy re supervision of school plant. . . 3 

Developing a cumulative record system for the 

division. 3 

Encouraging staff projects in individual schools. . . 
Studying curricula and making recommendations .... 
Developing policies in playground supervision .... 

Developing policies in van supervision. 

Developing a good school filing system. 2 

Studying ways and means of holding staff meetings . . 1 

Developing a cooperative supervisory program. 

Implementing good procedure re pupil attendance ... 1 

Studying and developing teacher orientation 

programs. 

Setting up a public relations program . 0 







































124 


FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER VII 


^Statement by Mr. D.C. Pickard, charter member and 
first president of the Foremost School Division Principals’ 
Association, in a personal interview, May 11, 1958. 

^Superintendent’s Report to the Department of 
Education, 1957, Leduc. 

^Statement by Dr. A.W. Reeves, personal interview, 
July 16, 1953. 

^Department of Education, Promotion Policies Report , 
Edmonton, Alberta, 1957. 

^Reports of superintendents to the Department of 
Education, Edmonton, 1957. 

^ Fifty-First Annual Report , 1956 , Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen’s Printer, 
1957, p.83. 

7 Ibid., p. 25 . 

^ Fiftieth Annual Report . 1955 . Department of 
Education, Province of Alberta, Edmonton: Queen’s Printer, 
1956, p.27. 

^Stephen P. Hencley, TT The Alberta Divisional and 
County School Superintendent”, unpublished Master’s Thesis, 
The University of Alberta, 1958. 

















CHAPTER VIII 


THE VALUE OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS TO EDUCATION 
IN RURAL ALBERTA 

To attempt an evaluation of Alberta divisional and 
county Principals 1 Associations is indeed a difficult if not 
an impossible task. It has often been stated that the 
fruits of teaching are hard to assess and that even the best 
of examinations cannot infallibly measure whether a student 
is gaining anything from attendance at school. There are 
intangible factors which defy evaluation. Because Associ¬ 
ations of principals have as their prime interest the 
education of children, there could be a great divergence of 
views as to how these organizations could best spend their 
time and what methods of operation would achieve the best 
results. The writer proposes to present the views of 
superintendents, who work closely with -Associations, the 
thoughts of school boards who are always interested in their 
principals, and a self-evaluation by Associations. An 
assessment by a carefully-chosen panel of experts from this 
province will conclude the evaluation. 

The panel members, who assisted the investigator and 
added greatly to the value of this chapter, consisted of 
Dr. T.C. Byrne, Chief Superintendent of Schools for the 
Province of Alberta, Dr. H.T. Coutts, Dean of the Faculty of 


; v fyt/bCbCbt ; ■ tl y 3 ' / . 

v i.V: 'tv. ■ 

; . 3 • 3v. : 7 nott. OT.b; / 0 77 Jq? 01 

Oor, b: ' bboob'b;I:bb ■ : .v. .^b'v o. 7 " >. I o'\o 777:: 7 r ' 7 bb , o "7 * \0'o ' o 'o • 

•. 7 ■ , .. • > • ■ a ' : ' ’ ■ ■ 

Croc- : ^c/Oo bob; ' : I" cooc07 7 b b7. iT .77 ' .ito^iOb 'to ob : bbioj; • 



: 




b 




9 0 




9 b 


1 


' £ ‘ >’ X ' v •,.. 




) ! 


OOboO b v : V :/ ■>. ;'v 




• T 


rj 


9 v • 




to 


. i I 






•' i 


: 1 7 9 *7 cot «i n i 



>• : 7 c bb .< 3 I ! iqbC- 9 



9 • - :b.' ■ b c • ■ ■ C Oil ' ■ 9 : * " % b 7 d a ■ 179 >7 

.Cb c t : '.t 3 : ! . tbt r 7 - b .Koo'o :tio ' o ’ ' < . • ' r c.b.j b‘77 co 

to Id .ob; 0 3777 7 b 7 b: 'v 1 .. : • 7; '•:" ; V .00 3/ J. 7-. .o, v 'to ;,.i 3 b‘- >o : C 

. • 0 ./ b. b ■ • ; 7 ■■ '■b “ ' ■: 1 ■ ’ ' • t 

0. ; b'7 : r -b- .. 7‘ :"H0\;; 'A .>3^9 : K, 7 77;— ; Ob-L f: b 7- 7 'j ;• V't iOOOT't ' 30 * 



■ . Ci 


CO 


}■ 


:) 7 *7)7 ] 



:7 • •; yf b '7 b t <■ 3 '.71 7 ■ ' } ■ : t • ‘1-:M -.7 I .7 i 3 • . ; bit 

.: 7 :■ ■ • b 7'. ,b ro b ‘o:,;/ :> , : ■ • t ■ ; .o: 










3 





126 


Education of the University of Alberta, Dr. A.W. Reeves, 
chairman of the Division of Administration of the Faculty 
of Education, Dr. H.T. Sparby, Professor of Education of 
the University of Alberta, and Mr. Olaf Larson, Super¬ 
intendent of the County of Newell. 

Dr. Byrne, who gave the writer the suggestion of 
using a panel of experts as a means of evaluation, was 
chosen because of his vast educational experience, particu¬ 
larly in the organization of early Associations in this 
province.- Dr. Coutts was chosen not only because of his 
position as Dean of the Faculty, but because of his 
practical experience as principal, superintendent, and his 
work in the Division of Educational Administration before 
his appointment. Dr. Reeves must take the credit for having 
started one of the earliest and finest Principals 1 Associ¬ 
ations in the province, and his interest in these organi¬ 
zations, and this investigation, make him a valuable member 
on this panel. Dr. Sparby joins the experts because of his 
experience in the field as high school inspector when the 
early organizations were formed in southern Alberta. He is 
widely recognized as an expert in educational administration 
and supervision. Mr. Larson rounds out the panel because he 
has been instrumental in building the Newell Association 
into a model and foremost organization in the province. 
Because his services are often sought in the capacity of 










„ . . . .■ < ■' 

. 

( 

, 

' t 

t r, ■ V ! >7 •' ■ ■ ’ ,' i ■ 0 r "■ 

( 




. ■ ■ " ; ' 1 1 '• '■ ■: ‘ ' 










. 








■ 


. 

. 

f 




t 


' ■ 


V 












' ' ” • r ; - • 












• • 

■ 




127 


consultant to other Associations, he has wide experience 
in principals 1 organizations. 

The panel of experts, consisting of five members, 
was asked through the use of a small questionnaire to rate 
five aims and purposes of Principals 1 Associations and also 
to evaluate their work, by rating in order of importance, 
a summarized list of activities which have taken up the time 
of these organizations in the past. A copy of the question¬ 
naire to experts may be found in Appendix D. 

School boards were approached through their chairmen 
to state how they valued their Associations by answering a 
questionnaire which asked how they felt about the work 
their principals had done in the past, and to express their 
opinions about trustee membership in and financial support 
of these Associations. A copy of this questionnaire will be 
found in Appendix C. 

Superintendents were asked by a circular letter in 
March, 1957, to express their regard for Associations. 

Other information about the superintendents’ point of view 
was gained from their annual reports to the Department of 
Education which were made available to the investigator 
by the Chief Superintendent of Schools. 

Finally, Associations themselves were asked in their 
questionnaire (Appendix B) which activities they valued 
most and how they thought the work of their organization 




128 


might be improved. 

It is the hope of the writer to present the views 
of the four groups mentioned, to point out similarities and 
differences, and to draw some conclusions from the informa¬ 
tion gathered. 

I. THE SUPERINTENDENTS EVALUATE 

Since superintendents work closely with Principals 1 
Associations and, as has been noted earlier, are often 
members and in regular attendance, they should be in an 
excellent position to assess the value of these organizations 
to themselves as chief supervisors of instruction, and to 
education generally in their areas. 

When superintendents were asked to classify Associ¬ 
ations as tT Very Valuable", "Valuable", "Fairly Valuable", or 
"Of Little Value", fifty-one replies were received. Twenty- 
nine superintendents termed their Associations "Very 
Valuable", while another nineteen described them "Valuable". 
Only three superintendents termed their organizations 
"Fairly Valuable", and none gave the relatively negative 
classification, "Of Little Value". Table XL shows that one 
hundred per cent of the superintendents replying, found that 
Associations are making some contribution to education in 
their areas, and over ninety-four per cent asserted that this 
contribution is quite significant. 



. 



* 




1 ■ 


' •' 









\ i 




* ; v . ;;." 








Uli- X CJ ■ : . 


0 ■ ' 








' . > 


c 








rr.; ‘x.v 






. . 

. 

., V . . ' V C it) 






' • i,u; • fj 


•J • . J . 














\ cioia 

\x i i ' i . i:£( H : ’ 


■ 


’ ■ A ’ 'X M ■ ' ■ ■ 

‘ : , , i ' L • ■- • l : '■ t ■ I 


: ■ . t • \L :■/ r : I r 

'.. .' I ' . < • ' o " i 

v • V *. ( \ . 

' • : ., >;.) ...■' : . ' . ' ... I . ' i 

. - . • ... . ■ . ■ . . ■ ■ 


o : • ■ . ■ ■ X 


: / "jO 

' , ; . 







129 


Superintendents were not asked in what ways they 
found Associations valuable, but in the space reserved for 
special remarks a number of them expressed opinions. 

TABLE XL 

SUPERINTENDENTS’ EVALUATION OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 


Classification 


Number of 
Superintendents 


Very Valuable.29 

Valuable.19 

Fairly Valuable. 3 

Of Little Value._0 

Total 51 


One superintendent writes: 

A Principals’ Association serves as a clearing house 
for such matters as Easter and final tests for all 
Grades, especially Grades seven to twelve, promotion 
policies, science, audio-visual and duplicating 
equipment, duties of principals, teachers, vice¬ 
principals, drop-out problems, etc.. 

Three other superintendents emphasize the value of 
Associations as a ’’clearing house”. Two of these add that 
their Association is a planning board and supervisory agency 
for the improvement of classroom instruction. Another 
superintendent remarked: 











:.■ ■■ ■ .1 ■v yyy ■ ’ '■ ■■ bi • . ■ ... 

• • n- • ; • •; ' ., • . : MY ' ; ■ : 

. . ). ir. - . < i . 




















. . . . y •; ' r ; 










■ 


■ : : vi ' ry ' ■; .7 ./ : r /JY 'U1‘ ■MO A" 1 - ■ ;/> 

■ *z 

. 




11 




- ! v;y 






■ 


. 


^ 









130 


... this Association has met with unusual success. 

It complements and supplements the superintendents zone 
meetings and testing programs and new ideas in general. 

One northern superintendent precedes a list of his 
Associations accomplishments with: 

It (Principals’ Association) proves very valuable 
for me and the board. 

Several superintendents indicate that their Associ¬ 
ation has grown from one that dealt with simple admini¬ 
strative matters to one which is chiefly concerned with the 
supervision of instruction. 

Two superintendents are somewhat negative in their 
remarks. One writes that his Association has geographical 
difficulties since great distances are involved and that the 
organization has been n rather inactive of late”. The other 
superintendent asserts: 

Too much work is placed upon the superintendent. 

He is expected to plan the agenda. He is involved in 
all projects undertaken, and is held more or less 
responsible for carrying them out. 

Other evidence as to how superintendents regard 
their Associations was found in reports of superintendents 
to the Department of Education. Some of their opinions are 
quoted below:^ 

a. The ... Principals’ Association has become an 

important key organization whose several successful 
educational projects of the last five years make its 
work really commendable. I am glad to mention here 
that it very ably seconds my efforts in the field 
and provides close collaboration. 







131 


b. Principals’ Association meetings are the chief 
means of initiating ideas and interchanging useful 
information of a group supervisory nature, 

c. As a result of meetings principals are taking a 
more active interest in the matter of supervising 
their staffs. Staff relations and public relations 
have improved through the Principals’ Association, 

d. The Principals’ Association has modified attitudes 
of teachers toward supervision resulting in regular 
supervisory visits by principals in some schools. 

e. Active in purposeful endeavor throughout the year. 

It is an excellent medium through which general or 
more specific supervisory activities can be 
conducted. 

f. Continues to be an effective instrument for admini¬ 
stration and supervision in this inspectorate. 

g. The Principals’ Association is still functioning 
very effectively. Its aim is to improve instruction 
and coordinate efforts of central schools. 

h. Did fine work in administration and in-service 
training. 

i. A very effective and highly purposeful organization. 

j. I have never seen more valuable meetings. 

k. Much benefit derived from these meetings. 

l. Had but few meetings and little was done other than 
to consolidate some of the efforts of previous 
years. The relatively small number of larger 
graded schools limits the amount of this type of 
activity. 

m. A Principals’ Association is in existence but I 
do not feel that too much comes out of it. The 
principals will not take the initiative and get on 
with the job that has to be done. They are always 
looking for something from me and if I do not 
attend, then nothing is done. 

A summary of replies to a questionnaire circulated 
among twelve members of the Northwest Edmonton Superintend- 


. ' ■: 

. . V ■ : ' ’ ’ ' ’ 


; 

■ 

. 

. 

- 




* 



- 

. 




. 


■ 


* 










. 


. 


■ 




132 


ents Zone regarding Principals 1 Associations also reveals 
how superintendents assess the value of these organizations. 

One question asked the following: What is your 
opinion of the value of the Association with respect to: 

a. coordination of instructional program 

b. - in-service training of principals 

c. encouragement of good supervisory practices 

d. strengthening of staff morale 

e. improvement of professional reading 

f. improvement of principal-superintendent relations 

g. public relations 

The replies indicated agreement among the super¬ 
intendents that Associations were, TT of very considerable 
value with respect to all matters listed in (a) to (f) 
inclusive”. Superintendents were most emphatic about the 
coordination of the instructional program, the in-service 
training of principals, and the improvement of principal- 
superintendent relations. 

In reply to the question as to whether work done at 
meetings influenced school procedures, the superintendents 
answered in the affirmative particularly with respect to 
testing and staff meetings. 

The same document also revealed that the super¬ 
intendents unanimously agreed that Associations, "deserve 
encouragement”. The summary concludes that the Associations 
in their area will make even more effective contributions as 
they become more experienced and mature. 

It would seem from the evidence gathered that 











•• ■' : • • ' r ' • ; ■»' ■ ■ '• •' ■ 

. 

■ 





















, 








. 























• 





■ 






■« ■ ■ ■ 


















■ 


. 



V ■" ■ 
















. 


■ " - ! ; •! . 








t • 














. 






















133 


superintendents generally agree that Principals 1 Associ¬ 
ations are making valuable contributions to the educational 
structure in their areas. Only two superintendents expressed 
a negative point of view. In areas where no Associations 
are in existence, vast distances, severe climate, or small 
schools have prevented their organization. 

II. SCHOOL BOARDS EVALUATE 

The attitude of school boards towards Principals 1 
Associations is certain to have a strong effect on the 
success or failure of these organizations. Associations 
are concerned with problems in administration and super¬ 
vision which in time are certain to involve board policy. 
Organizations which enjoy board support, understanding, and 
perhaps even participation, should be a great deal more 
productive than those who do not. It would appear in this 
study that most Associations enjoy the blessing of their 
school boards and many even receive practical assistance 
to give them encouragement. 

Mr. E. Parr, President of the Alberta School Trustees 
Association writes as follows: 

We believe that the Principals’ Associations are not 
only useful but very necessary in every area. 

The school trustees should be encouraged to attend 
their meetings and give the principals every aid and 
support that the board is capable of giving. 








. 










<;j t., . K 




c 

j 

* 



. \ • I •• 

t . '< \ ; ' •■ ■ ' ' <' / • 








134 


Boards have many problems which can be solved more 
easily with the advice and assistance of the principals. 
The principals also have problems which should be 
discussed with the trustees with a view to finding a 
solution which should be satisfactory to both groups 
and of benefit to the pupils and the school, 

I am sure that the vast majority of the trustees do 
appreciate the work of the Principals 1 Associations. 2 

The questionnaire sent to school boards and school 
committees was divided into two sections. The first asked 
them directly about their opinion regarding membership of 
trustees, working cooperatively with boards and the A.T.A., 
superintendents 1 attendance, and about certain apparently 
contentious methods of Association support. The second 
section provided a summarized list of the work Associations 
had done in the past, and asked them to rate its importance 
on a four-point scale. 

Board opinion regarding trustee membership , 
cooperative projects of Association and trustees , and joint 
projects of Associations and the A.T.A. , superintendents 1 
attendance , and certain means of support . Opinion is 
divided regarding membership of trustees in Principals 1 
Associations. Only seven of the thirty-one returning the 
questionnaire, checked an unqualified Always 11 in regard to 
trustee membership. Eleven chairmen checked the space 
provided under "sometimes 11 , showing that perhaps under 
certain conditions trustee membership would be acceptable. 
Twelve bluntly asserted "never" to Association membership. 




























■ 







■: ‘ 


F . • ’v 







, 




* 















1 " ' ' , ' • ' ' . . • '' ' . V ' ' 

< . .. . '. . . V ■ ■; ' '. 


- 




. 












. 










’ 
















j 


c 


* 








. 
























135 


One did not reply to this item. Table XLI shows these and 
other reactions mentioned previously, in graphic form. 

Trustees were emphatically in favor of cooperation 
with principals in educational projects. Twenty-five boards 
felt that trustees should give unreserved assistance while 
five felt that "sometimes" would do. None registered 
disapproval. 

It was interesting to note that trustees favor 
cooperation between Principals 1 Associations and the Alberta 
Teachers’ Association. Twenty-one chairmen gave it the 
highest rating, while the remaining eight favored the 
"sometimes" category. 

Similarly, Alberta trustees want their superintendents 
to attend meetings regularly, twenty-seven giving this indi¬ 
cation, while only four thought that the superintendent 
should attend only periodically. 

The opinion is divided in regard to Associations 
meeting during school time, but the majority (ninety per 
cent) of the boards replying feel that Associations should 
not do,so regularly. Thirteen chairmen opined that they 
could do so occasionally but fifteen flatly answered 
"never". Only three thought they should do so regularly. 

Twelve school boards thought that principals should 
receive mileage for attendance at meetings and another ten 
thought that they should get mileage sometimes. Nine of the 












• 










... :■ • . o 


. 






, . . . 










, 




. 

. . 






■ 



. 










« 










- '■ ' ' | 


Cl 

{ O '. ; 


■■ • . , .. 1 >: ■ : • 


c • ■ : ' s - 




















, ;»ix 



„ 





























136 


thirty-one replying registered opinions against. 

Thirty chairmen felt that Associations should be 
supplied with a cost-free place to meet, only one being of 
the opinion that principals should find their own. 

In regard to stenographic assistance, twenty-four 
boards felt that Associations should get it, seven of these 
replying "always”. The remaining seven were against giving 
stenographic aid. Table XLI summarizes the opinions of 
board chairmen in regard to membership, cooperation, and 
support in Principals’ Associations. 


TABLE XLI 

OPINIONS OP BOARD CHAIRMEN WITH RESPECT TO MEMBERSHIP, 
COOPERATION, AND SUPPORT IN PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 


Always Some- Never 
times 


Trustees should become members . . . 

7 

11 

12 

Cooperate in educational 

projects . . 

25 

5 

0 

Associations should cooperate 

with A.T.A. 

21 

6 

0 

Superintendents should attend 

meetings . 

27 

4 

0 

Associations should meet in 

school time. 

3 

13 

15 

Members should get mileage . 

12 

10 

9 

Associations to have free 

meeting place. 

29 

1 

1 

Associations to get free 

stenographic help. 

7 

17 

7 














. 

• ' < - ■ ' 

. • i 

■■ ■' <'■ . • ' ■ * : , ■ 1 • • 
e 

■ 

. 

t ■ ? 






. 








* . .. 

* .... » .. o 






. 








■ 



. 










137 


There is some similarity between opinions expressed 
by board chairmen and actual practices in Associations. 

It was shown in Chapter IV, however, that only six of the 
fifty-one Associations have trustees as members. Perhaps 
the principals’ organizations have been slow in inviting 
membership of trustees, or they may even feel that it is 
not desirable. Opinions in regard to support of Associ¬ 
ations is clearly reflected in actual practice as outlined 
in Chapters V and VI of this study. 

Board chairmen evaluate the work of Associations . 

In regard to the work of Associations, trustees showed the 
greatest interest in administrative problems. Studying and 
developing effective supervision of playground, school 
buildings, and school vans recorded the highest rating with 
twenty chairmen marking it "Very Valuable” and another eight 
finding it "Valuable”. Only two found this "Of Little 
Value”. Good office procedure followed closely, with seven¬ 
teen giving it the highest rating and twelve rating it 
"Valuable”. Reporting to parents was considered a highly 
desirable field in which Associations might work and it 
ranked third in importance with trustees. 

It would seem that the activities regarded most 
highly by school boards are not being stressed too heavily 
by Associations. It was noted in Table XXXIX, page 123, 










138 


that only a few have given the problem of playgrounds, 
school buildings, and vans a good deal of attention. Office 
procedure has received similar treatment. Trustees and 
Associations think alike, however, when it comes to report¬ 
ing pupil progress to parents. The survey shows that a 
great deal of work has been done in this field. 

While school boards think it highly desirable for 
Associations to consider curricula, the investigation has 
revealed that only two organizations have done any major 
work along this line. The two parties find more agreement, 
however, when it comes to promoting educational projects 
on a divisional basis. The study shows that this has 
taken up a considerable amount of time in Alberta Associ¬ 
ations. Trustees rank it approximately fifth in importance. 

Both Associations and trustees regard the planning 
of institutes and convention programs as important, judging 
by the work that principals have done in the past. When 
these activities are removed from cooperative supervision, 
however, Associations have not given them much consider¬ 
ation. Twenty-seven board chairmen marked this activity at 
least valuable, while only four thought it of little value. 

Staff meetings and teacher orientation programs 
received a favorable response from trustees, although nearly 
half of the chairmen (fourteen) gave these activities second 
rating. This phase of working with teachers is not too 


.1. 

, 

' 



. 




< *: 

■" ’ t 

'• , , • ■ • • : : 




■; • r : ■' i: ,.»r ■ .(,/ 




; 1 (.• ' ' • T ‘- " T.; 



: • : 'V; 



.'j { 1 • 


' . ' ■ loot 


i K . It ' 


y 1 ;.0 v : ,\; 


' >• ' ' O ■ ■ ' . ■ ' . ■ , t ■ 

. 

- i o '1 ‘ r:i-:w •• j ;/ 

,.) -: ' ' ■ i.. •: . . • : , • J 5 





ov. 



■ 


■'u'L j i ■■ ; r : : • ; •: 







t 


- 

/ -* '■ er : xr,.l r 1.1 • 





< 





' 

* • ; ■ / ■ ■. :: ? Or ' : ‘‘ . 

Li ■ 




139 


heavily emphasized in Association work, as the summarizing 
tables show. 

Twenty-four school boards recognize the importance 
of public relations, since thirteen of their chairmen rated 
them "very valuable" and eleven "valuable". There were 
five, however, who did not consider public relations a vital 
function of Associations. It must be noted here that only 
ten Associations in the province have done some work in 
this field. 

Fostering in-service training of principals, and 
planning for the acquisition and use of instructional aids 
and pupil supplies is considered by trustees as of equal 
importance. The majority of the boards replying registered 
the second rating of "valuable" for these activities. 

Extra-curricular activities with emphasis on sports, 
drew only an average response from the chairmen, five 
indicating that there was not too much benefit in this work. 

It is interesting to note that the field of testing 
did not receive too enthusiastic a response from the 
trustees. Only eleven counted testing as "very valuable". 

It was shown in Chapter VII that all Associations but three 
have testing programs of some kind. Two of the boards 
responded to testing with "of little value" and one could 
not see any value in it at all. Planning and promoting 
staff projects in individual schools, and studying board 




., a..:. • .* ■ .• ' v. > 1 '• V 0 > Xt ) 


« .■ > 


o l ; ; '-.J f i'l-j. U-) ;■< J >: .r. < s i:.n■ ‘ — r, 


. ’■ i ■ t ' •' • • : ■ ; *• '. : ;o 


■ :■/ ■; ; ’ • ,r ‘ ; 


vj ..\w - .1 J !. * <i Of') ■ ' 


c 




• o '. : ■■ 


a • m : 

» J 




■ 


c ", /1 ' 



, V 'v_ 'v ’ TV.J :V- . -'U j 

■ 


; il ■ 

■ 



■ 

• ./ 

. 

1 ■ ' ' ' • • ' 





140 

policy and making policy recommendations met with a similar 
response. Six chairmen out of twenty-eight replying thought 
that the latter had little educational value. 

Developing means for teachers and principals to 
evaluate their work was recognized as important by twenty- 
one of the twenty-eight responding to this item. 

The textbook rental plan fell far below the other 
administrative activities like playground, school building, 
and van supervision. Only eight chairmen marked this work 
as TT very valuable" and ten more called it "valuable". 

Table XLII summarizes the evaluations given by board 
chairmen with respect to the sixteen different types of 
work which Associations have performed in past years. 

In order to determine in what order trustees ranked 
the work of Associations, the writer assigned a value of 
three, to the rating "Very Valuable"; two, to the rating 
"Valuable"; one, to "Of Little Value"; and zero, to "Of No 
Value". 

Using this method produces a rank order as shown in 
Table XLIII. 



141 


TABLE XLII 

EVALUATION OF ASSOCIATION WORK BY CHAIRMEN OF SCHOOL BOARDS 


Type of Work 


Number of Chairmen 




Rating 



a 

_b 

c 

_d 

In-service training of 





Principals. 

Studying board policy and 

10 

15 

3 


making policy recommendations . . . 
Use of instructional materials, 

11 

11 

6 


pupil supplies, etc. 

Promoting educational projects 

7 

19 

4 

1 

on a divisional basis . 

Promoting staff projects in 

12 

15 

3 


individual schools. 

Considering means of holding 
staff meetings and teacher 

9 

14 

6 

1 

orientation programs. 

Promoting curriculum study with 

12 

14 

4 

1 

groups of teachers. 

Developing a cooperative super¬ 
visory program including 

13 

14 

3 

1 

institutes, conventions . 

Developing evaluation 
instruments for self- 

11 

16 

4 


evaluation of teachers. 

Testing for remedial 

instruction, promotion, 

12 

9 

6 

1 

determining I.Q. 

Developing an effective method 
of reporting to parents and 
implementing a promotion 

11 

13 

2 

1 

policy. ...... . 

Setting up a textbook rental 

15 

13 

2 


plan. 

Promoting a public relations 

a 

10 

7 

2 

program . 

Developing a good extra¬ 
curricular program, 
particularly inter-school 

13 

11 

3 

2 

sports. 

10 

15 

2 

3 




























142 


TABLE XLII (continued) 


Type of Work 

Number of Chairmen 

Developing effective 

supervision of playground, 

a 

Rating 

Jb __c _d 

school buildings, vans. 

Implementing good office 
procedure re pupil records, 
filing system, pupil 


8 2 

attendance. 

. . 17 

12 2 


a—Very Valuable 
b—Valuable 
c—Of Little Value 
d—Of No Value 


























■ 

c "i ' 

. ■ ' ‘ 

. 




: 




' <■ ■ 












143 


TABLE XLIII 

PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATION WORK AS RANKED BY 
SCHOOL BOARD CHAIRMEN 


Type of Work 


Value Rank 


Supervision of playgrounds, buildings, 

and vans. 

Good school office procedure .... 
Promotions and reporting to parents . 

Curriculum study. 

Promoting educational projects on 

a divisional basis. 

Cooperative supervisory programs, 

institutes, conventions etc. 

Better staff meetings and 

teacher orientation programs. . . . 

Public relations program. 

In-service training of principals . . 
Use of instructional aids, pupil 

supplies, etc. 

Extra-curricular programs, 

especially inter-school sports. . . 

Divisional testing programs . 

Promoting staff projects in 

individual schools. 

Studying board policy and 

making policy recommendations . . . 
Developing self-evaluation 

instruments . 

Developing a textbook rental 

plan. 


78 

1 

77 

2 

73 

3 

70 

4 

69 

5 

69 

5 

68 

7 

64 

8 

63 

9 

63 

9 

62 

11 

61 

12 

6l 

12 

61 

12 

60 

15 

51 

16 
























144 


III. ASSOCIATIONS EVALUATE THEMSELVES 

Evaluation of activities . When Associations were 
invited to state which activities they valued most highly, 
an excellent response was received. There were not many 
presidents who failed to make a statement of some kind. 

Since it is impossible to quote them all, the writer has 
grouped them, since there were many similarities in the 
items Associations considered most valuable. Table XLIV 
will summarize the activities most frequently cited. 

By far the greatest number of Associations valued 
their testing programs. Twenty-seven organizations listed 
testing as one of their three most valuable activities. 

This may not be too difficult to understand when one 
recognizes that testing on a divisional basis gives 
principals a better insight as to how their pupils are doing 
in comparison with the surrounding schools. This might 
become particularly valuable when a principals supervision 
time is limited by a fairly heavy teaching load. 

Nineteen Associations were able to cite that their 
organization had fostered more and better supervisory 
practices by the principals. This suggests what another 
eight Associations rate highly: that meetings have served 
as a training ground for the principals and for the teachers 
indirectly. It is encouraging to note that a good number of 






{ : ' : .j - . ■ ' L : ;.-vu : 

. 

* t ■ : 

' t ' . 

•' . . ; 1 ■ ' : ; \ i ; j .\ V '! T 

. •: • : , •. "f ■ ' • . ■ I •; : • 

. 



' ' - . ; ■ ' 





. 



■ : '' . ' 
















• ■ : 




. ' • ' 







• 








































' 












145 

our Associations are using their time for professional 
improvement• 

The desire for divisional uniformity is heavily 
emphasized in the statements received by the writer. 

Fourteen Associations valued their work in the preparation 
of a policy handbook for their schools. Eight asserted 
that, as a result of their work, more uniform and effective 
administrative practices had resulted. Another eight 
organizations valued their standard promotion policies. Six 
Associations claimed their work had resulted in more uniform 
divisional policies, and five were proud of their policy 
recommendations to the board. Four organizations prized 
their laggard policy, and another three stated that their 
efforts had brought standardization of classroom equipment. 
Three Associations even stated that their work had resulted 
in "standardization of classroom procedures". 

Eight Associations, as noted in Table XLIV, valued 
the educational projects which they had promoted in the 
past. Six had organized an extra-curricular program which 
consisted mainly of inter-school sports, while five prized 
their method of reporting pupil progress. Five organi¬ 
zations thought their institute planning was a valuable 
activity. Three different Associations named a textbook 
rental scheme, better noon-hour supervision, a better school 
library, and a streaming program in the elementary school as 



■ ' . o • . > ‘ ' . • ‘ ‘ ■ 






146 


valuable organization activities* 

TABLE XLIV 

ACTIVITIES OF PRINCIPALS* ASSOCIATIONS 
VALUED MOST HIGHLY BY PRINCIPALS* 


Activity- 


Number of 
Associations 


Testing programs.27 

Studying effective supervisory practices.19 

Preparation of a policy handbook.14 

Adopting better and more uniform 

administrative practices. 8 

Developing a standard promotion policy. 8 

In-service training of principals . 8 

Coordinating educational projects . 

Working towards uniformity in 

divisional policy . 6 

Organization of extra-curricular 

activities—sports. 6 

Improvement in reporting pupil progress . 5 

Improving board-staff relations . 5 

Planning institutes . 5 

Developing a laggard policy . 4 

Promoting professional growth . 4 

Standardizing classroom equipment . 3 

Standardizing teaching procedure. 3 

Promoting better noon-hour supervision. 3 

Developing a textbook rental scheme . 3 

Creating better school libraries. 3 

Streaming in the elementary school. 3 


^Listed voluntarily on questionnaire 

Some highly significant statements made by Associ¬ 
ations were that four thought their meetings had promoted 
professional growth. Another five were able to say that 































147 

their efforts had improved board-staff relationships, while 
one Association thought principal-staff relations had been 
improved. 

Table XLIV summarizes the activities Associations 
value most highly. 

Means by which Associations might be improved . The 
last part of the investigator’s questionnaire asked presidents 
to express three ways by which their Associations might be 
improved. While all fifty-one did not offer three suggestions, 
there were, nevertheless, a good number received. 

Of some significance was the most common suggestion 
that Associations wished for board participation in meetings. 
Ten Associations voluntarily stated that direct board 
cooperation would make their organization more effective. 
Evidently principals feel that a great deal of time and 
effort could be wasted in planning and organization, if it 
turned out later that board sanction was withheld. Even 
though Associations do not appear to be clear in regard to 
membership of trustees, they still wish for board parti¬ 
cipation. 

Nine Associations thought that their work should take 
more concrete lines like planning and executing specific 
educational projects. Seven organizations thought they 
could improve by conducting in-service training activities, 









' • J ‘ . ■ • J ' ' ' ' • 




. 

t 








‘ 

- 

. 






a 


, 






• :r 













■r :■ ,, 







. ' • ) ' : '. 





- t : : ■ .■ 



■ 







/ 











■ , . 










. 












. • 






* 




t 















14S 


both for themselves and for teachers. Six thought that 
their membership needed to develop a more professional 
attitude. 

Five Associations suggested each of the following 
activities: 

a. more meeting time required 

b. an agenda planned in advance 

c. financial support for meetings 

d. better follow-up procedures, for example, testing 

e. expand the testing program. 

Four Associations recommended the following: 

a. less domination by school officials 

b. some meetings should be held on school time 

c. in-service training through work with administrative 

experts 

d. more Association work should be done in committees. 

Three different organizations favoured these changes: 

a. promote a public relations program 

b. better attendance required 

c. strict adherence to length of meeting 

d. a written constitution and rules of procedure 

e. organization of a professional library 

f. time spent on clarifying the principals 1 role 

g. developing self-evaluation instruments 

h. more stress on the social aspect. 

A number of good suggestions were made by single 
Associations. One felt that they needed better lines of 
communication. Another thought that less time should be 
spent on administrative detail. One Association believed 
that more time should be spent in curriculum construction, 
while another believed that a staff orientation program 
should be implemented. 


y 

. ;w . i.fn [■' 

l < ■■ l\ .. ■ o . 

. 


■ 

f 

, 




' • t 3 .-" 'v '. , h ; r- 

c . 


- V..,',' V 


' • i". - • v - >. 


■I r ;>. . ■ 'l ‘ : - ■ r ■ - ■ i 




, .It J: ; J • juJ 


' 


. 










. ■ 

.... • - . 

. . .... . 

. 

- 

. 








' . 




* 




, 


. 

« 

c 

























149 


It is difficult to see a common trend in the values 
which Associations have placed upon their activities. It 
must be remembered that these organizations are located in 
all parts of our vast province where large school units and 
school centralizations exist. Conditions vary, and so the 
immediate needs must vary. Some organizations are only a 
few years old, while others have been in existence for a 
good length of time. 

Associations, however, have a common goal, which is 
leadership in education. They prize their activities which 
serve to make better principals. They value testing because 
they like to know where their school stands with respect to 
their goal. They like a certain amount of uniformity for 
the security it affords to the often inexperienced princi¬ 
pals who try their best to serve the public. 

IV. THE EXPERTS EVALUATE 

As stated in the beginning of this chapter, a panel 
of experts, consisting of five educational leaders in this 
province, was asked to evaluate the aims and purposes, and 
the work of Alberta divisional Principals’ Associations. 

The men on the panel were chosen not only because they are 
in the forefront of Alberta education, but also because of 
their practical experience and knowledge of these organi¬ 
zations. 




■ • . • • > •' ■ i ' *' 

„ r ! .V' ( : k \ i 

: ( ' i < . . v 

. 

. ■' • 5 

. 


■ 




• : 


. 


- 

* 








. . ■ ; 

' c ■ ■ 

« • * ■ ■ : '' ■ ; c 








■■ 















150 

Evaluation of aims and purposes ♦ The most popular 


choice of the experts is that Associations should aim "to 
improve supervision of instruction". Apparently the panel 
would agree with the theory that the prime objective of the 
principal should be to facilitate the teaching of children 
for which the position is created. If principals form an 
Association, it should help them in their work. 

Coordination of the work of principals, however, was 
a close second in the experts* choice, two giving this aim 
the first rating. In order to work together under one 
administrative unit with some efficiency, a certain amount 
of the work has to be coordinated in order to receive 
maximum results. Principals must get together, work to¬ 
gether, and cooperate with one another. 

The experts do feel that there is a place for 
Associations as advisors of school boards. This aim ranked 
third in the five listed. Evidently the panel feels that 
principals, who are near school children and who work 
directly with teachers, could offer boards suggestions which 
would correct wants and supply pressing needs. 

The idea of Associations assisting the superintendent 
in supervision was not considered too highly as a primary 
aim. It should be made clear at this point that principals 
are normally all too willing to assist the superintendent in 
bringing forth the best instruction of which teachers are 










* 




















t 

* 

- 











- 




p 







„ 



















* 










■ 






151 


capable. One would suspect that the ever-busy super¬ 
intendent is often approached by the principal for aid in 
the supervision of his school. It is surmised that the best 
supervision of instruction today comes from a cooperative 
effort of both. The aim, as it is worded, would seem to 
suggest that Associations become a tool of the superintendent. 
This Associations should not be, nor would superintendents 
want them to be. 

Uniformity in school administration ranked last with 
the experts as an aim of Principals 1 Associations. While 
there are certain basic principles to which education 
subscribes, the idea of stark uniformity in a democratic 
society does not find favor and frequently becomes 
undesirable. Cooperation and coordination are necessary, 
but when it comes to uniformity, Associations would do well 
to hesitate. Society does demand uniformity in some respects, 
and so many uniform practices can be found in our schools. 

And yet we fear the extreme which the term connotes. 

To get the rank order for the aims as evaluated by 
the experts, the writer asked them to use the numbers one to 
five, the same as Associations had done; the number one, 
ranking high. The writer then arbitrarily assigned a value 
of five, to the first choice; four, to the second; three, to 
the third; two, to the fourth; and one, to the fifth. Using 
these number values, a rank order was obtained as described 











' 


















152 


above. Table XLV states the alms and purposes in order of 
importance as ranked by the panel of experts. It also 
repeats the choice of Associations for the purpose of 
comparison. 

The greatest difference between the aims as Associ¬ 
ations see them and the experts 1 views of how the aims 
should be emphasized is in the purpose of uniformity in 
schools. Where the panel has given uniformity in school 
administration the last place in the rank order, Associ¬ 
ations still prize this aim very highly, placing it second 
only to coordinating the work of principals. It is likely 
that in the experts 1 point of view, there should be local 
differences which should be met by flexible administration, 
even in adjoining school centres. Principals likely prefer 
uniformity because of the greater ease with which a uniform 
policy can be administered. 

Principals see the value of improving the supervision 
of instruction, but place it third, behind the aims that 
stress joint efforts. They do not like the aim of advising 
the board regarding educational policy which the experts 
have placed third, even though this study has shown that a 
significant amount of this kind of work is being done. 

It is interesting to note that the experts and 
Associations agree that assisting the superintendent in the 
supervision of instruction should have the fourth place. 


. ■ 

. 

• ', i.-n.i . 

. 

M v ::t i ' ; U* if' : >e \i ' ‘ 0 if., * f J:• . r ,: V : >W ‘i 

■ ■ • . 

* 

c 

:> i) i: . * ■,.! t 1 1 .■ ' l i • ii ■ ■ 

■ 

; ' . ' 


■: ' i ' •:>' ’ J »i' 

; • 


. 


< t 




■ 


, 












’ 


■ 





153 


Evaluation of Association work . If it is difficult 
to rate five aims and purposes of Principals t Associations, 
it is certainly a more difficult task to determine with any 
validity an order of importance in a sixteen-item list of 
the activities which Associations have carried out during 
past years. This latter is what the panel of experts was 
asked to do. Because there are so many activities that are 
extremely valuable to Alberta schools, even the experts 
tended to vary somewhat in their choice. 

TABLE ILV 

EVALUATION OF AIMS AND PURPOSES OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 

BY EDUCATIONAL EXPERTS 


Aim 

Total 

Value 

Experts’ 

Rank 

Associations’ 

Rank 

To improve supervision 

of instruction. 

. 21 

1 

3 

To coordinate the work 
of principals . 

. 19 

2 

1 

To advise the board 
regarding educational 
policy. 

. 14 

3 

5 

To assist the superintendent 
in supervision of 
instruction . 

. 11 

4 

4 

To get more uniformity in 
school administration . . 

. 10 

5 

2 


The writer again decided to assign number values to 
the sixteen different choices which could be made. The 
















./ :■' : : .• -.v r _ ;, - 






. 

■ 'r. r., .. ' . 7 , J ,l\ v : . : j. : -T ■ . . ' ■; X- . O :' r i '• ' i .7 

> e I: 

* . ■ : v . , j ' • ■ - : 7 • ' ■ • ' ■ ' ' ■ ■ ■ ' : " • 1 ■ • .i 

> ■ ’ • > 

. 

. 



■ 






. . ■ ;■ < : . . 




















■ .■ 

; . - - ■ . j ' .• ; ' '• . 

. - 













♦ 




• ' IJ ' 





154 


first rating was assigned a value of sixteen; the second, 
fifteen; the third, fourteen; and so on, with the last 
choice receiving a value of one. In this manner a number 
was received for each of the sixteen items which represents 
a total relative value placed on the item by the five-member 
panel. 

The application of this method to the panel evalu¬ 
ation revealed that the experts placed a high value on 
activities which are closely related to teachers and their 
classroom instruction. The first four items in the rank 
order consist of the cooperative supervisory program, the 
in-service training of principals, self-evaluation instru¬ 
ments, and curriculum study. The summarizing Tables XXXVIII 
and XXXIX of the work of Associations in Chapter VII reveal 
that in-service training of principals is receiving a great 
deal of attention since considering the duties and practices 
of principals and the Principals 1 Leadership Course are also 
in the first four listed there. The same cannot be reported 
in regard to cooperative supervision, although institutes 
and conventions, taken separately, can be found somewhere 
in the middle of the table. Self-evaluation procedures and 
curriculum study have also been neglected by Associations 
since the former has been a major concern of only four 
Associations and the latter of two. It may be noted that 
curriculum study also rates very highly with school boards. 


t . * u „ f ' ■ , V', :' : • pj V. • r - r ;*r j 

1 : - ’ ... : . . v' 

. 

■ ■ 

' . ' 

. 

. •- • •• • . "' • :> 

- 1 \ r ■ ■ • . t ' ’ V >: 11 ' ’ ' ■ o • ' ' - ; :s. 

- 


■ 


. . i . ■ ■■ 

* 


.... ( 




c ’ 






• 



r ■ : - ■ •: ■ ' '• . • " ' ; ’’ 

. 







155 


The next item on the panel’s rank order concerns 
studying board policy and making policy recommendations. 

The experts undoubtedly recognize that principals must 
become familiar with board policy if they are to carry out 
their wishes and also that trained and experienced men have 
contributions to make towards the shaping of board policy. 
Table XXXVIII shows that thirty-nine of the fifty-one 
Associations have done at least some work in this field. 
School boards, lowever, gave this type of work a very low 
rating, six going so far as to say that it had very little 
value. It is possible that boards feel that Principals’ 
Associations could become pressure groups. 

The following three activities in the experts’ list 
are closely related to instruction again. The values show 
a difference of one between staff projects in individual 
schools and educational projects on a divisional basis. 

These activities are closely related to the most popular 
aim, that of improving the supervision of instruction. 
Holding good staff meetings and teacher orientation programs 
is the third member of this group. Associations have 
treated these problems very lightly, only one having made a 
serious study of staff meetings and none has a carefully- 
planned orientation program. School boards rank this 
activity seventh, so they must agree that it has some merit. 

Testing for various purposes, a most widespread 





. 





■ J ,i . •. : 





c 








1 

. 





c 





* 





. 


* 



< 








■ 






156 


practice among Alberta Associations, ranks only ninth 
with the panel of experts, and only twelfth with school 
boards. It would seem that this activity rises from a 
widespread need felt by principals and teachers during a 
period when even the public is gravely concerned about the 
academic success of school children. The extensive teacher 
Tt turn-over n in Alberta could be another contributing factor. 

Both experts and trustees place about the same value 
on public relations programs. It has been stated previously 
that Associations have not been able to get into this kind 
of work in any significant manner. It is commonly recognized 
that a principal must be a good public relations man, so why 
should his Association not help in this regard? 

Studying and acquiring the use of instructional aids 
and pupil supplies follows in the panel rank-order. Only 
six Associations have done extensive work in this field. 

/ 

School board chairmen, ranking it ninth, see some value in 
this type of work. Perhaps there are boards in Alberta who 
would welcome more guidance from Associations when it comes 
to putting aids and supplies into their schools. 

While both reporting to parents and promotions have 
caused widespread concern among rural Associations, and 
school boards show enough interest in these activities to 
rank, them third, the experts gave them only twelfth place. 
Apparently the panel feels that the Department of Education 






' 

. ■ ' ■ : ■ » r . ■ 

. - ' c ■' - . . : v i ■ 

. .1 

. > 

. 

■i ' 





























. 








■ 









« 






















157 

has made available to schools a good deal of information on 
methods of reporting and has publicized provincial practices 
in promotions, so the process of adopting a divisional 
policy would not necessarily have to become a major study. 

It was reported earlier that trustees prized good 
supervision of playgrounds, buildings, and vans most highly 
and good office procedure followed with a difference of only 
one point. The experts do not agree with such an evaluation. 
There is perhaps a difference in the point of view. Where 
boards are chiefly concerned with the physical aspect of 
making a school run smoothly, the panel members are more 
concerned with the quality of instruction that the school 
is offering. The investigation would seem to bear out that 
Associations themselves have not concerned themselves too 
extensively with these problems. 

Extra-curricular activities with emphasis on sports 
rank poorly with both panel and school boards. Even 
Associations appear to be in agreement, since only seven 
have taken up the matter seriously. 

Textbook rental appears to be a trivial activity in 
which thirty-four Associations have had to spend some time. 
School boards, although anxious to implement the plan 
through their principals, do not recognize it as important 
work.of Associations. The experts would agree judging by 
the value placed on this activity. 






< t \ ■ 

,' -.y • . . J •'.* i ■ ■ ■ 



































„ 


t . 

' 

, . 

3 

. ' ' ' 

- 

. 





158 


Table XLVI shows the rank order which the panel of 
experts places on the activities of Principals 1 Associ¬ 
ations • For the sake of comparison it also indicates the 
rank given to each of the sixteen items by school board 
chairmen. Another column in the table indicates how many 
Associations have engaged in the type of work listed. 






TABLE XLVI 


159 


WORK OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS RANKED IN ORDER 
OF IMPORTANCE BY A PANEL OF EXPERTS 


Type of Work 

Value 

Rank 

Board 

Rank 

No. of, 
Assns.* 

Cooperative supervisory 
program, institutes, 
conventions, etc. 

. . 72 

1 

5 

36 

In-service training of 

principals . 

. . 68 

2 

9 

49 a 

Developing self-evaluation 
instruments. 

. . 60 

3 

15 

16 

Curriculum study . 

• • 57 

4 

4 

13 

Studying board policy and 
making policy recommenda¬ 
tions. 

. . 52 

5 

12 

39 

Promoting staff projects 

in individual schools. . . . 

. • 49 

6 

12 

30 

Promoting educational 

projects on a divisional 
basis . 


7 

5 

48 

Better staff meetings and 
teacher orientation 
programs . 


8 

7 

28 b 

Divisional testing 

programs (all) . 

. . 40 

9 

12 

45c 

Public relations program . . . 

. . 38 

10 

8 

10 

Use of instructional aids, 
pupil supplies, etc. 

. . 36 

11 

9 

36 

Promotions and reporting 

to parents . 


12 

> 

42d 

Supervision, playground, 

buildings, vans. 

. . 32 

13 

1 

27 e 

Good school office 

procedure . 


14 

2 

30f 

Extra-curricular program 
especially inter-school 
sports . 

. . 18 

15 

11 

33 

Developing a textbook rental 
plan. 


16 

16 

34 


*This refers to the number of Associations which have 






















































































t ■ : i 


. « •' ■ 

• < 


... i 




. ' • • \ 



























160 


V. SUMMARY 

The very fact that only six rural inspectorates in 
Alberta do not have Principals’ Associations attests to the 
fact that they are useful and valuable organizations which 
serve Alberta’s education. Superintendents are high in 
their praise, particularly as they see the Associations 
coordinating supervision of instruction. They are agreed 
that Associations should be encouraged, and to some degree, 
supported. Superintendents are of the opinion that these 
organizations are helping to make better principals. 

School boards strongly favor cooperative action in 
educational projects even though they differ on trustee 
membership in Associations. The president of the Alberta 


been active in the work listed. Figures are taken from 
Table XXXVIII, p. 122. 

a. Considering duties and recommended practices of 
principals only. 

b. This figure for staff meetings only. For teacher 
orientation 15 only. 

c. Figure quoted is testing for remedial instruction 

only. 

d. Figure quoted is for reporting only. Forty-one 
Associations have worked on promotion. 

e. This figure for playground and van supervision. 
Building supervision, twenty-three. 

f. Figure quoted for cumulative records only. 



. ) 

Jifn 

■ 











. 


c 





$ 












■ f 






















161 

School Trustee’s Associations would encourage board members 
to attend meetings. Trustees place a particularly high 
value on physical administrative matters, such as super¬ 
vision of grounds, buildings, and vans. They do, however, 
also highly favor Associations spending time in curriculum 
work. 

The principals themselves value their cooperative 
efforts in testing and the type of work which leads to the 
improvement of supervisory practices. They like a certain 
amount of uniformity and coordinated procedure since many 
prize their work in creating policy handbooks. 

The educational leaders serving on the evaluation 
panel feel that Associations should aim at improving the 
supervision of instruction and at coordinating their work 
in the division and in their schools. The panel indicates 
that cooperative supervisory programs, in-service training, 
self-evaluation instruments, and curriculum study are the 
most valuable types of work which Associations have done in 
the past. 


• ■ £ 


5 - ' ? ' .. t < 

. 






. 




. 


■ ■ 








. ■ 

•r;V : ■ , - ■ I: . r ■ ' i '■ ? '1. 





FOOTNOTES - CHAPTER VIII 


^Reports of superintendents to the Department of 
Education, 1957. Section: Cooperative Supervision. 

^Letter to the writer by Mr. E. Parr, President of 
the Alberta School Trustees Association, October 7, 195&- 
Permission to quote secured. 




CHAPTER IX 


CONCLUSION 

Summary . In this survey of Alberta divisional and 
county Principals' Associations it was revealed that there 
are at present fifty-one such organizations in existence. 

The majority of these Associations have been organized since 
1950, with only .'seven having a longer history. There are 
only six rural inspectorates in the fringe areas where these 
organizations have not been established. 

This investigation has indicated that the earliest 
Associations were established in the southern part of the 
province where centralization of schools was begun soon 
after the inception of school divisions. The first Associ¬ 
ation was founded in the Lethbridge School Division in 
December of 1941. The idea seems to have come from far¬ 
sighted superintendents and several principals who saw the 
value of Associations of principals to coordinate work in 
newly centralized schools. A list of names of Principals 1 
Associations and their year of organization may be found in 
Appendix A. 

The investigation has shown that aims and purposes 
having to do with coordinating work, and those which stress 
uniformity, found the greatest favor with Associations. The 
improvement of the supervision of instruction ranked next. 





164 

Although not proven, the writer has been led to believe that 
aims and purposes in many Associations are not too clearly 
defined and that many Associations may be without consti¬ 
tutions. 

Because several Associations failed to state their 
exact membership a definite total membership cannot be 
stated, but the number is in excess of eight hundred. The 
majority of the Associations accept both principals and vice¬ 
principals as members. Superintendents, in the main, are 
members and are in regular attendance. School trustees and 
secretary-treasurers do not normally become members of 
Associations. Owing to the pressure of work and the vast 
territory they cover, high school inspectors do not become 
regular members, but attend occasionally when invited to do 
so. Most of the Associations do not have membership fees. 

Chapter V in this study dealt with the mechanics and 
organization of Principals T Associations. It was shown that 
the majority of the school boards concerned assist the work 
of Associations by paying mileage, or allowing school time 
in which to meet, or paying for meals. Cost-free places in 
which to meet either in board rooms or schools, are usually 
provided. Some boards see fit to allow their Associations 
several or all of these benefits. 

It has been found that the majority of the Associ¬ 
ations meet monthly for a period of two to three hours. The 


•" . ' . c • r . : 

' 

V '■ ■ J rjf, :iJ c .[ ■ v : 

. ' ■ . 

;i i).u .[J • r!. >' ■-& J s ,'i 

. . • : ) • •: • ' . ' ' ' c •■■■' ■ 

. 

; ' • ' •• 

' ' • *; :• ">.■ 

. - : 




, ■ . .■ ■ ’■ ; • - . - 

•. . ■■ t , . 


* 


‘ ! 


i;: • um u, 

. 

• ■ . ' -.'-■■■■) ■. ' ; ' o '■ . : . V. 

. 

. : • • : ■ ,• ■ • r • • 


. 







165 

time of day varies considerably but most of them hold their 
meetings during the school week. In areas where great 
distances are involved, meetings are held less regularly 
but often for day-long sessions. A high percentage of 
attendance is reported by all Associations. 

How Principals 1 Associations work with school boards, 
superintendents, and teachers was discussed in Chapter VI. 

It was found that most Associations communicate with boards 
through their superintendents, although some organizations 
have board members present at meetings and several communi¬ 
cate directly with their boards. The superintendents were 
found to be active participants in Association work and 
termed by nearly half of the Associations as definite 
leaders. About three-quarters of the organizations credited 
their superintendents with initiating studies, petitioning 
boards on their behalf, and devising cooperative supervisory 
practices with Association help. Various means are used by 
Associations to communicate with teachers. Staff meetings, 
superintendent and school board bulletins, minutes of 
meetings circulated to schools, and occasionally A.T.A. 
meetings are used. In over sixty per cent of the divisions 
served by Associations, groups of teachers refer problems 
to the principals T groups. 

Chapter VII surveyed the work in which the rural 
Associations have been active. At the time of writing, 


i i ' - ■■ C • 1 ■' ■'-o ' •. ,5 , > ' i ■ \“i 

. 

« • • 

. 

' ! ■' > ■ • • 1: . •: •/ " > . ' f ■ ■ ’ j J • r 

' V • ( 

; , • ;■■■.■' ■ ■ < - 

■ \Lo‘ • ■ 

■ ,1 i i 

- 

, ; jo ' . ' ■' ~ ■ ■ ■ 

■ 

. 

* . o ■ : ' c 

. 

* 

. 



166 


many organizations have not made exhaustive studies of the 
various educational problems undertaken, perhaps because 
many Associations are still young in years and have had to 
give their attention to immediate needs. 

Projects to improve instruction and those which 
improve the principalship head the list of extensive works 
performed by Associations. These same matters were also 
given the most widespread attention as was shown in 
Table XXXVIII, page 122. Testing on a divisional basis 
appeared to be the most common concrete activity, preceded 
only by general studies to improve the principalship and to 
promote educational projects on a divisional basis. Testing 
could easily be a large portion of these educational 
projects. 

Important areas in which Associations have done very 
little work to date are self-evaluation, curricula, and 
public relations. 

It would seem that most individuals and groups of 
authorities concerned with school administration are 
convinced that Principals 1 Associations are valuable 
organizations which are making a notable contribution to 
Alberta education. The principals themselves value their 
Associations for the coordination they afford and for the 
potential such organizations have for making better 
principals. Superintendents agree that Associations are 


* ■ - V • 

' ■ 

‘ i ■ ■ '• ' ! 

; *xo ■ ■ . 

• 1 ; • . .■ ‘ 

■* t 

' t \ . : \ X- ' 1 • • 

. * : • < • .... • :■ . 

.. 

; . , ' . • ' 1 . . ■ 

, . 

o; • " 


* 














167 

valuable because these organizations give them an opportunity 
to work with their principals as a group. Group efforts 
bring faster, and perhaps better results than if super¬ 
intendents had to deal with principals as individuals. 

School boards as a whole are also convinced that 
Associations have administrative value, particularly in the 
operation of school plants and in studying and improving the 
curriculum. This study has shown that a significant 
percentage of the trustees favors cooperation in various 
projects between school boards and Associations. 

Chapter VIII ended with an evaluation of Association 
aims and activities by a panel of educational leaders in 
this province, who believe that the purpose of Associations 
should primarily be to improve the supervision of instruction 
and to coordinate the work of principals. These leaders 
also believe that cooperative supervisory activities, in- 
service training of principals, and self-evaluation are of 
primary importance. They also agree with school trustees 
that curriculum study and policy recommendations might be 
a valuable activity of Associations. It would seem that 
the experts believe that groups of principals have a 
contribution to make in recommending educational policy. 

Implications for further research . This study has 
gathered together some basic information about Principals 1 






168 


Associations in Alberta. The purpose of the study was to 
survey rural Associations in order to find out about their 
organization and their work. The evaluation chapter 
attempted to assess aims, purposes, and activities of 
Associations in a very broad manner. 

The writer is convinced that many more investigations 
will take place in the future dealing with more particular 
topics which affect principals or their organizations. At 
the time of this writing, for example, a study is being 
launched which will attempt to show how a certain Principals’ 
Association has served education in a particular area. 

The writer, therefore, finds it next to impossible 
to attempt a complete list of possibilities and recommenda¬ 
tions for further research on Principals’ Associations. The 
following are the ones which at present would seem most 
interesting from the investigator’s point of view. 

(a) A similar study on city Associations. 

(b) A comparison of Alberta Associations with similar 
organizations in other provinces and/or in the 
United States. 

(c) How Associations should be organized with respect 
to membership and meetings. 

(d) How Associations may best cooperate with the 
superintendent, high school inspector, and the 
school board. 


' 

' 

c ■ 

c • • t • J .i • 

. 

O ; 1 • • . , ■ i‘ f. > -J. : J ;; o ;:l : 

... t ■ ' ' . ■ " . : . • )r.: 

5 ■. f 

■ ./ ■ •./ ^ •>. (. . ' ? -V : r \- i 






••• U > .. 

o v 

i - t 
































. 








169 


(e) Supervision of instruction as a primary aim of 
Principals 1 Associations, 

(f) How Associations could serve best in the field 
of curriculum study and construction. 

(g) Public Relations as a major work or Principals 1 
Associations. 

(h) Whether Associations should be regarded as an 
administrative body together with the superin¬ 
tendent and school board, and perhaps under their 
supervision and guidance, or whether Associations 
should strive for strict independence. 

(i) Principals 1 Associations and educational policy 
construction. 

(j) How Associations should be supported and financed. 

(k) Contributions single Associations are making to 
educational growth in their areas. 

(l) Testing and remedial instruction as coordinated 
by Associations. 

(m) Relationship of Alberta Principals 1 Associations 
to the Alberta Teacher 1 s Association. 


V ! r ■ > ?j • 

. ri . I ft ' i 

' ' O ,U). ' 

, : • • r ~irf 












‘ \ • vhwc 

■ . ■ . c • • fix v 5 

v,..j . '■ : . ‘ • C. : - 

. 

4 
















r 









































APPENDIX A 


A List of Alberta Divisional and County 
Principals 1 Associations, Their Membership, 
and Their Year of Organization 








171 


MEMBERSHIP AND YEAR OF ORGANIZATION OF ALBERTA DIVISIONAL 
AND COUNTY PRINCIPALS* ASSOCIATIONS 


Associations Number of Year a 

Members 


Acadia School Division . 11 1954 

Athabasca School Division.17 1951 

Barrhead School Division . 10 1954 

Beaver, County of.15 1950 

Berry Creek and Sullivan Lake.10 1954 

Bonnyville School Division . 21 1955 

Calgary Rural School Division.—* 1946 

Camrose School Division. 33 1946 

Castor and Neutral Hills.15 1953 

Clover Bar School Division.12 1952 

Drumheller School Division . 20 1953 

Edmonton Non-divisional Districts.15 1956 

Edson School Division. 25 1955 

Fairview School Division . 1§ 1956 

Foothills School Division.13 1956 

Forty-Mile, County of.13 1943 

Grande Prairie, County of.21 1951 

High Prairie School Division . 22 1957 

Killam School Division . 22 1955 

Lac La Biche School Division.12 1955 

Lacombe School Division. 20 1954 

Lamont School Division . 12 1952 

Lethbridge School Division . 25 1941 

Leduc School Division. 20 1951 

Macleod School Division. 20 1953 

Newell, County of. ..IS 1945 

Olds School Division.16 1954 

Peace River School Division. ....... 19 1954 

Ponoka, County of.—* 1953 

Provost School Division.11 1955 

Rocky Mountain School Division.10 1954 

Red Deer School Division.16 1954 

Smoky Lake School Division.14 1956 

Spirit River School Division . 12 1956 

St. Mary’s School Division. 20 1943 

St. Paul School Division. 20 1950 

Stettler, County of.14 1954 

Stony Plain School Division.13 1956 


















































• • ; 


’ 

v ' ’ 














' 

: u • i 6 '; v ' 

' 

- . , . ' s 

" .0-; ;, .00, 



* - . . O br.K\ ; 

■> • '* . * • ! ; 

. - '• ■ Oi '• r : : .too ;0; ; 

.■ * * o ■o. v;3 . ioo> ' loo 

‘ * •' ■' 

O<\0; ;\'0 O.LvOt V 7 : ; •;■ • ■ 7 ■ 

. - - . ■ ,' i : ., . o^ 07 " 

, 1 

. ■ 
l 

o' 

r ■ , 

. 

. 

- , ■. '.to i 5 t li J3o 603 
















MEMBERSHIP AND YEAR OF ORGANIZATION (continued) 


Associations Number of Year a 

Members 


Sturgeon Lake School Division. 25 1951 

Taber School Division. 21 1947 

Thorhild, County of. 9 1957 

Three Hills School Division. 18 1955 

Two Hills School Division. 12 1955 

Vegreville School Division . 16 1953 

Vermillion School Division . 1& 1956 

Vulcan, County of. 14 1951 

Wainwright School Division . 20 1956 

Warner, County of. 15 1954 

Westlock School Division.—* -* 

Wetaskiwin, County of. 12 1954 

Wheatlands School Division . 16 1954 


^Figures Unavailable 
a Year of Organization 








































.. .» v 










" ’ 

. • 




* 


$ 










, 







- 



' :■ ' / ■ ' 








t 

i 


: 

. . 







C 

< 

:■ 


.. Tl 








• , ' 


















































APPENDIX B 


Questionnaire to Principals’ Associations 







QUESTIONNAIRE RE: PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS 


174 


I. GENERAL 

1. Name of your Association _ 

2. Date of Organization _ 

If not available, age of Association in years _ 

3. Originating Officers (Please name): 

(a) - President_ 

(b) - Secretary-Treasurer _ 

(c) - Superintendent _ 

II. AIMS AND PURPOSES 

1. Need felt for a Principals’ Association (mark as 
many as apply in order of Importance). Use numbers 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 

_ (a) To improve supervision of instruction 

_ (b) To coordinate the work of Principals. 

_ (c) To get more uniformity in school 

administration. 

_(d) To advise the Board regarding educational 

policy. 

_ (e) To assist the Superintendent in super¬ 
vision of instruction. 

2. Others, (If aims and purposes are stated in 

Constitution, please quote): 


III. MEETINGS 

1. Frequency 

_ (a) Monthly 

_ (b) Bi-monthly 

_ (c) Weekly 

(d) Irregularly, _ times a school year. 

(Please state). 





























III. MEETINGS (cont'd) 


175 


2. Day and Time of Meetings: 

(a) Saturday a.m._ 

p.m._ 

(b) Weekday a.m._ 

p.m._ 


Please State: 


Time 

Time 

Time 

Time 


(c) Varies, set at previous meeting but always held 


(1) - on Saturday_ 


State time 


(2) - on a Weekday 
3. Length of Meeting: 

_ 1 hour 

___ 2 % hours 


State time 


2 hours 

3 hours 


Varies (Please elaborate) 


4. Place of Meeting 

Board Office 


Different School 
centres (Chosen 
in rotation, etc. 


School Centre 

Others (Please 
state) 


5. Transportation to Meetings 
(a) Expense 

_ (1) Members pay own 

_ (2) Board pays mileage 

__ (3) Share expense 

_ (4) Other arrangements (Please specify). 





























» 

" 

* v' 

; 


... ' . 

; . ' : . ; . : 

x 

; . < 5- ■ 


















III. MEETINGS (cont’d) 


176 


5. Transportation to Meetings (cont’d) 

(b) Distance travelled to Meetings (one way). 

Please estimate the Percentage 

0-5 miles (Percentage of members) _ 


6 - 

10 miles 

ft 

tt 

tt 

11 - 

15 miles 

Tt 

tt 

tt 

16 - 

20 miles 

TT 

tt 

tt 

21 - 

30 miles 

tf 

tt 

tt 

31 - 

40 miles 

Tt 

tt 

tt 

41 - 

50 miles 

tt 

tt 

tt 

51 - 

60 miles 

tt 

tt 

tt 

Over 

60 miles 

tt 

tt 

tt 

Attendance 

(a) Attendance at 

meetings 

is: 

(Use Check marks) 


_ (1) Compulsory 

_ (2) Voluntary 

___ (3) Voluntary, but members feel 

compulsion. 

(b) Average Attendance: 

_ 100$ _ 90-100$ _30-90$ 

_ 70-30$ _ 60-70$ _Below 60$ 

IV. MEMBERSHIP - Use Checkmarks 

1. _ Principals Only 

_ Principals and Vice Principals 

2. The Superintendent is: 

_ A regular member 

_ An honorary member 

_ No member, but attends 

Attends on invitation only 

































■ 

' ■' 

. ' • '• V\ 

. - • ' \ . 

l ^.. ; 

* 



















• - ; 

' 











- 












J: 


. 

. - 










- 



* 


■ ■ ' ' t ‘ 










177 


IV. MEMBERS HIP (cont'd) 

3. Board or School Committee Members 

_ May become regular members 

_ Are honorary members 

_ Are not Members but: 

(a) _ May attend if they desire 

(b) _ Are invited to attend but do not 

(c) _ Attend if invited 

(d) _ Never attend 

4. The Secretary-Treasurer of Division or County is: 

(a) A regular member 
_ (b) An honorary member 

_ (c) No member, but attends on behalf of the 

board 

_ (d) Attends upon invitation 

_ (e) Never attends 

5. The High School Inspector is: 

__ (a) A regular member 

_ (b) An honorary member 

_ (c) No member but attends upon invitation 

___ (d) Never attends 

6. Fees: 

(a) Collected: 

_ (1) Annually 

____ (2) Semi-Annually 
__ (3) Every meeting 

Please state amount of annual fee _ 

(b) _ Association does not have fees. 
























„ 

■ ■ ' bi v 












~ 



■ 







* 




■ 



















IV. MEMBERSHIP (cont’d) 


176 


7. Officers: (Please check those which apply:) 

_ President _ Honorary President 

_ Vice-President _ Secretary 

_ Treasurer _ Secretary-Treasurer 

_ Heads of Standing Committees: 

Please list Committees: 


Other Officers - Please state: 


3. Please state the total membership in your 
Association _ 

9• Officers are elected for: (Check) 

_ (a) One year terms 

__ (b) Two year terms 

__ (c) Other (please state) 

10. Election of Officers takes place in _ 

(Please state month) 

V. RELATIONSHIP TO SCHOOL BOARDS 

1. Does your Association: (Check where applicable) 

__ (a) Work together with school boards in 

meetings? 

(b) Make direct recommendations to the Board? 

_ (c) Make recommendations to the school Board 

through the Superintendent? 

2. Does the Board: 

___ (a) provide financial assistance for approved 
projects? 

__ (b) give Stenographic help in approved 

projects? 

_ (c) sit in committee with Association members 

on approved projects? 

_ (d) provide a meeting place for the Association? 
























■ 







» 

* 


, 

> 

* 

. 













V. RELATIONSHIP TO SCHOOL BOARDS (cont’d) 


179 


2. Does the Board: (cont’d) 

_ (e) provide school time in which to meet? 

_ (f) pay mileage to Principals in Attendance? 

If yes, state amount _ 

_ (g) Sponsor a dinner meeting? If so, how often? 

1. Regularly __ 

2. Alternately with members _ 

3. Occasionally _ 

4. Other arrangements, please state: 

3* Other Board-Association Relationships—please 
elaborate: 

VI. RELATIONSHIP TO SUPERINTENDENT 
Check those which apply: 

1. Does your Superintendent: 

__ (a) Attend all meetings 

___ (b) Attend most meetings 

_ (c) Attend occasionally 

___ (d) Attend when invited only 

2. Is your Superintendent: 

_ (a) a definite leader in your Association 

] (b) an active member 
_ (c) an advisor only 

_ (d) a participant only when called upon 

3. Does your Superintendent 

(a) Initiate studies 




























, 

■ 








l 

* 




' . . . " ' 


J 






. 


■ 






- 





■ 

. 




































VI. RELATIONSHIP TO SUPERINTENDENT (cont’d) 


180 


3. Does your Superintendent: (cont’d) 

_ (b) Ask Association for help in supervisory 

or administrative matters. 

_ (c) Petition the Board on your behalf 

4. In what other way does your Superintendent work 
with your Association? Please state: 


VII. RELATIONSHIP WITH TEACHERS AND TEACHER'S ASSOCIATIONS 

1. Do your Association members Report activities of 
Association at: (check those which apply): 

_ (a) Staff meetings 

__ (b) at local or sub-local A.T.A. 

_ (c) Both (a) & (b) 

_ (d^ Through Superintendent’s bulletins 

_ (e) Through School Board bulletins 

_ (f) Other methods (please state) 

2. In your opinion do teachers co-operate in 
Association projects: 

_ (a) with willingness and great interest 

___ (b) because they see the educative values 
in the projects undertaken 

_ (c) because they feel they are expected to. 

(d) Other reasons (Please specify): 
















: . ■ V 


■ 

. V- ' 






* , ' • . ' ■ 








v ! 

•‘CO ' I < 








•• 

. ' . 


■ . 






: .. • ’ c \ ' i 
















' 


■ 







131 

VII. RELATIONSHIP WITH TEACHERS AND TEACHER 1 S ASSOCIATIONS 


3. Do groups of teachers make recommendations to the 
Association? If so, are they made through: 

Please circle 

Check those which apply: 

Yes No 

_ (a) staffs of individual schools 

_ (b) Elementary teachers 

_ (c) Teachers of certain subjects in 

Jr. High School 

_ (d) Teachers of certain subjects in 

Sr. High School 

_ (e) A.T.A. sub-locals or local 

_ (f) Others, please specify: 


4. Does your Association cooperate in certain 
projects with A.T.A.? (please circle) Yes No 

5. Is there any active liaison between your 

Association and the A.T.A.? Yes No 

VIII. THE WORK OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS 

Please place a check mark beside the projects or 

activities in which your Association has done some 

work, and place an (X) beside those in which your 

Association has done a great deal of work. 

_ 1. Considering the duties and recommended 

practices of Principals 

_ 2. Studying ways and means of holding staff 

meetings 

_ 3. Promoting educational projects on a 

divisional basis 

_ 4* Considering means of promoting, initiating 

and completing staff projects in individual 
schools. 

_ 5. Developing promotion policies for the 

school system. 

_ 6. Studying and implementing a text book 

rental plan. 

_ 7. Studying and developing teacher orientation 

programs. 

3. Developing better ways of reporting to 

parents through better report cards, and/or 
parent teacher interviews. 

9. Giving consideration to the findings of the 
Principals’ Leadership Course. 

10. Developing a divisional handbook, setting 
forth policies, practices and regulations 
governing the operation of the school system. 





























. ■ J • o:j 


■ > : ■ 

t ■ • 

o'A 


: 

• 


;.i • v.; • ;« ■ . -■> - v.. i. w . . . 

i - » • 

: >: . • • - * ....... 

■ 

I 


. 






. 

c 


i ; •. ' 0 - j • • •: ‘ .v o = • V ! 

' 

■■j::: .; 'v. r = : /, ■'< : ■-! ' 

. 

. 

- 

. 

„ 


, 










VIII. THE WORK OF PRINCIPALS 1 ASSOCIATIONS (cont'd) 


182 


11. Developing a cooperative supervisory program 
for the division or county as a whole. 

12. Studying and promoting the development of 
evaluation instruments for the purpose of self- 
evaluation on the part of staff members to 
measure the effectiveness of instructional 
practices in various subjects. 

13. Setting up a testing program for the purpose of 
remedial instruction in: 

Reading Div I _ 

Language Div I _ 

Arithmetic Div I _ 

High School English 
Science 

14. Setting up a testing program to be administered 
for the purpose of guiding teachers in promotions 
or for comparisons at the end of the year 

_(a) In the elementary school subjects 

_(b) In the Junior High School subjects 

_ (c) In the High School (Please check 

subjects): 

Math 10_ Math 20 _ 

Science 10_ Science 20 _ 

Lang. 10 _ Lang. 20 _ 

Lit. 10 _ Lit. 20 _ 

S.S. 10 _ S.S. 20 _ 

Others (please specify)- 


. Setting up a testing program for instructional 
guidance in: 

_ (a) Grade IX 

__ (b) Grade XII 


Div II_ Div III 

Div II__ Div III 

Div II_ Div III 

_ Mathematics 


15 






























'■ ' ■ .... . v / ! . % .. : - 

■ ; , • 

r 

.. . 

- »'*• .. j 

' 

' ; > ‘ , v ■ ■ ■ \- ' . : Vt - , ■ . o JJ" ■ / 


.i JO V". > •, X ■ ■■ 


. 


* 






183 


VIII. THE WORK OF THE PRINCIPALS' ASSOCIATIONS (cont’d) 

_16. Setting up a testing program to determine 

M.A. and/or I.Q. 

_17* Giving consideration and making recom¬ 
mendations regarding instructional aids 
and materials, e.g., audio-visual aids, 
maps, science labs, pupil supplies, etc. 

_1&. Planning and promoting teachers 1 institutes, 

conventions, etc. 

_19* Studying curricula and making recommenda¬ 
tions, preparing outlines, etc. 

_20. Studying board policy and making policy 

recommendations to the Board. 

_21. Setting up an inter-school sports program, 

e.g., track meets, basketball, hockey and 
soccer leagues etc. 

_22. Studying disciplinary problems, setting up 

a "laggard student” policy, etc. 

_23. Studying and/or developing policies in 

supervision of: 

_ (a) Playground 

_ (b) School plant 

_ (c) School van 

__24. Setting up a Public Relations Program. 

__25. Studying and implementing good office 

procedure 

_ (a) cumulative records 

_ (b) filing system 

_ (c) Pupil Attendance 

_ (d) Others (Please specify): 


26. Other activities—Please List: 






















1&4 


IX. VALUE OF PRINCIPALS* ASSOCIATIONS 

1. What do you think are the three most valuable 

activities which your Association has undertaken 
or is undertaking? 

Please list: 

1 . 


2 . 


3. 


2* How might the work of your Principals 1 Associ¬ 
ation be improved? Please list: 

1 . 


2 . 


3 





' 

■ 












Noble Central School, 
Nobleford, Alberta. 

May 26, 1956. 


165 


Dear Superintendent: 

Enclosed you will find a questionnaire about the 
organization and operation of your Principals’ Association. 

I hope to be able to use the information asked for, in 
writing my thesis this summer. 

I have been given permission by Chief Superintendent 
Byrne to send it to you and ask you whether you would 
forward it to the President of your Association, for filling 
out. 


It is most urgent that I receive the completed 
questionnaires before the end of June, because, without 
them, I will not be able to proceed. Dr. Byrne has 
expressed an interest in my work, and it would indeed be 
gratifying if you could spare the time to use your influence 
in seeing that the questionnaires are returned to me as 
soon as possible. 

If you should find it difficult to contact your 
Association President perhaps you would like to answer the 
questions yourself? 

If you should think the information useful, I shall 
be pleased to send you a summary after it has been compiled. 

Yours sincerely, 


(Signed) Henry Toews 
H. Toews 









, ! - 


' 






1 











APPENDIX C 


Questionnaire to Chairmen of School Boards 







QUESTIONNAIRE TO CHAIRMEN OF SCHOOL BOARDS 
AND SCHOOL COMMITTEES 

RE: PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 


1S7 


Please answer the questions below by placing a check¬ 
mark in the column to the right wherever it applies. 


1. In Your Opinion Should Principals’ Associations: 


Always Some- Never 

_ times _ 


1. Allow trustees to 
become members? 


2. Cooperate with 
trustees in edu¬ 
cational projects? 

3. Cooperate with the 
Alberta Teachers’ 
Association in edu¬ 
cational projects? 

4* Have the superin¬ 
tendent attend 
meetings? 

5. Meet in school time? 

6. Members get mileage 
from the School 
Board for attendance 
at Meetings? 

7. Get a cost-free place 
in which to meet? 

. Get free steno¬ 
graphic help from 
the School Board when 
needed? 


8 
















' 

. 



it 











■ > 


I, 









I 


f 

? 

t 


1 I 

r f 


? f; 

; f 



: 

I 


? ? 


















f r f 

I 

f 

f 

! 

I ? 

f r 

$ 

t 

■ 



f ? 

? 



. 

’ ; , • . ' 

' 

. 


l/.n> 










las 

Below is a list of the work some Principals* Associ¬ 
ations in Alberta Divisions and Counties have been doing. 
Please rate the value of this work to school boards, and to 
educational growth in your area by placing a check mark 
opposite each statement in the appropriate column. 

Very Of 

Valu- Valu- Little Of no 

able able Value Value 


1. Fostering in-service 
training of principals 

2. Studying board policy, and 
making policy recommenda¬ 
tions to the board. 


3* Planning for the acquisition 
and use of instructional 
aids, pupil supplies etc., 
on a divisional basis 


4. Planning and promoting 
educational projects on a 
divisional basis 


5. Considering means of promo¬ 
ting, initiating and 
completing staff projects 
in individual schools 


6. Studying ways and means of 
holding staff meetings and 
teacher orientation programs 

7. Developing a cooperative 
supervisory program including 
teachers* institutes, 
convention programs, etc. 

&. Developing and promoting 
curriculum study with 
groups of teachers 

9. Developing evaluation instru¬ 
ments for self-evaluation 
of teachers especially with 
respect to effective instruc¬ 
tional practice 





















. 1 ? : '■' i • ' , ■> 

* 


' . . , - :■ ' 


t ' ' : ; c 

, 

- ' . 


' 












. 








■ 


• . : ,?ti. --.no • ir. ‘ TViTi;* 

. 






«» 




•• ■. • Jr' J-J ; • * - 




. ' ; ■ ■ ’ ; - ' '.h: ' 

’ • J: 

■ 


’ 


. - ; /■; 

. 


' I ... ‘ . 

' 1 ■ • • • 




















189 


Very Of 

Valu- Valu- Little Of no 

able able Value Value 


10. Testing on a divisional 
basis for the purpose 
of remedial instruction, 
promotion, and determin¬ 
ing I.Q. 

11. Developing an effective 
method of reporting to 
parents and implementing 
a promotion policy 

12. Setting up a textbook 
rental plan 

13. Developing and promoting 

a public relations 

program 

14. Developing a good extra¬ 
curricular program on a 
divisional or county basis 
—particularly inter¬ 
school sports 

15. Studying and developing 
effective supervision of 
playground, school 
buildings and school vans 

16. Implementing good office 
procedure especially with 
regard to pupil records, 
filing systems, pupil 
attendance, etc. 






















APPENDIX D 


Experts’ Evaluation Form 











191 

EVALUATION OF PRINCIPALS’ ASSOCIATIONS 
BY EDUCATIONAL AUTHORITIES 

I* Aims and Purposes 

Stated below you will find five possible aims and 
purposes of Principals’ Association. Please rate them in 
order of importance using the number scale 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
(1—high). 


_(a) To improve supervision of instruction. 

_(b) To coordinate the work of principals. 

_(c) To get more uniformity in school admini¬ 
stration. 

_(d) To advise the board regarding educational 

policy. 

_(e) To assist the superintendent in supervision 

of instruction. 

If you feel that important aims have been omitted, 
please add them. 


II. Work of Associations 

The list that follows is a summary of the work that 
our fifty-one Associations have engaged in during past years. 
Please rate them by numbering them in order of importance 
(use numbers 1 to 16, 1—high). 

_(a) Fostering in-service training of principals. 

_(b) Studying board policy, and making policy 

recommendations to the board. 

















. 

- ' ■ t ; < r 


) ; 

l . 













> 






„ 



• 









' 



1 ' ' . ’ . ■ J 


. 










••c; ) 


O ' • •• r ;• : V . - T( : . ■ 

. : ■ : x .'-‘Av • :: n ■■ . -i j •; ».t‘r. j ( ■ { )_ 




■ t 




, ■ •• ■ :• • 



' 














192 

(c) Planning for the acquisition and use of instru¬ 
ctional aids, pupil supplies etc., on a divisional 
basis. 

(d) Planning and promoting educational projects on a 
divisional basis. 

(e) Considering means of promoting, initiating, and 
completing staff projects in individual schools. 

(f) Studying ways and means of holding staff meetings 
and teacher-orientation programs. 

(g) Developing and promoting curriculum study with 
groups of teachers. 

(h) Developing a cooperative supervisory program 
including teachers institutes, convention 
programs, etc. 

(i) Developing evaluation instruments for self- 
evaluation of teachers especially with respect 
to effective instructional practice. 

(j) Testing on a divisional basis for the purpose of 
remedial instruction, promotion, and determining 

I.Q. 


(k) Developing an effective method of reporting to 
parents and implementing a promotion policy. 

(l) Setting up a textbook rental plan. 

(m) Developing and promoting a Public Relations 
program. 

(n) Developing a good extra-curricular program on a 
divisional or county basis—particularly in inter¬ 
school sports. 

(o) Studying and developing effective supervision 
of playground, school buildings and school vans. 

(p) Implementing good office procedure especially 
with regard to pupil records, filing systems, 
pupil attendance, etc. 






















BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Calgary Principals’ Association, "An Historical Review 
of The Calgary Principals’ Association", Calgary, 

May, 1942. 

Hencley, S.P., "The Alberta Divisional and County School 
Superintendent", unpublished Master’s Thesis, The 
University of Alberta, 1953- 

Minute Books of Principals’ Associations: 

1. Calgary Rural 

2. Foremost School Division 

3. Lethbridge School Division 
4- Taber School Division 

Personal Letters to the Writer from: 

1. Mr. F.M. Riddle, Superintendent, East Smoky 

and Grande Prairie Inspectorate, August 11, 1953. 

2. Mr. E. Parr, President, Alberta School Trustees 
Association, October 7, 1953. 

Province of Alberta, Department of Education: 

1. Annual Reports, 1943, 1949, 1953, 1955, 1956 

2. Promotion Policies Report , 1957 . p. 43. 

Superintendents’ Reports to the Department of Education, 
Edmonton, Alberta, 1957- 















c 







t 


c 

c 



* 




e 


5 







c 














































