
3416195 8 


For Reference 


not to be taken from this room 



Glebe. William V. 

Symbolism in Thomas 
TT Doktor Faustus"- 


Mann T s 






























































©X iUBBW 

wjbskmis 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/symbolisminthomaOOgleb 


TMimnSlTT OF ALBERTA 
FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE; . 
DEPARTOTYT OF MODERN LANGUAGES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have read 
and recomend to the SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES for 
acceptance, a thesis entitled 

-SYMBOLISM IN THOMAS MANN’S "DOKTOR FAUBTUS 5 *- 

submitted by William Y. Glebe, B.A., in partial ful¬ 
filment of the requirements for the degree of Master 
of Arts* 


PROFESSOR. 

PROFESSOR. 


Date 


PROFESSORS 











UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


-SYMBOLISM IN'THOMAS MANN’S *DOKTOR FAUST r US w - 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED “TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIRMIENTS FOR THE DEGREE 

OF 

MASTER OF ARTS 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND 


by 


UILLIAM V. GLEBE, B„A* 


EDMONTON, 


APRIL, 


ALBERTA, 

I960. 








ThesiS 

i<5SO 




ONTENTS 


Page 

INTRODUCTION 1. 

PART ONE: Symbolism affecting Adrian Leverktllm. , 5. 

PART TOO: Symbolism affecting Germany and its 

people. 114. 

PART TERSE: A wider symbolism. 149. 

CONCLUSION 160. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 163. 





-1- 


INTRODUC TI PIT 

No one who has read the fictional works of Thomas 
I.Iann can have missed the presence of an irony which is so 
much part of their author’s make-up. Such an ironic tem¬ 
perament was. bound to influence his writings on the whole. 


i. Where a footnote contains the abbreviation W DF", 

it refers to the Bemann-Fischer Verlag, Stockholm, 
1948 edition of Thomas Mann’s "DOKTOR FAUSTUS, Das 
Leben des deutschen Tonsetzers Adrian Leverktlhn, 
erz&hlt von einen Freunde”. 

ii. Where a footnote number is enclosed in double 

brackets - ( ) -, it indicates that the reference 
is given by the author of a quotation, 

iii. Where a footnote states "See p. -”, the reference 
is to the page number of the thesis. 


ously to them by means of a highly intricate sys¬ 
tem of subtly developed associations...The func 
ion is always synthetic: one by one the antithe 
ical symbols are identified with each other and 
finally fused into the single, nuclear, paradox¬ 
ical meaning which Mann wishes to emphasize." 1) 

I think one can safely say, that Mann has reached an all- 

time high in the use of this technique to establish the 

symbolism of his latest work, the D02CT0R FAUSTNS. 


1) Vernon Venable, "Death in Venice”,1938, in TEE STATURE 
OF THOMAS MANN (a critical anthology), editeajjfc. BEIDER, 
New York, New Directions, 1947, p. 131. 


cb cb 















-1- 


INTRODUC IT Oil 


No one who has read the fictional works of Thomas 
Mann can have missed the presence of an irony which is so 
much part of their auilbor’s make-up* Such an ironic tem¬ 
perament was. bound to influence his writings on the whole, 
and in particular his symbolism, in the use of which, per¬ 
haps, no other contemporary author has equalled him* Ver¬ 
non Venable in discussing the symbolism of DBS TOD IN 
VSNSDIG writes: 


M «..it is to this insatiable ironic temper, I 
believe, that we may ascribe chief responsibility 
for the newness of Mann’s symbolism* In the pro¬ 
cess of trying to achieve the symbolic ident¬ 
ification which his irony demands, he has created 
a new technique for the exploitation of poetic 
meaning, a technique in which no synbol is allow¬ 
ed univocal connotation or independent status, 
but refers to all the others and is bound rigor¬ 
ously to them by means of a highly intricate sys¬ 
tem of subtly developed associations.The funct¬ 
ion is always synthetic: one by one the antithet¬ 
ical symbols are identified with each other and 
finally fused into the single, nuclear, paradox¬ 
ical meaning which Mann wishes to emphasize*” 1) 

I think one can safely say, that Mann has reached an all- 

time high in the use of this technique to establish the 

symbolism of his latest work, the DOICTOE FATJST03# 

1) Vernon Venable, "Death in Venice”,1938, in TEE STATURE 
OF THOMAS MANN (a critical anthology), editedjjb. NEIDER, 
New York, New Directions, 1947, p. 131* 
























■ 1 
























-2- 


As Goethe’s "Faust" was an epic of humanity, so 
we can recognize in the works of Thomas Mann the symbolic 
representation, the filming of an epic. Hence it is by no 
means accidental that his latest novel should bear the 
title DOKTOR FAUSTUS. 

The symbolism of DOKTOR FATJSTUS falls, I believe, 
into three categories: 

!• Symbblism which bears directly on the life and fate of 
Adrian Leverktthn, and which is employed to further the 
technical progress and the dramatic qualities of the tale. 

2. Symbolism which draws a parallel or constitutes the 
correspondence between the life and fate of Adrian Lever- 
kQhn and the German nation and its people. 

3. A wider symbolism, universal in its scope, with Western 
civilization, if not humanity itself as its subject. 

Now it is proposed to treat the symbolism of 
DOKTOR FAUSTUS with these three divisions as a fundamental 
guide. If we recall, however, the remarks of Yernon Fen- 
able quoted above, it will be clear that these three aspects 
cannot be treated with clearly defined limits. Rather there 
w’ill "be a constant interrelation, each bearing upoh the 
other and each unmistakably a part of the whole framework 
of the novel and its intentions. 


Philo M. Black, writing of Thomas Mann’s DER 




• r . < 

* 

































* 








« 

t 












* 


t c 

























t 




-3- 

ZflOTEHBIiKG and Goethe’s FAUST states: 

”.The ’Magic Mountain’ is Goethe’s ’Faust’ in re¬ 
verse. For as the theme of the great dramatic 
poem is the gradual regeneration of mankind 
through the wise use of e:sperience, the theme of 
this novel is the allegory of human disintegra¬ 
tion through the simulacrum of experience until 
will becomes atrophied and reality is lost in a 
V'alpurgis Night of kaleidoscopic illusion.” 1} 

Thomas Mann himself, in speaking of the ’’Joseph” novels, 

states that in writing them he was drawn again and again to 

Goethe’s FAUST, to 

"...this life’s work and linguistic monument... 
this enormous mixture of magic opera and man¬ 
kind’s- tragedy, of puppet-show and cosmic poem... 
Faust is a symbol of humanity, and to become 
something like that, in my hands, was the clande¬ 
stine tendency of the ’Joseph’ story.” 2) 


Now, risky as it must have seemed to Mann, he 
himself has dared to write a ’’Faust” tale. It was inevit¬ 
able. Between the writing of DEB 2AUBEHBEBG and the writ¬ 
ing of DOKTOB FAUSTU3, Thomas Mann had seen the catastrophe 
of the German nation (perhaps of "western civilization, who 
knows?) building up to a climax. In DOICTOR FAUSTU3 the cli¬ 
max is reached and the complete breakdown follows. It was 
no use—for Mann’s ”Faustus” there could be no salvation 
such as we see in Goethe’s poem. Accordingly he has writ¬ 
ten not a FAUST but a DONTOR FAUSTUS (the title itself the 


1 ) 

2 ) 


Philo M. Black, "The promise and Blessing”, in TECS STAT¬ 
URE OF THOMAS MANN (a critical anthology) edited^C. 
ITeider, New York, New Directions, 1947, p.405. 


Thomas Mann, ”The Joseph Story”, ibid. 1), p. 226. 

























C 

* 






















symbol for the life of the German composer Adrian Lever- 
ktlhn), thus indicating that his protagonist is to have 
greater affinity with the Faustus of the old chap book 
than with Goethe’s Faust. Therein too, do we see the ulti¬ 
mate destiny of Adrian Leverktthn before we even begin with 
the reading of the chronicle of his life. 




t 



-5- 


PART ONE 

SYMBOLISM AFFECTING ADRIAN LOTFREXOiBN 


As in all Mann ? s previous novels or novellas his 
protagonist is an artist. Adrian LeverktLhn is a musical 
genius whose inherent talents are early manifested. More¬ 
over, the daemonic qualities which Mann associates with the 
genial artist who stands outside the pale, apart from the 
normal...the "Blonden und BlauSugigen", are symbolically 
suggested at an early stage. Speaking of "Genius* Serenus 
Zeitblom (in many aspects the personified symbol of Thomas 
Mann) the narrator and chronicler of LeverktLhn 1 2 3 s life, says: 

* Und doch ist nicht zu leugnen...dass an dieser 
strahlenden SpilKee das DSmonische und Widerver- 
nflnftige einen beunruhigenden Anteil hat, dass 
inner eine leises Grauen erweckende Verbindung 
besteht zwischen ihr und dem unteren Reich..." 2) 

This introduces the "Faustian* theme—the connection between 

"genius* and the nether world. 

* Sensibility and tenacity—Mann considers this 
blend the particular vitality of the genius. This 
tenacity 1 has a purely spiritual origin without 
any connection with physical vigour and tough¬ 
ness." 3) 


1) See Thomas Mann's TONIO KROEGER, last paragraph. 

2) See DF. p. 11. 

3) Berthold Biermann, "Thomas Mann and Goethe", in TEE 

STATURE OF ‘THOMAS ICANN (a critical anthology), edited*fc. 
Neider, New York, New Directions, 1947, p. 243. A 







-6- 


Thus Adrian 1 s "inherited migraine" sets him apart at once; 
it puts him in the category of the "ill", the physically 

deficient—one of the "badges" of most of Mann’s heros. 

* 

Adrian Leverktlhn was bom in blossom-time, in the 
most beautiful, most colourful time of the year; the time 
of renewal of life, of new vigour and promise, of new hope 
for the future* Strange, ironic symbol of things to cornel 
Moreover, he was born ” im oberen Stock" of the Buchel 
house; this too, bespeaks his destiny in the realms above 
"ground floor level" as it were* Not that it is unusual to 
be bom in the upper storey of a house* But Mann would not 
have needed to tell us this if he had not meant it to have 
special significance* 

His early childhood was spent in the shadow of a 
nighty old linden tree standing in the middle of the court¬ 
yard* This old linden, symbol of the past history of the 
area in which Buchel lay, and of the Reformation, was, in 
fact, ever to throw its shadow over Adrian’s life. As it 
shaded him in childhood, so it hung symbolically over his 
whole life; indeed, it was on the bench under this same 
old linden that he was destined to spend the fateful years 
of his insanity, once again as a child, with his mother* 

Is Zeitblom tells us: ”•*• sah den teueren Mann wieder 

1 ) 

im lahre 1935... Die Linde blUhte, er sass darunter.." 


1) See EF. p. 771 







' o 




\ 


« 


"”!• 



e 


. 

'■ 





- 7 - 


Nearby was a little pond called the "Kuhmulde", 

a favourite haunt of Adrian and Serenus as children, the 

water of which was unusually cold, so that they could bathe 

in it only after the sun had lain on it for some time. 

Here already is the "cold" motif which is to dominate Lever- 

1 ) 

ktthn’s life: "Urn ihn war K 8 1 t e". 


On a little hill dubbed the "Zionsberg" Adrian 

and Serenus were to have many serious discussions. The 

biblical connotation is obvious, and it was on the "Zions- 

berg 11 that Adrian, many years later, explained to Zeitblom 

2 ) 

his "twelve-note system" for music—that symbolic parody 
of the twelve disciples who acted according to the dictates 
of their Master* Indeed, this parody is carried much far¬ 
ther toward the end of the novel. Speaking of the change 
in Adrian’s appearance prior to his mental breakdown, Zeit¬ 
blom says: 

Die Verfremdung, die diese partielle Bedeckung 
der Zttge bewirkte, nahm man in den Kauf, weil der 
Bart es war, der, wohl zusammen xnit einer.wachs- 
enden Neigung, den ICopf zur Schulter geneigt zu 
tragen, dem Antlitz etwas Vergeistigt-Leidendes, 

Ja Christushaftes verlieh". 3) 

Finally, one sees in the episode of Adrian calling together 

his friends for his confession a aymbolic parody of the 

"Last Supper" of Christ. 


1) See DF. p. 14. 

2) See DF. p* 301 f. 

3) See D3* p. 733. 






t 

' 








> i; ^ 

. 

' 








— 8 — 


One can hardly overlook the fact that Adrian as 

a hoy had his first taste of music as such, from Hanne, the 

"cow-girl" at Buchel, whose bosoms flapped and whose feet 

were always crusted with dung: 

"•••dieses tierisch duftende GeschOpf...sang uns, 
zwar mit plSrrender Stimme..•allerlei Yolks-, 
Soldaten-und auch Gassenlieder, meist Gefffitils- 
streifenden Oder grausigen Charakters vor.." 1) 

It might be said quite literally that Adrian f s music had its 

origin "in the gutter"—the cow-stable gutter. Indeed,the 

precocious child seems to have been aware of this, for he 

would laugh his diabolic laugh: 

" Wenn ich aber an jenes Auflachen Adrians zurttek- 
denke, finde ich, dass es etwas von Wissen und 
moquanter Singeweihtheit hatte. Ss ist ihm immer 
geblieben.•.Darnals passte es noch gar nicht zu 
seinen Jahren, war aber schon ganz dasselbe wie 
bei dem Srwachsen&n. Ss war ein leises Ausstossen 
der Luft durch Mund und Hase bei gleichzeitigem 
Zurtlckwerfen des Kopfes, knapp, ktthl, ja gering- 
sch&tzig...als wollte er sagen: *Gut, das, drollig, 
kurios, am&santl 1 •.2) 

It was a wicked, contemptuous, mocking laugh, a symbol of 
that arrogance of spirit which was to contribute so much to 
his ultimate damnation. 


From his father, Johannes Leverktlhn, Adrian in¬ 
herited the "migraine", a significant warning bell for what 
was to come later. But there are other qualities in the 
father which are much more symbolic in significance for 
Adrian’s future. 

1) See DF. p. 46. 

2) See DF-p. 148 f. 




■ 


t 






' 







. 





- 9 - 


Johannes Leverktlhn liked "to speculate the ele¬ 
ments"; he carried on studies in natural science, biology, 
chemistry and physics# Zeitblom thought it unseemly— 
"••♦weil ein gewisser mystischer Einschlag darin merklich 

war, der ehemals wohl als Hang zur Zauberei verd&chtig 

1 ) 

worden ware". The things he showed the young boys were a 

source of secret amusement to his son—the experiment of 

the "sichtbare Musik", the"fressende Tropfen", the inorganic 

chemical culture. The elder LeverkQhn pursued them in all 

seriousness and expected his audience to examine them in 

the same light. But they made Adrian laugh, "mit einem 

GelSchter, das ihn f8rmlich schtittelte und ihm Tranen er- 

2 ) 

presste". One has the impression that the boy was only too 
ironically well aware that these "temptings" of nature, 
these efforts to lay bare her workings were closely related 
to witchcraft, that they were works of the Tempter. 

It was Johannes Leverktlhn too, who brought his son 
into first contact with "hetaera Esmeralda", that fateful 
symbol which was to permeate Adrian’s existence and to find 
expression in his music, ^e showed the boys nature-books 
with illustrations in colour of exotic lepidoptera and 
sea creatures...freaks and fascinations displayed in all 
colours of the rainbow. It was the illustration of one of 
these creatures which was to stay with Adrian Leverkfthn all 

1) See DE.p# 24. 

2) See BE* p. 27. 





— 

* 




« 



- 10 - 


his life—in a much more concrete fashion, as we shall 

1 ) 

see eventually. This was the species of lepidoptera called 
"hetaera Esmeralda”: 

" Ein solcher Schmetterling, in durchsichitger 
Nacktheit den dammernden Lauhschatten liebend, 
hiess Hetaera Ssmeralda. Nur einen dunkeln Ear- 
benfleck in Violettund Rosa hatte Hetaera auf 
ihren ElUgeln, den sie, da man sonst nicht von 
ihr sieht, im Elug einem windgeftihrten Blttten- 
blatt gleichen l&sst". 2) 

The "Esmeralda” motif reappears again and again in Lever- 
ktihn’s life-story. But more of this in its place. Suffice 
it to say here, that it is one of the most important sym¬ 
bols employed by Mann in his delineation of Adrian ^ever- 
ktlhn f s pathyway to Hell, 


Physically, Adrian resembled his mother, and 

from her he had his incredible ear for music. Her voice, 

” der Lage nach ein warmer Mezzo-Sopran und in der Sprach- 

3) 

behandlung,,.ganz ausserordentlich gewinnend", made a deep 
impression on Zeitblom, But Adrian learned nothing about 
music from her: 

" Dieser Stimmreiz kam aus einer inneren Musik- 
alitftt, die im tlbrigen latent blieb, da Elsbeth 
sich urn Musik nicht kttmmerte, sich sozusagen nicht 
zu ihr bekannte". 4) 

—as if, with true mother’s instinct, she realized the 
dangers which lay in music for her son. On one occasion 


1) See p. 35 ff, 

2) See DE. p, 25. 

3) See DE u. 37. 

4) Ibid. 3) 







t 


t 



1 


' 

s 


t 



- 11 - 


after Adrian had met liis musical mentor, Wendell Kretschmar, 
Zeitblon describes the relations between Frau Leverktthn 
and Kretschmar: 

"Dennoch beobachtete ich...eine gewisse durch 
Freundlichkeit nicht ganz verhttllte G-ezwungen- 
heit, Zurttckhaltung, Ablehnung in ihrem Verhalten 
gegen den Organisten.•.so zweifle ich nicht, 
dass die eigenttoliche Spaimung zwischen Kretsch¬ 
mar und Adrians Mutter sich auf diesen bezog, 
dass er ihr ^egenstand war..." 1) 

Symbolic of her intuitive fear was an action she performed 

on another occasion, when mother and son, Kretschmar and 

Zeitblom were in conversation in the Buchel living-room: 

" Sie schlang gleichsam den Arm. um ihn, aber 
nicht um seine Schultem, sondern um sein Haupt, 
die Hand auf seiner Stim, und so, den Blick 
ihrer schwarzen Augen auf Kretschmar gerichtet 
und mit ihrer wohllautenden Stimme zu ihm sprech- 
end, lehnte sie Adrians Kopf an ihre Brust." 2) 


The most concrete symbol of the qualities which 

LeverkGhn inherited from his parents and which made him 

fundamentally what he was, are his eyes: 

Das Pechschwarz der mhtterlichen und der Azur 
der v&terlichen Iris hatte sich in seinen.Augen 
zu einem schattigen Blau-Grau- GrtLn vermischt, 
das kleine metal&sche Einsprengsel, dazu einen 
rostfarbenen Ring um die Pupillen zeigte..." 3) 


These eyes, of no one distinct colour, but rather a mix¬ 
ture of three, introduce another very significant motif in 
the novel. That is the number "three" motif, a number 


1) See DF.p. 198 f. 

2) See DF«p. 200. 

3) See DF-p. 38. 





c 











t 



















: 

« 





( 









-IE- 


symbolic of that unholy triad consisting of Leverktlhn, 
’’hetaera Esmeralda” and the Devil, who together produce 
the Leverktlhn musical masterpieces. They also bring to 
mind another group of "three”, namely, Rudolf Schwerdt- 
feger, Marie Godeau and ^epomuk Schneidewein; these three 
people, all of whom Adrian dared to love in his way, are 
significant because the former and the latter had blue eyes, 
while Marie Godeau had black eyes. It hardly seems mere 
chance that Leverktlhn should have been driven to choose 

the extreme blue, or the extreme black when he found love. 

1 ) 

In any case, this motif we are to meet again; at this 
juncture it is a subtle foreshadowing of what the future 
holds for Mann’s hero as reflected in his eyes. 

Adrian received his elementary education from a 
private tutor in the paternal home* Ostensibly this was 
done because the father believed that it would provide a 
more careful education for his sons, for Adrian’s brother 
George had been similarly trained. But it is already in 
its way symbolic of that retirement from the world and 
from human contact which was to be Adrian’s lot. ^e was 
never to know the companionship of childhood playmates 
other than that of his "protector”, Serenus Zeitblom* 

In this elementary training period, the first 
concrete signs of Adrian’s "ingenium” became quickly 
1) See p. 38, for development of number "three” symbol. 





- 




t 




. 

« 

■ 

4 

. . 

s 

. 

. 

' 

- . 

















, 

* 

, 





■ 







- 13 - 


\ 


evident in the superior facility with which he absorbed 

the instruction. At the same time the child’s arrogance 

was manifested in his attitude toward his teacher, who 

often complained that his pupil acted as if he "knew it 

already”. On this Seitblom remarks: 

” Nattlrlich war es nicht so, dass sein ZSgling 
f alles schon wusste.’ Aber seine Geb&rde hatte 
etwas dpvon T einfach weil hier ein Fall jener 
raschen, sonderbar souverfinen und vorwegnehmenden, 
ebenso sicJjejen wie' leichten Auffassung und 
Aneignungf, dass ein solcher Kopf eine G-efahr fflr 
die Bescheidenheit des Herzens bedeutet und es 
gar leicht zur Hof fart verftlhrt.” 1) 


In true Freudian fashion Thomas Ifenn has now es¬ 
tablished the setting for the life of his artist-genius 
hero. In his childhood environment, his family background 
we have been able to detect both exterior and incipient 
influences which foreordain the future; the keynotes, the 
leitmotifs have been sounded; the first movement of the 
symphony has ended and we are ready to proceed with the 
second. On the distant horizon of Leverktlhn’s life the 
storm-clouds are vaguely gathering. 


Now he comes to Haisersaschern^the native town 
Df Serenus Zeitblom, where he is to attend the Gymnasium— 
the " Schule der Brttder vom gemeinen Leben.” His uncle, 
Dwner of a musical instrument firm takes him in as his 
son. Thus begins the second phase of Adrian’s life, a 

1) See DF* p. 54:. 









' ■ 










* 
















* < 


4 








c 












r 

' 

- 


* 

, 





















, 






, 









' 











- 14 - 


phase of major significance. 


Up to this point Adrian’s contact with music had 

been confined to that of Hanne, the cow-girl, and that 

which he had heard in routine attendance at church with 

his Lutheran parents* Outwardly he had so far displayed 

not the faintest interest in it: 

* So viel ich sehe, hat er ihm (i«e*, the phen¬ 
omenon of music) damals noch, und noch durch 
jahre hin, jede Aufmerksamkeit versagt und es 
vor sich selbst verborgen gehalten, dass er mit 
der Welt des IGLanges irgend etwas zu schaffen 
habe.” 1) 

Fven here, in the warehouse of his uncle where every imag¬ 
inable musical instrument lay to hand, Zeitblom tells us: 

"♦♦♦er bewahrte einen fast achselzuckenden Gleich- 
mut vor all der Herrlichkeit und beantwortete 
meine bewundernden Exklamationen meist nur mit 
einem kurzen Lachen..." 2) 


But all this was only an apparent indifference; for sec¬ 
retly his precocious mind was at work, and this in spite 
of himself and his efforts to deny what lay in his nature. 
The daemonic urge could not be held in abeyance, and grad¬ 
ually overpowered him. But not without a struggle: 

"...er verbarg sich dahinter, verbarg sich vor 
der Masik. Lange mit ahnungsvoiler Beharrlich- 
keit, hat dieser Menseh sich vor seinem Schick- 
sal verborgen." 3) 


This struggle on Adrian’s paftt to keep away from 

1) See DF. p. 52. 

2) See DF*p. 67. 

3) See DF. p. 69. 








. 






* 























































< 

■ 

« 











.. , 

* 












- 15 - 


the realm of music is of the highest symbolic significance. 
There can be no doubt that his conscience told him that 
for him it constituted a danger, that in it lay his doom. 
Indeed, some years later, after he had finished his Gymnas¬ 
ium and had gone into theology, he wrote in a letter to 
Kretschmar who had become his music teacher at Kaisers- 
aschern: 

n Sie verstehen, dass ein geheimer Schrecken 
mich abmahnt, es aufzugeben, die h. Schrift unter 
die Bank zu legen und in die Kunst zu laufeh, in 
die sie mich einftlhrten, und um die es mir als 
Beruf ftir mich so ausnehmend schade wSre? w 1) 


This fear, moreover, symbolizes Thomas Mann’s 

own fundamental attitude toward music. We have,for example, 

the statement of his own daughter: 

” Music is the only weakness Papa has. He regards 
it with a mixture of adoration, envy and disdain. 

♦.he arouses in me the idea..,that had he chosen 
it or been chosen by it he would have fallen 
into the abyss. Its inarticulateness would have 
corrupted him and delivered him to the devil. 

He is too fully the man of the world—of the pro¬ 
saic, the intrinsic, the ascetic—so that music 
for him is necessarily somehow linked with sin.” 

2 ) 3 ) 


Adrian Leverktlhn then, while at Kaisersaschern, 
began secretly to experiment with musical composition on 


1) See DF.p, 204, 

2) Monica Mann, 1947, "Papa” in THE STATUES OP THOMAS 
MANN, ( a critical anthology), edited^. Neider, New 
York, New Directions, 1947, p. 80. 

3) See also p. 31 for further evidence of Mann’s attitude 
toward music as expressed by Leverktlhn. 





t 
















' ? 







t 


c 










< 


• 5 













- 16 - 


the piano* n Uebrigens war es auch die Zeit, in der die 

1 ) 

ererbte Migrfine anfing ihm b8se Tage zu machen.” — a most 
ominous symbol of the danger lying in this heretofore 
denied field of interest* 


Meanwhile, at the Gymnasium Adrian, because of 

the very facility with which he absorbed instruction was 

the bane of his teachers 1 2 3 existences; not however, 

”...weil man den Eindruck gehabt hStte, er bilde 
sich auf seine Leistungen allzu viel ein,— im 
Gegenteil, er bildete sich nicht genug darauf 
ein und eben darin be stand sein Hochmut.” 2) 

He made it quite plain on every occasion ”...wie gleich- 

gtlltig und sozusagen nebens&chlich ihm das ganze Schul- 

3) 

wesen war”* Only one subject interested him—mathematics. 

This is but another piece of evidence of the trend ig. 

Leverktlln^s mental development* saw in it a discipline, 

a discipline for the mind; but also a discipline for that 

diabolic period of musical composition which lay ahead. 

he saw already the affinities which lay between mathematics 

and the composer 1 s art, and he knew instinctively that he 

4) 

would need its discipline. ” Die Ordnung is alles”. Or: 

” Weisst du was ich finde?. * .Dass Musik die Zweideutig- 
' 5) 

keit ist als System”. 

finally, we cannot overlook the fact that numbers, 


1) See DH*p* 52A 

2) See DP*p. 70 # 

3) See OT.p. 70 f 


4) See DIP. p. 72 

5) See DIT« p * 74 












e 


c 
















- 17 - 


geometric figures and mathematical formulae have always 

played a part in magic and the conjurer's art. Indeed, 

it was under the significant eye of a "magic square” that 

most of his music was written. At least we know that it 

hung above the piano while he studied at Halle theological 
1 ) 

school, and again during his four and a half years at 
2 ) 

Leipzig; and it does not seem illogical to assume that 
it also accompanied him to Munich and later had its place 
above the piano at Pfeiffaring. Por undeniable proof (over 
and above his fondness for the "magic square” as an in¬ 
spiration for his composing) that numbers had a daemonic 
significance for him, we may refer to this statement: 

"-Yernunft und Magie, sagte er, - begegnen sich 
wohl und werden eins in dem, was man Weisheit, 
Einweihung nennt, im Glauben an die Sterne, die 
Sahlen...” 3) 

When it was discovered that Adrian had begun 
experimenting with music, arrangements were made by his 
uncle for him to take lessons from Wendell Kretschmar, or¬ 
ganist in the cathedral at Kaisersaschem. This man who 
looked upon music as the highest of all the arts, who was 
afflicted with a diabolic stutter and passionately addicted 
to giving out information, saw in young Leverktihn the lat¬ 
ent musical genius, and promptly and methodically set 
about fanning into life the smouldering embers of the fires 
of Hell. 


1) See DP* p. 147 for 
description. 


2) See DP. p. 179 

3) See DP. p. 302 





' oep. 








t 


c 









- 18 - 


Kretschmar worshipped music for music’s sake. 

His special deity was Beethoven* He taught Adrian all 
he himself knew about music; and though the youth soon 
surpassed his master in technique it was Kretschmar’s 
teachings which helped Adrian into the daemonic regions of 
composition, which, while reaching technically into the 
sphere of the divine, remained in subject matter always 
the product of the Devil* Not only did he teach him all 
he knew about music. He established for his pupil a con¬ 
nection between music and ” other fields of form, and cul- 
1 ) 

ture." He discussed with him philosophy; they read Shak¬ 
espeare who, with Beethoven, constituted Kretschmar’s twin 
stars; he introduced him to Russian, English and French 
novels, the lyrical poems of Shelley and Keats, HBlderlin 
and Novalis; he gave him Manzoni and Goethe, Schopenhauer 
and Meister Eckehart— all this was put in Adrian’s way 
"outside the humanistic influence" as Zeitblom signifi¬ 
cantly points out. 

When Zeitblom suggested that all this was dan¬ 
gerous for a nature such as Leverkdhn’s, which should be 
held in check rather than urged on, that his friend’s health 
might suffer (in fact, Adrian was suffering frequently:" Oft 

sah er blass aus—und das nicht nur an Tagen. wenn die er- 

2 ) 

erbte MigrSne ihren trttbenden Druck. ♦ .austtbte?), Hretschmar 

1) See DF. p. 117 f. 

2) See DF. p. 115 f. 



























- 19 - 


replied: 

" Y/enn sie ftir Gesundheit sind, — mit Geist 
und Kunst hat die denn wohl freilieh nicht viel 
zu tun, sie steht sogar in einem gewissen Con¬ 
trast dazu, und jedenfalls hat das eine urns 
andere sich nicht viel gekQmmert.” 1) 

This, of course, has been Thomas Mann’s contention since 

BUDDEH3R00KS, where Hanno is a good example* 

There is little doubt, then, that Wendell Kret- 
schmar was one of the Devil’s minions who flattered and 
urged Adrian Leverktlhn on to his destruction* And he 
played no minor part in Adrian’s final decision to change 
from theology to music, if that can be said to be a ” decis¬ 
ion” at all* 

Kaisersaschern supplies a third major influence 
on Leverktlhn’s life* A left-over from the Middle Ages 
both in appearance and atmosphere (actually Mann’s Lttbeck 
in disguise), lying in the district where the Reformation 
controversies raged, it left its mark on Leverktlhn through¬ 
out the remainder of his life* It is a symbol of the past: 
”*..es scheint jene bertthmte Formel der Zeit- 

losigkeit, das scholastische nunc stans an der Stirn zu 

2 ) 

tragen.” as such it stamps its mark on Leverktlhn’s per¬ 
sonality and therefore indirectly on his musical compos¬ 
itions. Thus it had a hand in preparing him for his fate. 

1) See DR. p. 116 # 

2) See DR. p. 57. 





— 4 ' 


. 

". J.■ ;> ■ *; ■ ' ■ .; ■ 






< 




























* 

* 














- 20 - 


Its pious, mediaeval, Lutheran air inspired him to under¬ 
take the study of theology at Halle which was identified 
with the University of Wittenberg, the two having been 
united when they were reopened after the Napoleonic wars. 
But the study of theology was only another step toward 
LeverktLhn 1 s doom, as we shall see. 

He spent nine years in Kaisersaschern, where, 

"...in der Luft war etwas hSngen geblieben von 
der Verfassung des Menschengemtltes in den letz- 
ten Jahrzehnten des 15. Jahrhunderts, Hysterie 
des ausgehenden Mittelalters, etwas von latenter 
seelischer Epidemie..." 1) 

There were even many "originals", old women regarded as 

witches, queer, half-mad characters, before whom mothers 

snatched up their children in fright— evidence still, of 

the theories about witchcraft, necromancy, and other 

"black" arts of mediaeval times. Serenus Seitblom once 

hopefully expressed the opinion, when he learned that 

Adrian was to leave the city for Halle, "that now Kaisers- 

2 ) 

aschern would lose its hold on him." But it never did; 
it fitted too well into his destiny. Later in his inter¬ 
view with the Devil, Adrian complains of a want of style 

on the Devil f s part for visiting him in Italy: " In Kaisers- 

3) 

aschern Mtte ich mir euch gefallen lassen." To which the 
Devil replied: "...Wenn du den Hut hottest, dir zu sagen: 
f Wo ich bin, da ist Kaisersaschem* 9 S o stimmte die 

1) See DF. p. 57. 3) See DF. p. 350. 

2) See DF. p. 132. 





















< 


c < 


£ 



. 

* 

£ • ' < 

* 


C 









c 




1 










1 







- 21 - 


Sa che auf einmal. . <," 1) 

Although he appeared to be flinging himself into 

the arms of music during these years at Kaisersaschern, 

Leverktthn nevertheless displayed the same indifference to 

music as he had displayed toward his academic studies, as 

pointed out previously. He pretended at all times that 

he saw no connection between himself and music: 

" T Ich spreche ja von der Musik, nicht von mir’... 
Sr (i.e., Adrian) hielt gar sehr auf diesen 
Unterschied und sprach fiber Musik nur wie fiber 
eine fremde Macht, ein Wunderliches, ihn aber 
persBnlich nicht berflhrendes PMnomen, sprach 
von ihr kritisch distanziert und gewissermassen 
von oben herab...* 2) 

This outward attitude, however, may be regarded as symbolic 
of the inner struggle which was being waged between Lever- 
kOhn’s conscience and the innate evil which had already 
permeated his being and which, aided and abetted by ex¬ 
terior unhealthy influences, was drawing him slowly but 
surely into the Devil’s net. 

5 ) 

His decision to drop music for theology, or 
rather, not to begin to devote his whole time to music, was 
accordingly an involuntary manifestation of this struggle, 
fmd yet it was at the same time but a part of the whole 
pattern leading up to his destruction. For it was not out 

1) See DF. p. 551 

2) See DF. p. 120 

3) See p. 25 ff. 








- 22 - 


of humility that he chose theology: 

"•••hatte es mir kundgegeben. , ,wobei er durch- 
blicken liess, dass er das Studium nicht als 
Vorbereitung ftlr don praktischen Kirchen-und 
Seelsorge.\dienst, sondern ftlr eino akademische 
Laufbahn auffasse," 1) 

Zeitblom divined only too clearly, w dass er seinerseits 

2 ) 

seine Y. T ahl aus Hochmut getroffen hatte." Leveritthn, in 

fact, in his final confession to his friends Just before 

his mental break-down, reveals the awful truth: 

" Drum gab ich meiner Hoffart Zucker, dass ich 
theologiam studierte zu Hallen auf der Hoh'en 
Schul, doch nicht von des Gottes wegen. sondern 
von wegen des anderen (i,e,, the Devil), und 
war mein Btlndnisses Anfang und der verkappte 
Zug zu Gott nicht, sondern zu ihm, dem grossen 
religiosus," 5) 


Ihus we begin the third phase of LeverktLhn f s life, 

at the Halle theological school. Of Halle, Zeitblom the 

Homan Catholic humanist, says: 

",..dessen geistiger Raum seit Jahrhunderten 
voll war von religiSsen Kontroversen, das heisst: 
von Jenam geistlichen Zank und Streit, der 
immer dem humanistischen Bildungstriebe so ab- 
trSglich gewesen ist," 4} 

Into this atmosphere came Adrian Leverktlhn to study theol¬ 
ogy, He was once more in a most appropriate setting, not 
only spiritually, but in the matter of physical surround¬ 
ings as well; for beyond the fact that Halle was larger, 
it resembled Kaisersaschern very closely. "Heine 3ude n , 


1) See DB, p. 129, 

2) Ibid, 1) 

3) See DF, p. 756 

4) See DF, p. 139 








c 




< 


c 


c 


? * 


c 


t 





i 





c 

< • 


c 


c 










% 












- 23 - 


says Zeitblom, "lag in der Hansastrasse^einem G&sschen hin- 
ter der Moritzkirche, das ebensogut Ilaisersaschern seinen 
verschollenen Lauf Mtte liaben kOnnen." 1) 


Levsrktlhn could not have chosen his lecturers 
more appropriately* With masterly irony Thomas Mann has 
portrayed these men as symbols of the diabolic in the 
guise of theologians and philosophers. There was Kolonat 
XTonnemacher (maker of nuns) who with his lectures on Py¬ 
thagoras did in a sense, contribute to the celibate life 
of Mann’s hero. He spoke of ” die Zahl und das Zahlver- 

hfiltnis als konstituierender Inbegriff des Seins und der 

2 ) 

sittlichen Wttrde.♦." We have already seen the morbid in¬ 
terest in mathematics which Leverkfihn displayed. Here, 

in Halle, it will be remembered too, the "magic square" 

3) 

made its appearance in Adrian’s living quarters: 

" Dartiber an der Wand...ein arithmetischer Stich 
befestigt...ein sogennantes magisches Quadrat, 
wie es neben dem Stundenglase, dem Zirkel, der 
W a ge, dem Polyeder und anderen -Symbolen auch 
auf Dflrers ’Melancholia ’ erscheint..." 4) 

Dtirer we are to meet again in one of Le ve rktlhn’s musical 

compositions, the "Apocalipsis cum figuris". 


Prom Ehrenfried Humpf, " der saftigste Sprecher 

5 ) 

an der ganzen Eochschule" he heard lectures on systematics. 
The students called him a "wuchtige Pers8nlichkeit." He 

1) See DP. p. 146 f. 4) See DP. p. 147 

2) See DP. p. 148. 5) See DP. p. 150 

3) See p. 17 • 







t 









- 




c 








r 






i 

c 


< 

, 






- 24 - 


was possessed of a crude heartiness which did not appeal 

to the Roman Catholic Zeitblom at all, although Lever- 

ktthn showed no antipathy. Physically he is described as 

"ein grosser massiger, voller Mann mit gepolsterten Hfinden, 

drohender ^timme und einer von vielem Sprechen leicht tror- 

1 ) 

gebaumten zum Spritzen geneigten Unterlippe." His fame 

was not so much based on his lecture material as on his 

w Ex-Pauken", his "extra punches", 

"...die er, die Falls te bei zurttckge raff tern Geh- 
rock in seinen senkrechten Hosentaschen, auf 
dem breiten Katheder hin und her stapfend, in 
die Lesung einschaltete, und die dank ihrer 
SpontaneitSt, Derbheit, gesunden AufgerSumtheit 
auch wegen ihres pittoresk-alterttolichen 
Sprachstils den Studenten ausserordentlich ge- 
fielen." 2) 


Ihese "Ex-Pauken" consisted largely of well- 
known sayings expressed in "good, round German terms", 
and of florid and often vulgar names for the Devil, as 
if he were afraid to name him outright as the Devil. More¬ 
over, he expressed the belief that, ” (er) sah den Lttgner, 

den bSsen Feind gerade in der Yernunft vorz&glich am 

3) 

Werke. w it is not difficult to recognize in Ehrenfried 
Kumpf the symbol of Martin Luther himself. Indeed, when 
Adrian and Serenus paid their formal dinner call, Kumpf ate 
with the greatest of heartiness, danced with his wife around 
the table, and then pointing at a darkened corner of the 

1) See DF. p. 151. 

2) Ibid. 1) 

3) See DF. p. 154. 





t 




t 


c 






c 


t 


c 








t 


? 



J ... 




t 




t 










- 25 - 


room, suddenly picked up a roll and flung it viciously at 

the "Spielvogel", the "Wedenschimpf 1 " whom he thought to 

see there. It was not the ink-pot; hut the analogy is 

clear. It was all rather frightening. Only Adrian felt 

no alarm: " Immerhin hatte er nach jenem Teufelsgefecht 

auf der Strasse einen Lachfall, der sich nur langsam, unter 

1 ) 

ablenkenden GesprSchen beruhigte." It is Kumpf f s ? feood old 
German" too, which the Devil employs in his interview 
with Adrian. And Adrian uses it on occasion, most sig¬ 
nificantly of all, in his Faustian confession. 


If Leverktlhn had not met the Devil "in the flesh" 

up to now, Privat-Bocent Hberhard Schleppfuss, the other 

outstanding figure at Halle was to provide the opportunity. 

His name reminds us of the "cloven-hoof" of Mephistopheles 

in the "Walpurgisnacht"of Goethe’s FAUST. Although it 

was denied by others that he dragged his one foot, Zeit- 

blom states: "Nach meiner Meinung schleppte er wirklich 

2 ) 

etwas den einen Fuss." His dress and person too, leave 

no doubt about the figure the author is trying to suggest: 

" Schleppfuss war eine kaum mittelgrosse, leib- 
arme Erscheinung, gehtlllt in einera schwarzen Urn- 
hang, dessen er sich statt eines Mantels be- 
diente, und der am Halse mit einem Metallkettchen 
geschlossen war. Dazu trug er eine Art von 
Schlapphut mit seitlich gerollter Krempe, dessen 
Form sich dem lesuitischen annSherte... Er 
sprach...nicht vom Kathederstuhl aus, sondem 
irgendwo seitlich halb sitzend an ein GelSnder 
gelehnt, die Spitzen der Finger bei gespreitzten 

1) See DF• p. lo5 f. 

2) See DF. p. 156. 























c 










. 

















c 



t 







* 



c 




- 26 - 


Daumen im Schosse verschrflnkt, wobei sein ge- 
teiltes Bfirtchen sich auf und ab bewegte, und 
zwischem ihm und dem gedrehten Schnurrbfirtchen 
seine splittrig-scharfen ZShne sichtbar wurden." 
1 ) 


It is significant that Schleppfuss lectured at 

Halle for only two semesters, rt um dann, allerdings, ich 

weiss nicht wohin, wieder von der BildflSche zu verschwin- 

2 ) 

den, n He was, to say the least, most auspiciously present 
during Adrian’s time. When his task was completed he dis¬ 
appeared quite properly. His teachings, however, were to 
become tattooed upon Leverktthn’s soul, that soul by now so 
ripe for every evil influence extant* 


w Ich sagte...dass die fheologie ihrer Natur 
nach dazu neigt und unter bestimmten Urnstanden 
jederzeit dazu neigen muss, zur Mmonologie *u 
werden. Hierfto war Schleppfuss ein Beispiel, 
wenn auch einer sehr fortgeschrittener und in- 
tellektueller Art, da seine dSmonische Welt- 
und Gottesauffassung psychologisch illuminiert 
war.” 2) 

So Professor Kumpf’s good, solid ways with the Devil were 
nothing in comparison, 

”...rait der psychologischen Wirklichkeit die 
Schleppfuss dem ZerstOrer, diesem personifi- 
zierten Abfall von Gott, verlieh...er nahm... 
dialektisch den LSsterungsaffront in das G6tt- 
liche, die HOlle ins Bmpyriun auf, erklSrte 
das Verruchte ftir ein notwendiges und mitge- 
b.orenes Horrelat des Heiligen und dieses ftir 
eine fast unwiderstehliche Herausforderung 
zur SchSndung,. . . ” 3) 

He equated evil and good, made them complementary in their 

1) See DP. p. 156 f. 

2) See BP. p. 157. 

3} See DP. p. 157ff 



t 






• ■ « 


t 


t 


c 


t 


t 






c 



<4 


« 






s 







-27- 


contributions to the wholeness of the universe; evil,the 
Evil One himself was a necessary emanation and the in¬ 
evitable accompaniment of the holy existence of God* With 
the most disgusting and diabolic examples he proved such 
things as "the reality of magic, of daemonic influence and 
bewitchment” in the human sphere, and "that mind, whether 

wilfully or not, was able, by magic to alter another per- 

i) 

son’s physical substance." All in all, we are reminded 

9 

once more of Mephistopheles in Goethe’s FAUST, who said 

that he was "Ein Theil von jener Kraft / Die stets das 

2 ) 

BOse will, und stets das Gute schafft." 


Portentous for Adrian’s experience with "hetaera 
Esmeralda”, as we shall learn, was the fact, "dass wann nur 
immer von der Macht der Dtaonen ilber das Menschenleben 


darin die Rede war, das Geschlechtliche eine hervorstehende 

5) 

Rolle spielte." /aid Schleppfuss elucidated thus: 

" Denn grQssere Hexenmacht hatte ihm Gott zugetan 
OTer den Beischlaf, als sonst tlber jede mensch- 
liche Handlung: nicht nur wegen der Sussern Un- 
fiatigkeit dieser Yertlbung, sondern vor alien 
weil die Yerderbtheit des ersten Yaters als Erb- 
sdnde dabei auf das ganze Menschengeschiecht 
tlbergegangen war. Der Zeugungsakt gekennzeichnet 
durch astetische Scheusslichkeit war Ausdruck 
Yehikel der Erbstlnde..4) 


—adding that "woman” lay at the root of it all: 


1) See DF. p. 157 

2} Goethe’s FAUST, 11. 1335-36. 

3) See DF. p. 164. 

4) ibid. 3). 




















, 










. 























. 




. 




















. 







1 




-28- 


" Der ^egenstand, das instrument-urn des Yersuchers 
war das Weib. Sie war damit freilich auch das 
instrumentum der Heiligheit, denn diese gab es 
nicht ohne tobende Stlndenlust.” 1) 

He spoke too, of the "evil eye": 

" Srscheinungen wie etwa die des bOseh Blicks, 
ein Hrfahrungskomplex, konzentriert in der Sage 
vom tetenden Auge des Basilisken. Strfifliche 
Inhumanityt wfire es gewesen, zu leugnen, dass 
eine unreine Seele durch den biossen Bliok, sei 
es willentlieh Oder auch unvdllktirlich, ktfrper- 
lich scMdigende Wirkungen an anderen hervor- 
bringen k8nne, an kleinen Kindem zumal, deren 
zarte Substanz ftir das Gift eines solchen Auges 
besonders anfSllig war." 2) 

Leverktlhn remembers this years later, when he looks upon 

himself as the murderer of Nepomuk Sehneidewein, the little 

"angel-child", his nephew: 

" Weiche Schuld, welche Sflnde, welch ein Yer- 
brechen—dass wir ihn kornmen liessen, dass ich 
ihn in meine N£he liess, dass ich meine Augen 
an ihm weidetei Du musst wissen, Kinder sind 
a us zartem Stoff, sie sind gar leicht ftir gift- 
ige Einfltlsse empfSnglich..3) 


Finally, where Halle is concerned, Adrian T s con¬ 
nections with the "Winfried-Yerein", a "Burschenschaft" of 
theological students must be mentioned, "Musik, Natur und 

frShliche Andacht, das waren nahe verwandte und vorschrifts- 

4) 

mSssige Ideen im Winfried-Yerein." This Yerein made ex¬ 
cursions "in corpore" and in smaller, more exclusive groups 
into the country, and held gatherings from time to time 
which took the place of "beer evenings". 

1) See DF• p. 166. 

2) See DF. p. 173 f. 

3) See DF. p. 725. 

4) See DF. p. 179. 




— 
















■ 

























































- I . 

juj. 

« 













. . 

■ ■ 







-29- 


In these discussions and excursions Adrian took only a 
small part* Only occasionally was he drawn into their 
dissertations on politics, society, religion and youth* 

He avoided participation on various pretexts, "meistens 

1 ) 

unter Berufung auf seine Migr&ne." Nature seemed to have 

little effect, openly, upon Leverkflhn* But that it did 

leave its mark, Zeitblom confirms: 

* Und wenn die Natur ihm auch keine begeisterten 
Ausrufungen entlockte und er mit einer gewissen 
sinnenden Zurtickhaltung auf sie blickte, so 
zweifle ich nicht, dass ihre Bilder, Rhythmen, 
hocheingetragenen Melodien ihm tiefer in die 
Seele drangen, als den Genossen, und hs.be bei 
manchem Vortlbergang reiner, geltfster SchOnheit, 
der sich aus seinem geistgespanntem Werk her- 
vortut, sp&ter an jene gemeinsame Eindrttcke 
denken mtlssen." 2) 

Adrian’s inherent and growing indifference to human contact, 

his coldness and reserve, are evidenced by the fact that,.* 

" und (er) war noch nach Jahr und Tag... so wenig auf den 

frere et cochon-Fuss gekommen, dass selbst das brMerliche 

3) 

Du im Verkehr mit ihnen deutlich unnattlrlich war*” This, 

together with his aloofness from the common interests of 

the Verein, [s further symbolic of the trend of Lever- 

kELhn’s life. As Zeitblom says: 

"Ich spttrte.•*einen Schicksalsabgrand zwischen 
dieser strebend geborenen Jugend und seiner Ex- 
istenz, den Unterschied der Lebenskurve zwischen 
gutem, ja vortrefflichem Durchschnitt, dem bald 
aus dem vagierenden, versuchenden Burschentum 

1) See DF. p. 176. 

2) See DF. p. 196. 

3) ibid. 1) 










-30- 


ins btlrgerliche Leben einzulenken bestimmt war, 
und dem unsichtbar Gezeichneten, der den Weg des 
Geistes nnd der Problematik nie verlassen... 
sollte, und dessen Blick, dessen nie ganz ins 
brtiderliche sich ltfsende Haltung. <, .mich und die 
anderen empfiden liess, dass auch er dem Unter- 
s'chied ahnte." 1) 


"Schon zu B eginn seines vierten Semesters hatte 

ich Anzeichen, dass mein Freund das theologische Studium... 

2 ) 

abzubrechen gedachte. 1 * And so begins the fourth phase of 
Leverktlhn’s history—the final step toward the nether world. 


Theology had disappointed him: 


".♦pWofUr die Grtlnde natttrlich nicht in dieser 
ehrwtlrdigen Wissenschaft, auch nicht bei seinen 
akademischen Lehrern, sondern in ihm selbst zu 
suchen seien." 3) 


Leverktlhn himself admitted that he had always grasped things 

too easily: ,f 0 .«zu leicht wohl eigentlich, als dass irgend 

4) 

etwas davon bei ihm zu rechtem Ansehen hatte kommen ktfnnen.* 1 


In his time at Halle, Adrian and Wendell Fretsch- 
mar had frequently seen each other and had corresponded 
regularly. In the meantime, Frets chmar had moved from 
Faisersaschern to Leipzig. Adrian writes a letter to him 
there, a sort of confession, which serves as the prelude 
to the final dedication of his diabolic talents to music. 


By now Leverktlhn is aware that the die is cast: 


1) See DF. p. 197 
S) ibid. 1) 

3) See DF. p. SOI f. 

4) See DF. p. SOS. 










_ _ 

, : ' ' 

; 














-31- 


" T Ich ftlrchte*, schrieb er, 'lieber Freund und 
Me is ter, ich bin ein schlechter Mensch, denn icb 
habe keine Warme...ich bin entschieden kalt... 
auf dem Gymnasium...schon diese ftlnfundvierzig 
Fach-Minuten weilten mir zu lange, machten mir 
Langeweile—das kfilteste Ding in der Melt...und 
des zura Zeichen stellte das Hauptweh sich ein... 
das kam nie von Ermtidung durch Mtlhe, es kam von 
Ueberdruss, von kalter Langeweile.« 1) 

He reveals his true reasons for having gone into theology: 

" Ic k kabe mich ihr unterstellt, nicht sowohl, 
wenn auoh in diesem Grunde zugleioh—, weil ich 
die hSchste Wissenschaft in ihr sah, sondern 
well ich mich demtltigen, mich beugen, mich dis- 
ziplinieren, den Diinkel meiner I3llte strafen 
wollte, kurz, aus conifcitio.” 2) 

We see how he connects religion with music: 

w Sie halten mich Mr berufen zu dieser Kunst und 
geben d lip zu verstehen, dass der f Schritt vom 
Wege T zu ihr nicht gar gross ware. Mein Luther- 
tum stimmt dem zu, denn es sieht in Theologie 
und Miisik benachbarte, nahe verwandte SpShren, 
und persSnlich ist mir obendrein die Musik immer 
als eine magische Verbindung aus Theologie und 
der so unterhaltenden Mathematik erschienen..♦ 
sie hat viel von dem Laborieren und insistenten 
s e trie ben der Alchemisten und Schwarzkttnstler 
von eheraals, das auch in Zeichen der Theologie 
stand, zugleich aber in der Emanzipation und 
Abtrtlnnigkeit.” 3) 


Tne symbolic key to Leverk&hn's whole attitude 

to music lies in the following statemnnt in this letter: 

w Hr sei an die Tastatur geraten nicht aus Lust, sich zu 

ihrem Meister aufzuwerfen, sondern aus heimlicher Neugier 

auf die Musik selbst.” Zeitblom had said that a gift such 

as music should be loved: To which Leverktlhn had put the 

1} See DF. p. 202 f. 

2) See DF. p. 204. 

3} Ibid 1) . 

41 See DF. p. 205. 




<5 






- 32 - 


question: 

n HSlst du dio Liebe l*tlr den starksten Affekt?" 
n Weisst du einen stSrkeren?" (Zeitblom) 

" Ja, das Interesse.” 1) 

He denied that he was suited for solo virtuosity 

in the event that he chose music as his career: "...das 

Yerlangen nach Liebesaustausch mit der Menge, nach KrSnzen, 

nach CatzbucKelei und KusshSnden im Beifallsgeprassel", was 

entirely lacking in him* And Zeitblom adds: " Hr vermied 

die Ausdrtlcke. ..dass er...zu schamhaft, zu stolz, zu sprBde, 

2 ) 

zu einsam ftlrs Virtuosentum sei." 


Nor did he find a career as conductor appeal¬ 


ing : 


w ..*er sprach von Weltscheu. f Weltscheu f nannte 
er sich und wollte damit nichts zsl seinem Lob 
gesagt haben. Diese Eigenschaft urteilte er, 
sei der Ausdruck des Mangels an Wfirme, an Sym- 
pathie, an Liebe. n 3) 

—things which were necessary to become a good artist, to 
be beloved of the world. 


This left only composition— ”die Musik als 

solche, die Yersprechung und Y e rlobung mit ihr, das her- 

4) 

metische Laboratorium, die GoldkEtche, die Composition. w 

With unrestrained enthusiasm he continues: 

n Alle Tricks und Zw&nge werde ich auffassen... 
Ich werde die prima materia veredeln, indem ich 
ihr das magisterium beisetze und mit G-eist und 

1) See DE. p. 113. 

2) See DE. p. 205 


3) See DE. p. 205 f 

4) See DE. p. 206. 












- 













* 







. 


* *■ 

• - * 


; r 





, r#; 






* 








4 

c 










- 33 - 


Feuer den Stoff durch viele Engen und Resorten 
zur Listening treibe." 1) 


But for all that, he still doubts whether he is 
suited for the art, whether he has "the nature of the art¬ 
ist” : 

” Statt ihrer ist eine rasch ges&ttigte Intel- 
ligenz mein T eil...und sie, nebst der damit Yer- 
bundenen Ermtldbarkeit und Neigung zum Ekel 
(begleitet von Hauptweh) ist der ^rund meiner 
Scheu und Sorge...” 2) 

finally he speaks of his diabolic and irresistible desire 
to laugh: 


” Ich habe verdammter Weise von jeher bei den 
geheimnisvoll-eindrucksvollsten Erscheinungen 
lachen mtlssen, und bin von diesem tlbertriebenden 
Sinn ftlr das Komis che in die Theologie geflohen, 
in der Hoffrung, dass sie dem Kitzel Ruhe ge- 
bieten we£de*~um dann eine Menge entsetzlicher 
Komik in ihr zu finden. Warum mtlssen alle Dinge 
mir als ihre eigene Parodie erscheinen?" 3) 


We see then, that Adrian Leverktlhn knew what lay 
ahead for him. In his innermost heart he knew his destiny 
and understood its sources in himself. It needed only 
further urging from Kretschmar for him to make his decis¬ 
ion in favour of music. And Kretschmar knew what he wan¬ 
ted: 


"Leute wie ihn, genau solche, habe die Kunst 
heute n$tig...Die Ktthle, die ’rasch gesgttigte 
Intelligenz’, der Sinn_ftlr das Abgeschmackte, 
die Ermtldbarkeit, die Reigung zum Ueberdruss, 

1) See DP. p. 206* 

2) See DP# p. 206 f. 

3) See DP. p. 208 f. 









- 

t * * * 

















< 

1 


, 

c 




r; •;! 


. 

... 


„ 









- 34 - 


die FShigkeit zum Skel—dies alles sei ganz da- 
nacli angetan, die darait verbundene Begabung zur 
Berufung zu erheben." 1) 

So, at the beginning of the winter semester, Leverktlhn 
went to Leipzig* 

More and more clearly are we to discern how this 
man is living up to his symbolic name with which Thomas 
Mann has invested him—"Leverktlhn"—"dangerous liver"; the 
man whose pride and arrogance dare him to plunge irrevocably 
onward to certain damnation* 

i 

Barely two months have passed when Zeitblom re¬ 
ceives the letter from Adrian which stands as a symbol of 
the end. Appropriately written in part in an antiquated 
style reminiscent of Halle and the language idiocyncracies 
of Ehrenfried ICumpf, it brings on the stage again the one 
leitmotif in this grotesque and fantastic account of the 
descent of a human soul into Hell, which never after dis¬ 
appears from the scene: "hetaera Esmeralda". 

This letter, besides containing many sarcastic 
generalities about Leipzig and its people, makes specific 
mention of Leverktlhn 1 s special interest in the field of 
musical counterpoint: 

" Unter uns gesagt, macht die ^%rmonielehre mir 
viel G&hens, da ich doch bei dem Kontrapunt so- 
fort lebendig ware, nicht genug kurzweiliger 
Bossen auf diesem Zauberfelde anstellen K ann." 2) 


1} See DF. p* 210 
2) See DF. p. 218 













* 


















■’U ■ 


‘ 
















* 










. 










. 





- 35 - 


Then, quite as if in passing only, it tells of Adrian’s 
first contact with the world of the carnal. This too, 
had to come, as Adrian must have gathered from the lec¬ 
tures he heard from Schleppfuss at Halle. 


On the evening of the day of his arrival in Leip¬ 
zig, a porter offered his services to Adrian as ’’Fremden- 


ftthrer"— 


"...so ein Kerl, einen Stride um den Leib, nit 
roter Mtltze und Messingschild, im W©tterumhang 
teuflisch redend wie alle Welt dahier, mit ge- 
str&ubtem Unterkiefer, sah...unserem Schlepp¬ 
fuss dhnlich.. .ilbrigens starker und dicker von 
der Gose...” 1) 

—who offered to show him the sights of the city. 

2 ) 

* Item: WIR WUHDEN DER SACHS EINS W (italics mine). 
At the precise moment when Adrian and his w FBhrer w came to 
an agreement—at that very moment Adrian LeverkQhn became 
a ” Faustus”, for it is the frightful symbol of the be¬ 
ginning of the actual contract with the Devil for his soul. 
It is clear in Adrian’s recognizing in him something of 
Schleppfuss; it is clear in Mann’s delineation of the 
guide— in his ’’red” cap, in his brightly polished ’’brass” 
badge, and in the equally brightly polished ’’brass” rail¬ 
ing leading up to the brothel with the f? red” lantern over 
the door, to which the betrayer leads him instead of to a 
restaurant as had been requested of him. Finally it is 

1) SEE DF. p. 219. 

2) ibid. 1) 












- 36 - 


clear in his contact with the inmates of that house: 

"Nyinphen und T&chter der Wtlste.. .Morphos, Glas- 
fltlgler, Esmeralden.. .Neben mich stellt sich 
dabei eine Brfiunliche, in spanischem ISckchen, 

Mit grossed Mund, Stumpfnase und Mandelwange, 
Esmeralda, die streichelt dir nit den Arm die 
Wange... ” 1) 

LeverkUhn fled* But the sign of Satan had been placed upon 
him when "Esmeralda” brushed his cheek! 


I have said above that the letter was i n p a r t 
written in an archaic style reminiscent of Halle and the 
Luther-like Humpf* It is significant that this style is 
dropped as soon as the details of the ”Et!hrer”episode have 
been told: 

” S©hr merkwtlrdig* • *dass die Stilgebung, die Trav- 
estie Oder persbnliche Adaption des Humpf'schen 
Altdeutsch nur vorhtlt, bis jenen Abenteuw-er- 
zSLhlt ist**.lst es nicht, als Mtte der archais- 
ierende Ton seinen 2weck erftillt, sobald die Eehl- 
ftlhrung auf den Papier steht?” 2) 

It is a parody of style, of course, which LeverktLhn con¬ 
sciously or unconsciously chose for the telling of his 
tale. 


If final proof is needed that Leverldihn himself 

recognized the dire significance of this event in his life, 

the words which close Its telling, thrown in haphazardly 

and as it were jokingly, must suffice: ” Amen hienit und 

3) 

betet ftlr mich!”—as if he already knew what the next in¬ 
evitable step would be. 

1) See BE. p. 221« 3) See BE. p. 224. 

2) See BE. p. 225. 





















- 37 - 


Within the next year this step was taken* Ad¬ 
rian Leverktthn returned to the brothel to seek out the 
"Esmeralda" who had burned her mark upon his cheek: 

"...dass Adrian an jenem Ort um einer bestimmten 
Person willen zurttckkehrte: derjenigen, deren 
Bertlhrung auf seiner Wange brannte, der * Brfiun- 
licheiV, ♦ • *und die er Esmeralda nannte." 1) 

But she had gone. And when he learned where she 

had gone, he sought her out. Under the very significant 

pretext of wishing to see a performance of "Salome” at 

Graz, the capital of Styria, he also (or perhaps, instead) 

2 ) 

made a visit to Pressburg—"ungarisch Pozsony genannt"— 

where the girl had been secreted for treatment of what 

was obviously syphilis : "...um einer Hospital-Behandlung 
3) 

willen." 

" urn) AN IHHER mum STfflTTE machtb der getrieb- 
4) 

ENE SIE AUSFXNBIG" (italics mine). Fatal words! In spite 
of her warning that her body was diseased, the inevitable 
took place. The "Faustian" pact with the Devil was con¬ 
summated; for in the union of their bodies, Leverktlhn 
symbolically signed the agreement with his own blood. The 
fateful anti-climax of his life had been reached, th@ 
hellish triad indissoluably forged together—Leverktthn, 
"Esmeralda"(syphilis) and the Devil. Five weeks later 
Adrian learned that he was infected. 

1) See DF. p. 237. 3) ibid. 2) . 

2) See DF. p. 238. 4) ibid. 2) 





t 

? 


- 
















- ' 







- 38 - 


In describing Leverktlhn f s actions following 

this discovery, Thomas Mann employs repeatedly the number 

symbol "three", as representative of the triad named 

above. He first visits a Dr, Hrasmi— " Adrian hatte 

1 ) 

seine Uohnung im Addressbuch aufgeschlagen." It is char¬ 
acteristic that he chose his physician this way rather 
than openly seeking out a reputable practitioner, " Er- 

asni war ein gewichtiger Mann, mit rotem Gesicht und sch- 

2 ) 

warzen Spitzbart." 

" An drei aufeinanderfolgenden ^agen war Adrian 
zur Eortsetzung dieser Handlung bei ihm; dann 
ordnete Erasmi eine Unterbrechoing von drei 
Tagen." 3) 

Upon returning for further treatment after this period, 

Adrian went up three flights of stairs to the office, only 

to find three open doors, and beyond the t hird Dr. Erasmi 

4) 

dead, laid out by the undertaker. 

He took two days to recover from the shock. On 
the third day he chose another name from the directory— 

Dr. Zimbalist. His office was on the third floor over a 
piano warehouse. In his waiting-room, one could find 
among other books and magazines, " eine illustrierte 
Sittengeschichte." Twice Adrian went for treatment. On 
the third time he met three people coming down the stairs— 


two detectives, and between them, Dr. Zimbalist, hand- 

1) See DF. f. 241. 3) See DF. p. 242 

2) ibid 1) 4) ibid. 3) 










. 




4 




















- 39 - 


cuff ed to one of them* He made no third attempt to obtain 

treatment, for after a time all outward symptoms had disap- 

1 ) 

peared. 


In Zimbalist as in Erasmi the identification with 

the diabolic is as obvious as it had been in the.case of 

Schlepp fuss and Kurrpf. But here Mann goes even farther: 

"...und einem nur unter den NasenlOchem stehen 
gelassenen SchnurrbSrtchen, wie es damals in den 
oberen Klassen Mode war und spSter zum Attribut 
einer welthistorischen Maske werden sollte." 2) 

The reference, of course, is to Adolf Hitler* 


Leverktthn took all these experiences as a matter 
of course. And such, indeed, they were, as the Devil him¬ 
self confirms during the interview which took place in 
Italy four years later: 


(Devil) 

"Und die Aerzte hast du dir auch mit sicherem 
Ins tinkt aus gesucht •" 

(Adrian) 

"Was habt ihr mit meinen beiden Aerzten gemacht?" 
(Devil) 

"Beiseitigt, beiseitigt. Oh, die Stamper haben 
wir doch natUrlich in deinem Interesse beiseit¬ 
igt*..Sobald sie mit ihrer spezifischen Behandlun 
die erste, kutan betonte allgemeine Infiltration 
geh8rig eingeschrSnkt und damit der Metastasier- 
ung nach oben (i.e., to the brain) einen kr&ft- 
igen Antrieb gegeben, war ihr G-escMft getan, sie 
waren abzuschaff en.* 3) 

1) Syphilis affects "first some local part, secondly the 
skin and mucous membranes, and thirdly the bones and mus 
cles". In the latter stage there is no outward manifesta 
tion of its presence. See The Concise Oxford Dictionary, 
Third Edn., Oxford University Press, 1934. 

2) See DE. p. 243. 

3) See DE. p. 362. 

















" 




' 




■ 

t 

t - ‘ 








* 

.■ : 

. 










- 40 - 


It was but one phase of that preparation for the years— 
twenty-four years—of diabolically brilliant artistic 
activity: 

" Der Rtickgang der Allgemeindurchdringung war 
sick selbst zu liberlassen, damit die Progredienz 
dort_oben htlbsch langsam vonstattenging, damit 
die Jahre, Jahrzehnte schSner, nigromantischer 
2eit salviert wftren, ein ganzes ^tundglas voll 
genialer Teufelszeit..1) 

The syphilitic germs at their destructive work, " die Klei¬ 
ner", as Satan calls them, were already early symbolized 
by the "fressender ^ropfen" of Johannes LeverkOhn, the 
"speculator of the elements"* 

It is interesting to note that the whole w Esmer¬ 
alda" episode follows in almost exact detail a similar 
experience which Nietzsche had had, and that its outcome 
for him in the end, was precisely the same as for Lever- 
kt!hn* This is one of numerous instances where the life of 

Leverktlhn follows that of Nietzsche, who also died in mad- 

2 ) 

ness, as Blankenagel points out. 

"IJND HER NAME!—DERJ3SNIGE DEN ER UTR TON ANFANG 
GSGEBEN— GEISTERT RDNENEATT*• •BURGH SEIN vJERK" (italics 
mine). That is what Zeitblom says of the woman, " Esmer¬ 
alda", through whom Adrian sold his soul. This leitmotif, 
first touching Adrian’s life during his childhood when his 


1) John C # Blankenagel, " A Nietzsche Episode in Thomas 
Mann’s ’D 0 ktor Faustus’", Modern Language Notes, Vol. 63 
1948, pp. 387-390. 

2) See DF. u. 362 f. 






















• t 








- 41 - 


father showed him the coloured cuts of freakish lepi- 

doptera etc., was henceforth to appear in symbolically 

concrete form in his musical compositions. He used it 

for the first time in his "Brentanolieder": 

"...in dem wohl schOnsten der noch in Leipzig 
komponierten dreizehn Brentano-G-es&nge, dem 
herz%rwtlhlenden Liede, * 0 lieb MSdel, wie schle- 
cht bist du f , das ganz davon beherrscht ist." 1) 

It consists of the use of a five to six note series as an 

ever-present motif dominating the whole song: " Es bedeutet 

...diese Elang-Chiffre, h e a e es: Eetaera Esmeralda" 2). 


Not only does the use of this leitmotif symbolize 

the "Esmeralda" experience; it shoves too, his tendency in 

music and at the same time one of the aspects of this art 

which interested Thomas I'lann: 

"Leveridlhn war nicht der erste Komponist...der 
es liebte, Heimlichkeiten formel-und siegel- 
hafter Art in seinem Werk zu verschliessen, die 
den eingeborenen Hang der Musik zu aberglSub- 
ischen Begehungen und Befolgungen, zahlenmyst- 
ischen und bustabensymbolischen bekunden..." 3) 

It is evidence of an innate trend and leaning to the mys¬ 
tical, as well as of past influences in his life. Finally, 

it shows how he is striving for "a strict style", seeking 
4) 

to "discipline" his music: 

" Weisst du...wo ich einem strengen Satz an n^ch- 
sten war?.. .Sinmal im Brentano-Cyklus.. .in T 0 
lieb Mtdel f # Das ist ganz aus einer G-rundgestalt, 
einer vielfach variablen Intervalreihe, den 
ftinf TBnen h-e-a-e-es, abgeleitet.. .es ist e in 

1) See DF. p. 240. 3) ibid. 1) 

2) See DF. p. 241. In English 4) See p. 16, Note 4) 
this reads:b e a e b-flat. 








- 42 - 


Wort, ein Schltlsselwort, dessen Zeichen tlber- 
all in den Lied zu finden sind und es g&nzlich 
determinieren mOchten.” 1) 

—as his life and fate, of course, were determined by 

"hetaera Esmeralda”♦ There is also a number-symbol in the 

number of songs contained in the cycle—thirteen—a number 

which has always been looked upon with suspicion* It 

obviously had a meaning for him, for he would never allow 

the production of these songs except as a complete group: 

"•••(er) wollte niemals den Vortrag einzelner Sttlcke daraus, 

sondern stets nur die geschlossene cyklische Darbietung zu- 

2 ) 

lassen.” Even Mann remarks on the fact that the numeral 
XIII chances to stand at the head of the chapter which he 
has devoted to Xberhard Schleppfuss at 2 alle...very appro¬ 
priate, indeed! 


Under the guidance of Wendell Kretschmar, Adrian 
produced a symphonic fantasy called ”Meer 1 euchten” while 
at Leipzig. This piece already foretold the flavour of 
his future productions: 

”*.*so trug schon dies glaubenlose Meistersttick 
koloristischer Orchesterbrillianz heimlich die 
Ztlge der Parodie und der intellektuellen Iron- 
isierung der Xunst tlberhaupt, die sich in Lever- 
ktihns spSterem Werk so oft auf eine heinlich- 
geniale W®ise hervortrat.. .TTiele fanden das er- 
kSltend, ja, zurtlckstossend und enpSrend.” 3) 

Most of the time, however, he spent on the settings for 

lieder# ^e arranged music for a series taken from Dante f s 

1) See DF. p. 297 f. 

2) See DF. p. 283. 

3) See DF. p. 235. 







c 


t 





t 









- 43 - 


DIVINF COMEDY, from the "Purgatorio" and the "Paradiso": 

" Adrian hatte da etwa die furchtbare harte 
Folge von Versen gew&hlt, wo von der Verdammnis 
der Unschuld, der Unbelehrtheit die Rede ist 
und nach der unbegreiflichen G’erechtigkeit ge- 
fragt wird, die den Guten und Reinen, nur eben 
nichtGetauften, von Glauben nicht erreichten der 
HBlle ttberantwortet." 1) 


It was always the morbid which attracted Lever- 

kHhn, and parody of evil and good was ever present in his 

work* ^e chose,for example, the poems of Verlaine and 

Blake, setting the latter 1 2 3 s " A Poison Tree* to music: 

"•••die b3se Schlichtheit des Gedichtes war in der Kbmpo- 

2 ) 

sition vollkommen wiedergegeben." 

It was while at Leipzig that Adrian made the 

3 ) 

acquaintance of Rtldiger Schildknapp, anglicist and anglo- 

maniac, poet and translator—the "shieldbearer" or "squire" 

—the very antithesis of what his name implies* For he 

was never available when he was needed, yet always imposing 

his presence when the company might well have done without 

it* He looked "elegant und sportlich herrenhaft", had 

"eine etwas zerissene und zugleich weichliche Mundbildung... 

neigte zu Tuberkulose", and was quite successful with the 

ladies. His chief concern was "what one ought to do": 

"•♦.das Potentielle war seine Domfine, der unend- 
liche Raum des MBglichen sein HBnigreich..*Aus 
seinem "amen ersChioss er, dass seine Vorfahren 
reisige Begleiter von Rittern und Ptirsten ge- 


1) See DF. p* 250. 

2) See DF. p. 256. 

3) See*DF. p. 258 ff 





„ * 4 









- 44 — 


wesen wSren, und obgleich er nie auf einem Pferd 
gesessen hatte.. .ftlhlte er sicli zum Ritter ge- 
boren...Die h&ufigste Redensart in seinem Munde 
war das Wort T man sollteV 1 1) 

Although, his whole attitude expressed a desire for indepen¬ 
dence, " Doch war er auch wieder vieler Herren Diener und 

2 ) 

hatte manches vom Rrippenreiter." 


This man was throughout the remainder of Adrian T s 

life, a frequent companion. He could always make Adrian 

laugh: "Hie habe ich ihn(i.e., Adrian) so viel lachen, und 

zwar Tr&nen lachen, sehen, wie beira Zusammensein mit Rlldiger 

3 ) 

Schildknapp." Adrian was very friendly with him. More¬ 
over, their eyes were exactly the same colour. Zeitblom 
regards the similarity of their eyes, and the fact that 
Schildknapp did not like the Germans— ” dass er auch die 

Deutschen nicht mochte, von ihrer vBlkergesellschaftlichen 

4) 

Inferioritat durchdrungen war"— as significant in ex¬ 
plaining Adrian 1 s attachment to Schildknapp. He says of 
Adrian: 

" Seine Abneigung gegen das Beutschtum, das er 
verkSrperte (ein Widerwille, der inn tlbrigens 
mit dem Anglisten und Anglomanen Schildknapp 
zusammenftlhrte) trat in die beiden Brscheinungs- 
formen versponnener SchUchternheit vor der Welt 
und ernes inneren S edtlrfnisses nach Welt und 
Weite auseinander # 5 ) 

Schildknapp, accordingly, is the diabolic influence which 

1) nSee DP. p. 262 f. 

2) See BF. p. 263. 

3) See BF. p. 264. 

4) See BF. p. 263. 

5) See BF. p. 255. 











- 45 - 


adds fuel to this particular tendency in Adrian’s char¬ 
acter, and their like-eyes are surely symbolic of this 
quality in both of them. It was Schildknapp too, who 
accompanied him to Italy when the terms of Adrian’s con¬ 
tract with the Devil were arranged. 


Speaking of Leverklhn’s tendencies in music, Zeit- 

blom says: 


n Das Element eines zum Sussersten gehenden Aus- 
druckswillens war immer herrschend in ihm, zu- 
sammen mit der intellektuellen Leidenschaft ftlr 
herbe Ordnung, das niederllndische Lineare. Mit 
anderen Worten: Hitze und Elite walteten neben 
einander in seinern Werk..*so dass man den Ein- 
druck einer gltihenden Eonstruktion hatte...die 
Idee des Dlmonischen nahebrachte..." 1} 

Not only does this symbolize the ’’coldness” which is a 
leitmotif of Leverklhn’s life from the beginning; it sym¬ 
bolizes also, precisely the ’’Hell” which the Devil describes 
to Adrian, in Italy: 


a Ha es in zwei Worten zu sagen: ihr Wesen, Oder., 
ihre Pointe ist, dass sie ihren Insassen nur die 
Wahl lfisst zwischen extremer Elite und einer 
Glut...zwischen diesen beiden Zustlnden fllchten 
sie brill end hin und her, denn in dem einen -er- 
scheint der andre immer als himmlisches Labsal, 
ist aber sofort und in des Wortes hlllischer 
Bedeutung unertrlglich..2) 


The setting for the fifth distinct phase of Lev- 
erktthn’s life is Munich, w r here he went after a visit to 
his home at Buchel to attend the wedding of his sister, 
Ursula. He was destined never to see his father alive 


1) See EF. p. 276 

2) See BE. p. 381 






-■ - 

- 

- 

t 

, 

* „ „ 



















^ • < 










. 

i 














- 46 - 


again and not to return to Buchel until his mother fetched 
him hack, after his mind had broken dorm. 

At Munich he lived as a lodger with Frau Senator 

Rodde from Bremen, and her two daughters Inez and Clarissa. 

The house and its furnishings bespoke a once well-to-do 

bourgeois household. In Frau Rodde and her daughters, 

Mann symbolizes the life of his own mother and his two ill- 

fated sisters, both of whom committed suicide. Carla 

ended her life in circumstances and for reasons similar to 

those which were responsible for the death of Clarissa 

Rodde. Mann frequently uses his mother as model for the 

mothers in his works. There are always modifications, of 

course; but Frau Rodde had that insatiable love of life 

displayed by both Tonio XrSger’s mother and the mother of 

the dilletante in DSR BAJAZZO; for example, Zeitblom’s 

remarks about Frau Rodde after the death of her husband: 

w Hack dem Tode ihres Satten*..bei stark her- 
abgesetzten TerMltnissen und wohl nicht ganz 
zu. bewahrender Stellung in dem gewohlben Milieu, 
waren Wtlnsche einer unerschSpften und wahrschein- 
lich nie recht befriedigten Lebenslust in ihr 
frei geworden, die auf ein interessanteres 
Hachspiel ihres Lebens in menschlich warmerer 
Sphfire abgezielt batten.” 1) 

Frau Rodde entertained, for her daughters she claimed— 

”'aber doch, wie ziemlich deutlich war, um selbst zu ge- 

3 ) 

niessen und sick den Hof machen lassen.** 

1) See m. p. 304 f. 

2) See DF. p. 30B. 









. 




.r:; .r 



v: 




- v-'f. '--.r.- , \ r. 










. 

*'-,4 












* 








i 


■)/ 








JB . 










m 








-47- 






- 48 - 


Clarisaa the younger daughter was preparing for 

a dramatic career* The symbols of her fate are obvious 

in her bedroom furnishings: 

,f Das Zeichen des Totenkopfes wiederholte sich 
in ihrem Zimmer, es war sowohl als wirkliches 
zfihnebleckendes Skelettprfiparat a^s o gpch in Form 
eines bronzenen Briefschwer e r s * cfe r ** da^ hohldug- 
ige Symbol der Vergfinglichkeit und der * G-enes- 
ung T auf einem Folianten liegend darstellte* 
Dieser trug in griechischen Lettem den Hamen 
des Hippokrates." 1) 

She had a "Heigung zum Skurril-Makabern", which prompted 
her to keep poison in a secret compartment in the bottom 
of the paper-weight in the form of a hollow book, referred 
to above* 


All her life Clarissa strove toward intellectual 

and artistic goals, to no avail* She had in the first 

place no real talent for the stage* She repulsed every 

decent man who had approached her, guarded her virginity 

with her contemptuous way of looking dam her nose, only 

to be seduced in the end by ?, ein pseudo-dimonischer Spitz- 

bar t, SchtozenjSger, Co$lissen-Habitue und Provinz-Yiveur, 

2 ) 

der als Rechtsanwalt, Kriminal-'^erteidiger wirkte* 11 When 
a young man of good breeding finally asked for her hand, 
this beast, who had already forced her to his will since 
the first time by threatening blackmail, revealed her past 
to her bethrothed, and Clarissa ended her life by swallowing 

1) See DF* p. 305 f* 

2) See DP* p. 581. 








■ 
















- 












- 

, 













■ t 








- 










, 









* 


. 









- 49 - 


the cyanide which, had been waiting in the hollow book 

with the death’s head on it for just this occasion: 

"Each Ablauf der Winter-Saison 1921-22, im Mai, 
in Hause ihrer Matter zu Pfeiffering (Frau Rodde 
had in the meantime moved to Pfeiffering), nahm 
sie sich, und auch ohne viel Rttcksicht auf 
diese, hastig und entschlossen mit dem Gifte das 
Leben, das sie eben fttr den Augenblick,. wo ihr 
Stolz das Leben nicht mehr ertragen wtlrde, von 
langer Hand her in Bereitschaft gehalten hntte.”!) 


Inez, the elder sister, was also fated: 

” Sie vertrat•..das erhaltende Element in der 
kleinen Familie, lebte im Protest gegen die 
Entwtlrzelung, das Stiddeutsche, die Kunststadt, 
die BohSme, die Abendgesellschaft ihrer Mutter, 
rtlckwSrts gewandt mit Betonung zum Alten, Vfiter- 
lichen, Bttrgerlich-Strengen und Wtlrdigen.. .* 2) 

She wrote poetry in secret. One example, called " Der 

Bergmann” already contained the key to her fate: 

”Ioh bin ein 3ergmann in Seele Schacht 
Und steige still und furchtlos dunkelwSrts 

Und nie verlang’ ich mehr^zum G-lttck.* 5) # 

She married Dr. Helmut Institoris— "Aesthetiker und Kunst- 

historiker.•.die Brutalit&t verehrte, nattlrlich nur, wenn 

4 ) 

sie sch8n war../* This marriage, not out of love, aroused 
in her her latent femininity, for she fell instead in love 
with Rudolf Schwerdtfeger, a bisexual flirt, forced her¬ 
self upon him as his mistress, took to morphine, and fin¬ 
ally, in a fit of jealousy shot him and was herself com¬ 
mitted to an asylum, insane. 

1) See DF. p. 579. 

2) See DF. p, 506. 

3) See DF. p. 307. 

4) See DF. t>. 441. 





t 



t 









t 


< 








t 






t 









- 50 - 


I have spoken of these two women at length, not 
only because they are symbolic of Thomas mann’s own family 
life in the paternal home, but also because they represent 
the type of person with whom Adrian Leverktthn had contact 
for many years. They are the disturbing forces which hang 
heavily upon the air about Leverklihn, external influences 
which condition him for his diabolic musical works, and 
edge him little by little toward the "Raging Inferno". 

The Rodde"salon brought other personalities into 
Adrian’s life as well: 

" 3s war eine ktinstlerische oder halbktinstler- 
ische Welt, die sich da zusammenfand, eine so- 
zusagen stubenreine Boh^me, gesittet und dabei 
frei, locker, axntlsant genug..." 1) 

People such as Konrad KnSterich, "dem Ansehen nach einem 

Germanen, Sugambier Oder Ubier gleich—es fehlte nur ohen- 

2 ) 

auf der gedrehte Haarschopf", though his name, "Knotgrass" 

supplied that in symbol. There were Leo Zink and Baptist 

Spengler, an inseparable combination of artists, whom Mann 

always mentions in the same breath; indeed, their names 

"zinc" and "tinsmith" suggest their "alloyed" qualities. 

Spengler, " ein skeptischer Weltmann, vem8gend, wenig 

arbeitend, hypochondriach, belesen, stets ISchelnd im Ge- 

3) 

sprach und rasch nit den Aug an blinzelnd" is the symbol of 
penglerian decay and decadence, for syphilis was devourin 

1) See DF. p. 304. 

2) See DF. p. 307. 

3) See DF. p. 308. 





t 


c 












t 







C 














-51- 


him from within, finally reaching his heart and removing 
him from the scene. This fact Adrian learns from the 
Devil: 

" Nattirlich ist Spengler ein Ssmeraldas. Nicht 
umsonst blinzelt er immer so verschfimt und listig 
mit den Augen...Sr lcrBpelt so dahin an Leber, 
Niere, Magen, Herz und Darm..1) 

Mann depicts the entire coterie of Leverhtlhn’s acquain¬ 
tances as useless, decadent people, leading aimless lives. 

In additoh to Rttdiger Schildknapp, one of Adrian^ 
most frequent companions subsequent to coming to Munich, 
was Rudolf Schwerdtfeger, also an habitue of the Rodde 
salon. I have called him a ^bisexual flirts; firstly, 
because he flirted shamelessly with the female sex, a qual¬ 
ity which made Inez Rodde fall in love with him, and at 
whose hands he died; secondly, because he wooed Adrian 
Leverktthn from the moment of their first acquaintance. Al¬ 
though Thomas ^ann never says it outright, the suggestion 
that this was a homosexual attraction is made tine and 
again through the mouth of Zeitblom. Schwerdtfeger was 
one of the three people whom Adrian LeverMhn openly loved— 
love which was forbidden him by Devil’s contract, and hence 
could have only fatal and diabolic results, not to say 
basis. 

The Schwerdtfeger-LeverhfLhn relationship is the 


1) See OT. p. 359 





> 






o 



-52- 


exact reverse of the Tonio KrOger-Hans Hansen relation¬ 
ship in Mann’s TONIO KROEGER. Whereas in TONIO KROEGER it 
is the artist "who longs for and woos healthy, unprob- 
lematical normality, it is precisely the naive, blond and 

blue-eyed Rudi Schwerdtfeger who now seeks Adrian’s, the 

1 ) 

daemonic artist’s company and love*” 


Here is a picture of Schwerdtfeger: 

” Sin hegabter junger Geiger...ein Blondkopf, von 
mittlerer, netter Statur...dem Flirt mit dem 
schOnen Gesclilecht • • .selig hingegeben.. .mit seiner 
nalven Gewohnheit, jemand im Gespr&ch gespannt 
und gleichsam entrttstet anzusehen: seine stahl- 
blauen Augen wtlhlten dabei fBrmlich in dem Ge- 
sicht des anderen, indem sie sich bald auf das 
eine, bald auf das andere. ♦ .eins tell ten.’’ 2) 

These steel-blue eyes (his name is appropriately ’’ Schwerdt¬ 
feger") were destined to bore, to cut their way through 
Adrian’s reserve to his heart. They were the colour of 
those of Adrian’s father, and constituted one of the three 
colours which made up Adrian’s eyes. 


Zeitblom writes further on Schwerdtfeger: 

n ^D a hei war er schlichten Sinnes, von Literatur 
nicht bertihrt, jedoch besorgt urn die gute Mein- 
gsistig hochstehender Menschen—nicht nur 
aus litelkeit, sondern weil er ernstlich Wert 
auf den Dmgang mit ihnen legte und sich durch sie 
zu beheben, zu vervollkommen wttnschte. Auf Adrian 
hatte^er es gleich abgesehen, machte ihm den 
Hof, indem er geradezu die Danen darflber vernach- 
l£ssigte." 3) 

1) Andre von Gronicka, "Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Eaustus’, Ger- 
manic "eview, Vol. LXZHI, Ho. 3 , October, 1948, n. 214 . 

2) See DE. p. 308. 

3) See DE. p. 310. 





- 


? 












4 










-53- 


’’ E r nahm seinen Arm (i.e., Adrian’s), schlen- 
derte mit ihm urn den Saal indem er sich des 
karnevalistischen Du gegen ilm bediente, unbe- 
kttmmert darum, dass jener nicht darauf singing." 
1 ) 


Once, after Adrian bad played parts of bis 

t,G esta Romanorum” to a group of friends, an occasion which 

bad brought the tears to the eyes of those listening, 

Schwerdtfeger became almost repulsively demonstrative: 

"..in entfesselter Zutraulichkeit, nahm die 
Lizenz des Augenblicks wahr, indem er mit einem 
f das hast du grossartig gemachtl’ Adrian umarmte 
und dessen Kopf an den seinen drtlckte." 2) 

Much later, on another occasion, when Adrian was suffering 
from a frightful attack of headache at Pfeiffering, Sch¬ 
werdtf eger discussed with Adrian his sinful liaison with 
Ine*. Institoris (nee Rodde) as they sat in a darkened room* 
Amongst other things, he confessed: 

" Man beurteilte ihn meistens falsch: er ftlhre 
viel lieber ein ernstes, ihn hebendes und f©r- 
derndes G-espr&ch mit einem solchen Mann, als 
dass er bei Weibem liege; ja wenn er sich selber 
charakterisieren solle, so glaube er nach ge- 
nauer Prtifung am besten zu tun, sich eine plat- 
onische Natur zu nennen." 3) 


Long ago, when he had first met Leverktihn, he 
had asked him to write a violin concerto for him. Now in 
the familiarity of the darkened room and with Leverktihn’s 
head heavy with excruciating pains—the manifestation of 
the Devil’s ’’little ones”, the spirochettes of syphilis 

1) See DP. p. 316. 

2) See DP. id. 492. 

3) See DP. p. 537. 








$ 









4 









" f 


<r 





























♦ 

a ■: 

. 

* 



















-54- 


at work on his brain, — Schwerdtfeger pressed his dia¬ 
bolic suit with the words: 

" Ich brauche Sie, Adrian, zu meiner Hebung, 
meinerYervollkommung, meiner Besserung, auch zu 
meiner Reinigung, gewissermassen.. # es ist mir 
niemals ernster mit einer Sache, mit einem 3e- 
dtlrfnis gewesen. Und das Konzert.. .ist nur der 
zusamniengedrfingte. . .der symbolische Ausdruck fttr 
dieses Bedtlrfnis...Sie k8nnen alle Konventionen 
umstossen...Einverlieben wollt ich es mir, dass 
ich’s im Schlafe spielen kSnnte und es he gen und 
pflegen in jeder Rote wie eine Mutter, denn Mut¬ 
ter w&re ich ihm, und Sie w&ren der Yater—es 
W£re zwischen uns wie ein Kind, ein platonisches 
Kind—ja, unser Konzert, das w&re so recht die 
Irftillung von allem was ich unter platonisch 
verstehe.” 1) 

It is as Seitblom remarks: " Auf die Dauer erwies sich die 

VJehrlosigkeit der Einsamkeit gegen solche Aorbung, aller- 

2 ) 

dings zu des Werbers Yerderben.” Bor the concerto was 

eventually written. Schwerdtfeger broke down Adrian’s 

reserve; with his steel-blue eyes he penetrated the wall 

of "coldness” which had surrounded this man: 

n Es kann kein Zweifel bestehen...dass eine uner- 
mttdliche durch nichts abzuschreckende Zutrau- 
lichkeit tlber sprSdeste Einsamkeit schliesslich 
den Sieg davon getragen hatte—einen 3ieg, der 
bei der Polaren...Yerschiedenheit der Partner, 
den geistigen Abstande zwischen ihnen, nur einen 
BESTUXITEIT CHARAKTER( italics mine) haben konnte, 
und der, koboldhafter Weise, immer auch in diesem 
Sinn angestrebt worden war. Es ist mir volkommen 
klar, dass ftir Sehwerdtfegers Flirtnatur die 
TTeberwindung der Einsamkeit, durch die Zutrau- 
lichkeit, bewusst oder unbewusst, von Anfang an 
diese besondere Meinung und FSrbung gehabt hatte— 
womit nicht gesagt ist, dass sie der edleren 
Motive ermangelte. Im G-egenteil.. .nur dass er 

1) See DP. p. 537. 

2) See DP. p. 538f. 







« 




c 











-55- 


(i.e. Schwerdtfeger) unlogisch genug war zu 
ihrer Hroberung die angeborenen Ilittel des Flirts 
spielen zu lassen—und sich danxi gekr&nkt zu 
ftlhlen, wenn die schwermtltige Neigung, die er 
erregte,die Merkmale erotischer Ironie nicht 
verleugnete." 1) 


As I said above, the concerto was written] and 
it took Adrian with Rudi to Vienna for its first perfor¬ 
mance, and from there on a trip with the latter as sole 

companion, to one of the estates of a mysterious Frau von 

2 ) 

Tolna in Hungary. The significant thing is that when this 

trip ended Adrian and Rudi stood ”per du 1 *: 

w Als sie von dort zurfLckkehrten, erfreute Rudolf 
sich des Pr&rogativs, das bisher, von Undheit 
wegen, ausschliesslich mir geh8rt hatte: er und 
Adrian nannten einander Du. n 5) 


If undesirable relations ever did occur between 
these two men, then certainly this seems the logical occas¬ 
ion (and the place in the book) which Thomas Mann provides 
as a clue. Immediately prior to the appearance of the 
above quotation, he lets Zeitblom tell the reader of a love- 
letter in every sense of the word, which Leverktlhn had'on 
one occasion written to Schwerdtfeger, It had brought a 
prompt visit from the latter to Pfeiffering: 

w Und mit einer Art von Billigung vermute ich, 
dass bei aieser Gelegenheit die Ausarbeitung 
...und Zueignung des Violin-Honzerts beschlos- 
sen wurde. ff 4) 


1) See DP. p. 633. 

Z) See p. 92 ff for account of Frau von Tolna 
3} See DF. p. 634. 












-56- 


Then Mann begins Chapter XXXEX with this intro¬ 


ductory paragraph: 

Tt Armer Rudil Xurz war der Triumph deiner kind- 
ischen Dfimonie, denn sie hatte dich in dem Kraft- 
feld einer tieferen, verhSngnisstgrkeren ¥er- 
fangen, die sie schleunigst breach, verzehrte, zu- 
nichte machte. Unseliges f DuM Weder tem es der 
blau&ugigen Belanglosligkeit zu, die es .ftlr sich 
gewann, noch konnte derjenige, der sich dazu 
herbeiliess, urnhin, die—mag sein— begltlfekende 
Erniedrigung su r&chen die ihra idamit geschehen 
war. Die Bache war unwillktlrlich, prompt, kalt- 
blickend und geheimnisvoll. w 1) 


There is no doubt that LeverkOhn loved Schwerdt- 
feger, if he can be said ever to have loved, in the true 
sense of the word. It comes out when he asks Kudi to pro¬ 
pose to Marie Godeau in his behalf. Adrian had employed 
the word ^human” in speaking of his future works; to which 
Schwerdtfeger had replied that he had no wish to hear any¬ 
thing which had been inspired by the ?? human^ element in 
Leverktthn: 


(Adrian) 

lf Nein?.. .und hast doch schon dreimal eines vor 
den Leuten gespielt? Hast es dir widmen lassen?... 
Dass...sagt nir Einer, der mich mit staunens-- 
werter Geduld ftlr T s Menschliche gewann und mich 
zum Du bekehrte, Einer, bei dem ich sum ersteli¬ 
ma 1 in meinem Leben menschliche W&rme fand...* 2) 

n In meinem Leben war Einer...der das Menschliche 
in mir freimachte, mich das Gltlck lehrte...* 3) 


Ehether, then, overt relations occurred between 


1) See DFo p. 635. 

I 2) See DIP. p. 664* 

3) See, DF. p. 665 






- 



c 


c 


















- 57 - 


Leverkllhn and Schwerdtfeger, we cannot tell; in any case 
their relationship was spiritually consummated in Adrian 1 s 
writing and Schwerdtfeger f s playing of the concerto. Fur¬ 
ther, we must see in the Schwerdtfeger episode in Lever- 
ktttm’s life, the symbol of the work of The Tempter, with 
"hetaera Esmeralda” and the number-symbol "three" as the 
key. 

It is one of the three loves not actually allowed 
Adrian by contract with the Devil, It produces a concerto 
which is performed three times. The third performance pro¬ 
vides the occasion for Adrian to meet Marie Godeau of the 
"black eyes", with whom he falls in love, to all appearan¬ 
ces. This produces an ironic love- triangle , LsverkOhn, 

Marie Godeau and Schwerdtfeger. Adrian makes the unnatural 
request of Schwerdtfeger that he propose to Marie Godeau 
for him; the girl refuses and in the end Schwerdtfeger 
abandons Adrian, betrays their friendship, and himself asks 
for her hand. She accepts him after a third visit— one on 
Adrian’s behalf, two on his own— the outcome of which was 
to contribute directly to his death. Schwerdtfeger now 
plays his last concert as first violinist with the Zapf- 
enstQsser orchestra, in preparation for leaving for Paris 
and his marriage to Marie Godeau. After this concert, 

Inez Institoris (nee Rodde), who now forms a third in another 
love- triangle -- Schwerdtfeger, Inez Institoris, Marie 










$ 































■ 

t 

< 















- 58 - 


1 ) 

Godoau (Schwerdtfeger had been Inez’s lover)—shoots him 
with five shots from a pistol on a streetcar. Two of 
Adrian’s loves were now beyond his sphere. The third one, 
Nepomuk Schneidewein, still lay in the future at that time. 

The nest important phase of LeverMhn’s life, 

the sixth, has its setting in Italy: 

” Der Ort war Palestrina*•.Primeste mit ihrem an- 
tiken ilamen und als Penestrino 1 2 , Trutzburg der 
Ptlrsten Colonna, von Dante in 27* Gesange des 
Inferno erwfihnt...* 2) 

Schildknapp was his companion during the two years spent 
in Italy. During the summers they lived in the ’’Manardi” 
household, and it is here that Adrian had the interview 
with the Devil, that strange fiction of a diseased imag¬ 
ination; here where the terms of the fateful bargain first 
contracted for five years earlier with ”Ksmeralda n in 
Hungary, were finally agreed upon. 

Let us consider for a moment the setting for 
this dread experience. Italy the land of sunshine, of 
’’warmth”, completely different from the ”cold” North which 
Adrian represented only too well; an ancient Roman setting 
in the Sabine hills; a household with a fourteen-year.old 
daughter, 

”...ein leicht zum NSrrischen geneigtea Kind, 
das die Gewohnheit hatte bei Tisch den LBffel 
Oder die Gabel vor ihren Augen hin und her zu be- 

1) See p. 49 

2) See DP. p. 327. 











■ 






<■ 





























* 

























.$■!■' * - 

. 












- 59 - 


wegen und dabei irgend ein Wort . ..mit fragender 
Betonung wiederholt vor sich hin zu sprechen.";l) 

a house where a Russian prince had lodged on a previous 

occasion and had frightened the inhabitants by shooting at 

ghosts he believed he saw there; on the steps leading up 

the hillside to the village—" Eine Sorte Kleiner, schwar- 

2 ) 

zer Schweine lief darauf herunu.."; a Capfctchin monastery, 
Adrian’s favourite spot; finally, as Adrian’s sole com¬ 
panion, Rtldiger Schildknapp, the only man who could make 
him laugh his diabolic laugh. It requires little imagin¬ 
ation to feel the presence of the diabolic in such surroun¬ 
dings; nor to see in the little black pig the symbol of 
3 ) 

the Devil himself. 


Most interesting of all is the presence of the 

"hetaera Esmeralda” symbol in the members of the Casa 

Manardi household, as Victor A. Oswald points out: 

"...Mann’s incorporation of another Hetaera Es¬ 
meralda cipher in the passage of the novel that 
describes the Casa Manardi, the scene of Adrian’s 
dialogue with Old Nick. You will find it in a 
juxtaposition of the initial letter, or letters, 
of the given names of the house’s inhabitants, 
temporary and permanent: H e lene Seitblom, B tld- 
iger Schildknapp, A drian Leverktihn; E rcolano 
Manardi, S erenus Seitblom, "M e re" Manardi, 

A 1 fonso Manardi, D ario Manardi, A melia Man¬ 
ardi. This yields He-ra Esmeralda, which leaves 
little indeed to_be desired...Finally...the name 
chosen for this Italian family is that of the 
precursor of modern syphilology, Giovanni Man¬ 
ardi (1462-1536).,." 4J 

1) See DF. p. 328. 4.) V.A. Oswald, Jr., "Bull 

2) See DF. p. 327. Fathom Eive:Notes on some 

3) Cf.‘ r der sctaarze Pudel f | Devices in T. Mann’s DE." 

Goethe’s FAUST, 11. 1147ff. Germanic A e view,Vol.XHV, 

_ Dec., 1949, No. 4., p.275. 











c 























5 

- 








- 


' 















- 60 - 


We have already seen how "Esmeralda” became the symbol for 
syphilis. 

Zeitblom and his wife Helene, as the above quo¬ 
tation from Oswald indicates, vacationed with the two her¬ 
mits during their second summer in Italy* Zeitblom felt 
out of place and found the monkish life they led very st¬ 
range and unnatural* He admits too, that he was somewhat 

jealous of the "'^emeinschaft der Keuschheit, das Fundament 

2 ) 

ihrer Freundschaft”. Adrian seemed to be living here the 

life of a saint, and he, Zeitblom, alone knew the truth: 

" Ich erbebte nun aber bei dem G-edanken, dass 
seine Keuschheit s e i t d e m, seit jener Um- 
amung, seit seiner vortlbergehenden Irkrankung 
und dem Verlust seiner Aerzte wfihrend derselben, 
nicht mehr dem Ethos der Reinheit, sondern, dem 
Pathos der Unreinheit entsprang. 11 3) 

In this environment, then, LeverMhn had his 
"Faustian" meeting with the "Evil One", of which his ac¬ 
count is in the same archaic language as that earlier let¬ 
ter to Zeitblom telling him of the w Esmeralda" experience 
in Leipzig, it was significantly written on music paper,— 
significant because his music henceforth represents the 
most concrete symbol of this meeting with the Devil. Actual¬ 
ly, of course, the event was a figment of his subconscious 
mind, a conversation with his conscience* However, for 
Leverktihn it took on the colours of reality* 

1) Se^ p. 37, ff. 

2) See DF. p. 341* 

3) See DF. p. 341 f. 
















c. 


f; 




t 


t 









- 61 - 


On the day in question ho had been suffering 

the excruciating tortures of the disease which was raging 

in his system, the tortures of "hetaera Esmeralda”, symbol 

of both his disease and his pact with the nether world: 

"Hatte den ganzen Tag, schmerzhafte Creatur, mit 
dem Leidigen Hauptweh im Eunice In gel e gen und 
mehrmals wttrgen und speien mtlssen® • .aber gegen 
Abend lean Besserung unverhofft und fast pl®tz- 
lich...” 1) 

Increasing attacks of head pains and a craving for ”dark¬ 
ness” during these attacks are the leitmotifs which Thomas 
Mann employs continually from now on to symbolize the 
disease, the approaching madness of Leverktlhn. 

The following extracts,with comments, dram from 
this interview, have been chosen because they either help 
to explain past events in Leverktlhn 1 2 3 s life, or, point to 
the future. It is interesting to note that Mann uses dia¬ 
logue form at this point, an almost certain indication that 
he had 'Goethe’s FAUST in mind to a very marked degree when 
he wrote this section. 

” Sass...bei meiner Lamp e und las Kierkegaard 
tlber Mozarts Don Juan.” 3) 

It is ironic that on this occasion he should be reading 
the work of a Christian on music. 

” Da ftihl ich mich auf den Plotz von schneidender 
KSlte getroffen..3) 

1) See DF. p. 345. 

2) See DF. p. 346. 

3) ibid. 2) 







■ 4 






. 










< 




. 












. 





■ 

♦ 



, 






, 

- 











, 

' " ' 

* 



























- 62 - 


Ilere is the "cold” motif, the "coldness", symbol of Lever- 
ktlhn’s lonely arrogance and pride* 


" demand sitzt in Dtomer auf dem Rosshaarsofa... 
ttberhaupt kein rechter Herr...1st ein Mann, eher 
spillerig von Bigur...Ein Strizzi, Sin Ludweig. 
Und mit der Stimme, der Artikulation eines Schau- 
spielers." 1) 

This man, this apparition, is in every respect a no-good, 
a losel, similar to the "Etihrer" who led Adrian astray at 
Leipzig. But the trained voice, is the voice of one ex¬ 
perienced in his field. 


(Adrian) 

" Wer sagt Du zu mir?" 

(Devil) 

" Ich...Ich mit Gunst. Ss ist schon ein Ver- 
hSltnis mit uns zum Du sagen." 2) 

The Devil knows Adrian already, specifically through "het- 

aera Esmeralda", and hence feels justified in calling hik 

"Du" . 


(Devil) 

" Ich komme ja nicht, dich zur Gesellschaft zu 
holen ; dich zu beschmeicheln. ...sondern um die 
Geschafte mit dir zu besprechen." 3) 

Their contract had been formulated long ago; there re¬ 
mained only the laying down of the terms. 


(Adrian) 

" Ihr sagt lauter Dinge, die in mir sind und aus 
mir konmen, aber nicht aus euch. Ihr Sfft den 
Eumpf nach mit Redensarten und sehet nicht dabei 

1) See DR. p. 346. 

2) See DR. p. 346. 

£) See DR. p. 347. 



















- 63 - 


aus, als wftret ilir je in einer Universitfit auf 
einer Hohen Schule gewesen und Mttet neben mir 
auf dem Aeffehbfinklein gesessen." 1) 

—a reference to Shrenfried Kumpf of the theological school, 

Halle, who believed so firmly that the Devil was at work 

everywhere, all the time;; also that the Devil is in Adrian. 


(Adrian) 

" Und ftlr wen halte ich euch?" 

(Devil) 

Aber geh, das weisst du dochl.. .Weisst doch so 
gut wie ich, dass unser TerMltnis denn doch 
einnal nach einer Aussprache dr&ngt. Wenn ich 
bin—und das &ibst du nun, denke ich, zu —so 
kann ich nur Einer sein. Meinst du W e r ich 
bin: Wie ich heisse? Aber du hast ja all die 
skurrilen Neckn&mchen noch von der Hohen Schu- 
len her im G-edSchtnis... w Z) 

—a reference to the many names Ehrenfried gave to the 

Devil instead of calling him such outright. 

(Devil) 

"...suche dir unter den b&uerlichen SSrtlich- 
keiten eine aus...Nur eine will und mag ich nicht 
h8ren...Wer mich Dicis et non facis nennt, der 
wohnt in der Fehlhalde...Ich tue schon was ich 
sage. ?f 3) 

This he proves in that LeverktLhn eventually has to pay with 
his sanity for the years of musical genius which the Devil 
granted him. 


(Adrian) 

11 IC5nnt ihr denn das Unwesen nicht abstellen, 
diesen eisigen Zug?" 

(Devil) 

?T Leider, nein, Ich bin nun einmal so kalt. Wie 
sollte ich es auch a us halter, und es wohnlich 

1) See DF. p. 349. 

2) Ibid 1) 

3) See DF. p. 350. 





4 




4 







4 


C 










4 4 













- 64 - 


befinden dort, wo ich wohne," 1) 

The "coldness” was inherent, of course, in Adrian’s make¬ 


up. 


(Devil) 

",,,es hat Zeit damit, reichliche, unabsehbare 
Zeit,—Zeit ist das Beste und Sigentliche, das 
wir geben, und unsre Gabe das Stundglas.•,Mur 
eben das Stundglas gestellt ist, der Sand immer- 
hin zu rinnen begonnen hat, darttber wollte ich 
mich gem mit dir, mein Lieber, verstSndigen.” 2) 

The "sand” began to run when the pact was first entered 

into; i,e., wheh Adrian had the liaison with "hetaera Es- 

meralda" at Leipzig. This also refers to the twenty-four 

years of "genius time" which Leverlctlhn is to be given. 

The chap book gives Eaustus twenty-four years too, as we 

will recall. 


(Adrian) 

"..•Each eurer Behauptung konversier ich mit dem 
schwarzen ICesperlin,—ICesperlin, das ist Easpar, 
und so sind ICaspar und Sami el ein und derselbe," 
3 ) 

The name of the dog at Pfeiffering is Kaschperl; Adrian 
was the only one who could quiet him on the day of his ar¬ 
rival there; he never called him ICaschperl, arather Suso, 
after the dog at Buchel, as if he recognised the affinity 
between "Kaspar" and "laschperl", " Samiel" or " Sammael" 

the Devil himself translates into German for Adrian as 
4) 

” Fngel des Giftes" 

1) See DF. p. 351. 

2) See DP. p. 352. 

3) ibid. 2) 

4) See DF. p. 353. 













c 










- 65 - 


(Devil) 

"...ich schenke meinem Aeussern gar keine Auf- 
merksamkeit...es stellt sich so je nach den Um- 
st&nden her.. .Anpassung, Mimicry, du kennst das 
ja, Mummschanz und Yezierspiel der Mutter Natur... 
die Anpassung.♦ .wie der Schmetterling... n 1) 

—proof that the Devil appears in many guises in Lever- 

ktihn's environment. Special reference to the lepidoptera 

with the changing colours is made here—the ones which his 

father had shown him as a child, particularly the "hetaera 

Esmeralda" species. 


(Devil) 

"...deinem htlbschen Lied mit dem Bucks tab ensymbol. 

..Wirklich begabt. Das ist es ja, was wir bei 
Zeiten erkannt, und weshalb wir von frtlhan ein 
Auge auf dich gehabt haben,—wir sahen dasrdein 
Ball ganz ausgesprochen der Utihe wert... f? 2) 

—reference to the lied "0 lieb MHdel, wie schlecht bist du n , 

where Adrian used the h e a e e s note-symbol: ^hetaera 

3smeralda n . 


(Devil) 

n Endlich einmal lfissest du die pluralische B8f- 
lichkeit fallen und sagst mir du, wie es sich 
ziemt zwischen Leuten, die im Yertrage sind und 
in der Abrade auf Zeit und UTigkeit." 3) 

Adrian had for the first time dropped the ff ihr t? form for 

the f? du". 


n Aber wir schweigen ja schon an die ftlnf Bahre 
lang und mtlssen dock irgend einmal mit einand 
zusprach kommen und rfitig wealden tiber das Ganze 
und liber die interessanten Umst&nde, in denen du 
dich befindest...* 4) 


1) See DF. p. 354, 

2) ibid 1) 


3) See DF. x>. 355 

4) ibid. 3) 












- 66 - 


It was five years since LeverkQhn had consorted with Tf het- 
aera Esmeralda’ 1 2 3 in Hungary and had become infected with 
the syphilis. 


(Devil) 

w Ich fasele keineswegs und mitnichten, wenn ich 
von der gegebenen Zeit spreche und von d.em ge- 
setzten Ende, sondem rede strikte zur Sache... 
Zeit verkaufen wir—sagen wir einmal vierund- 
zwanzig Jahre." 1) 

Here the time is definitely laid down, which is to be given 
to Leverktlhn for his artistic future. 


(Devil) 

n ...da mag einer leben auf den alten Kaiser hin 
wie ein Viehe und die Welt in Irstaunen setzen 
als ein grosser Nigromant durch viel Teufels- 
werk...dass er sich schlecht und recht ftlr einen 
Gott halten mag in gewissen ausgelassenen Augen- 
blicken... ?? 2) 

This promise is to be borne out in Adrian’s musical pro¬ 
ductions of the future. 


(Devil) 

^ Mur, das Ende ist unser, am Ende ist es unser, 
das will ausgemacht sein, und nicht bloss sch- 
weigend, so verschwiegen es sont auch gehen mag, 
sondern von Mann zu Mann und ausdrttcklich. tf -5) 

There is to be no doubt in Leverkflhn’s mind that he must 

pay for everything in the end. 


(Devil) 

w Was ftlr’n Sorte Zeit, darauf korrmt’s anl Grosse 
Zeit, ganz verteufelte Zeit, tolle Zeit, in der 
es hoch und tiberhoch hergeht, und auch wieder 

1) See DF. p. 356. 

2) ibid. 1) 

3) ibid. 1) 













■ 




— 




! 


















' Ju • ■ 

























. 

J.'. , 

. ■ - r"t 

' 

















-67- 






- 68 - 


ein bisschen miserabel natttrlich, sogar tief 
miserabel, das gebe ich niclit nur zu, ich be¬ 
gone es sogar nit Stolz, denn so ist es ja recht 
und billig, so ist»s doch ICtlnstlerart und Natur*" 


Here he foretells the Suffering Adrian will have to go 
through. 


(Devil) 

tT Denn wir liefem das Aeusserste in dieser Richt- 
ung: Aufschwtlnge liefern wir und Erleuchtungen, 
Erfahrungen von Enthobenheit und Entfesselung, 
von Freiheit, Sicherheit, Leichtigkeit, Macht- 
und Triumphgeftihl, dass unser Mann seinen Sinnen 
nicht traut...Und entsprechend tief, ehrenvoll 
tief, geht’s zwischendurch denn auch hinab,— 
nicht nur in Leere und Oede und unvemSgende 
Traurigkeit, sondern auch in Schnerzen und Uebel- 
keiten,—vertraute tibrigens, die schon inner da 
waren, die zur Anlage geh3ren, nur h8chst ehren- 
yoll verstHrkt sind durch die Illumination und 
den bewussten Haarbeutel.. 2) 

This tells of the exlii lira ting experiences Adrian will 
have and refers again to the suffering; the inherited mi¬ 
graine will grow worse through the influence of the syphil¬ 
itic gems at work in his body, which will at the same time 
provide the "Illumination" for his brilliant work* "Haar¬ 
beutel" , .refers to an admission Leverkfihn had made in his 
letter to Eretsshmar before he made the final choice of 
music over theology, that he had gone into the latter be¬ 
cause (among other reasons), "Mich verlangte naclr dem 

3 ) 

hSrenen MLeid, dem Stachgtirtel darunter". 


1) See DF. p. 556 

2) See DF. p. 357 

3) See DF. *d, 204 





r 


< 


c 






< 

? • ‘ '• ‘ •• 


* 







- 69 - 


(Devil) 

" Inner willst du nur Schweigen haben. Icli bin 
doch nicht von der Fanilie Schweigestill.•.Ich 
aber bin ganz und garnicht Schweigen wegen ins 
heidniscbe Ausland gekommen, sondem zur Aus- 
drtlcklichen Bekraftigung unter vier Augen und 
zum festen Rezess tlber Leistung und Zahlung..." 1) 

He points out once and for all that they must come to terms. 


(Devil) 

Tf 1st 5a so traulich, heimliche Welt, in der wir 
mitsammen sind, du und ich,—sind beide recht 
zu Hause darin, das reine Kaisersaschern, gut alt- 
deutsche Luft von Anno ftLnfzehn hundert Oder so, 
kurz bevor Dr. Martinus kam, der auf so derbem, 
herzlichen Fuss mit mir stand und mit dem Semmel, 
nein mit dem Tintenfass nach mir warf...* f 2) 

3) 

—referring to Adrian’s oneness with Kaisersaschern and the 

[Middle Ages, and the occasion when Ihrenfried Eumpf threw 

the roll at the imaginary' Devil, as Luther had thrown the 
4) 

inkpot o 


In speaking of the after-effects of the Crusades 

upon Germany, the Devil says: 

"...da kamen die zarten ICLeinen, das Yolk der 
Lebesschrfiubchen, die lieben Glste aus West-Indien 
ins deutsche Land, die &e i ss el s chwtrmer,—gelt, 
da horchst du auf?...Ich meine aber die Flagel- 
laten, die untersichtig Winzigen von der Sorte, 
die ^eisseln haben, wie unsre bleiche Venus,die 
spirochaeta pallida, das ist die rechte Sorte... w 
5 ) 

The reference is to venereal disease such as now flows in 
Adrian’s veins. 

1) See DF. p. 357 f. 

2) See DF. p. 358. 

3) See p. 19 f. 

4) See p. 24 f. 

5) See DF. p. 359. 





















- 70 - 


(Adrian) 

" Der Ludewig scheint medLicinam studierbzu haben." 
(Devil) 

" Nicht mehr als du theologian.. .fragmentarisch 
und spezialistisch. v'illst du leugnen, dass du 
die beste der KSnste und Wissenschaften auch nur 
als Spezialist und Liebhaber studiert hast? Y/ie 
sollte aber ich, Ssmeraldas Freund und Zuhalt, 
als^den du mich vor dir siehst, nicht ein beson- 
de^s Interesse haben an den betreffenden. den 
anztlglichen G ebiet, den nfichstliegenden Gebiet 
der Medizin und spezialistisch darin zu Hause 
sein?" 1) 

Adrian) 2) 

adnits to these assertions both in his letter to Kretschman 

3) 

and in his final confession to his friends. Note that the 
Devil identifies himself here openly with "Esmeralda 11 —the 
symbol of syphilis, in Adrian Leverlolhn. 


(Devil) 

* Warte ein, zehn, zwSlf ^ahre, bis die Illumin- 
ierung, der heVlichte Ausfall aller lahraen 
Skrupel^und Zweifel auf seine H8he komnt, und du 
wirst wissen, woftlr du zahlst, wesvregen du uns 
Leib und Seele vemacht* Da werden dir sine 
pudore aus der Apothekensaat osnotische G-ew^chse 
spriessen..4) 

—referring to the osmotic chemical growth with which Jo¬ 
hannes Leverktlhn used to experiment and which, made Adrian 

5 ) 

laugh so heartily when he was a child. 


(Devil) 

"0, dein Vater ist in meinem Maule garnicht so 
fehl am Ort. Er hatt es hinter den^Ohren, mochte 
immer gem die element a spekulieren. Das Haupt- 
weh...hast du auch von ihm..." 8) 

The reference is to the father’s interest in experimenting 

1) See DF. p. 361. 6) See DF. p. 363 f. 

2) See DF. p. 201 ff. 

3) See DF. p. 752 ff. 

4) See BIT. p. 363 f. 

5} See DF. p. 33 f. 




t 



t 



















t 































- 71 - 


with nature phenomenae; also to the "migraine” which Ad¬ 
rian had inherited from his father, and which is one of 
the predominating leitmotifs following him throughout the 
novel* 


(Adrian) 

"•••von den Trfinen in meines Waters Augen wollte 
ich ihm(i*e., Rtldiger Schildknapp) erz^hlen, wenn 
er sagte: ’ Und dabei sind sie totl T ” 

(Devil) 

” Du hattest recht, ob seiner erbarmungsvollen 
Tr&nen zu lachen—unabgesehen noch, dass, wers 
von Natur mit dem Versucher zu tun hat, immer 
mit den Geftthlen der Leute auf kontrSren Fusse 
steht und immer versucht ist, zu lachen, wenn 
sie weinen, und zu weinen, wenn sie lachen*” 1) 

The quotation is a reference to the tears which Adrian T s 
father had shed when he explained to the boys that his os- 
mothic growths were actually ” dead”. The Devil’s speech 
explains Adrian’s desire to laugh, then, as well as con¬ 
firming the fact that he had the diabolic in him even at 
that early age. 


(Devil) 

” Was heisst ’tot’, wenn der Tropfen doch solchen 
gesunden Appetit bekundet?” 2) 

3) 

—alluding to the "fressende Tropfen”, one of Johannes ne¬ 
ver ktlhn’s experiments. The ’fressende Tropfen”, of course, 
symbolizes the germs of Adrian’s disease too, even at that 
time of his life—a symbolic forerunner of the precise pro¬ 
cess which is now at work in his system. 

1) See DF. p. 364. 

2) ibid 1) 

3) See DF. p. 32 f. 















- 72 - 


(Devil) 

n Hast du vergessen was du auf der Hohen Schul 
gelernt hast, dass Gott aus dem BSsen das Gute 
machen Kann, und dass die u elegenheit dazu ihm 
nicht verktlmmert werden darf...” 1) 

—referring to the teachings of Eberhard Schleppfuss at 

the Halle theological school: Schleppfuss as the Devil T s 

disciple* 


T ’ Glaubst du an so was, an ein Ingenium, das 
garniehts mit der HOllen zu tun hat? Non datur! 
Der Ktlnstler ist der Bruder des Verbrechers und 
des Verrtickten.*’ 2) 

This statement echoes Thomas Mann’s well known ideas con¬ 
cerning the connection between the artist and the criminal 
as we have seen in the banker in TONIO KROEGER, and in 
Felix Erull in BBK3HTNISSS DES HOCBBTAPLERS FELIX KR0LL # 


(Devil) 

w VIqs der in seinen klassischen Lgufen alien- 
falls ohne uns haben konnte, das haben heutzu- 
tage nur wir zu bieten. Und wir bieten Bessres, 
wir bieten erst das Reohte und Wahre,—das ds’t 
schon nicht mehr das feLassische, mein Lieber, 
was ?7ir erfahren lassen, das ist das Archaisehe, 
das Urfrfthe, das ISngst nicht mehr Erprobte.. .” 

The reference in the first line is to Goethe’s accomplish¬ 
ments in the field of art; we remember that Goethe’s 
Faust was redeemed in the end. This is not to be for Ad¬ 
rian. The latter lines explain then, why Thomas Mann went 
back to the old chap book by and large, for his "Faustus”. 


1) See DF. p. 365 

2) See DF. p. 366 

3) ibid. 2) 







* 

. ' 








- 73 - 


(Adrian) 

" Hit den Kerl vor mir war unterdess, w&hrend 
seiner letzten Rede* weylinger Weis was andres 
vorgegangen:...sass da nicht lgnger als Ludewig 
und Mannsluder, sondern,...als was Besseres, hatt 
einen weiss en Kragen un und einen Settle if en- 
schlipps, auf der gebogenen Base eine Brille mit 
Hornratimen, hinter der feucht-dunkle, etwas ge- 
rOtete Augen schimmern,—eine Mischung von 
ScMrfe und Weichheit das Gesicht: die Base 
scharf, die Lippen scharf, aber weich das Kinn, 
nit einem Grtlbehen darin, ein G-rtibchen in der 
Mange noch obSndrein...—ein Intelligenzler, der 
tlber Kunst, iiber Musik, fttr die gemeinen Seit- 
ungen schreibt, ein Theoretiker und ^ritiker, 
der selbst komponiert. soweit eben das denken 
es ibn erlaubt..." 1) 

The Devil has now changed form and in this new figure we 

recognize the symbol of Thomas Mann himself. The pages 

2 ) 

following, reveal many of Thomas Mann's ideas on art, music, 

etc., today. 


n Es sollte der ‘Teufel was von Musik verstehen. 
Yfenn ich nicht irre, lasest du da vorhin in den 
Buch des in die Aesthetik verliebten Christens? 
Der wusste bescheid und verstand sich aif mein 
besondres Yerhlltnis zu dieser schSnen Eunst,— 
der allerchristlichen Eunst, wie er erfindet,— 
mit negativem Yorzeichen n&turlich, vom Christen- 
tum zwar eingesetzt und entwickelt, aber ver- 
neint und ausges Chios sen als dSmonisches Bereich. tf 
3 ) 

Adrian had been reading Kierkegaard on Mozart f s^Don Juan n 

when the Devil appeared to him. 


" Bine hochtheologische Angelegenheit, die Musik— 
wie dia Stfcadexlst, wie ich es bin. Die L e iden- 
schaft des Christen da ftlr die Musik ist wahre 

1) See DF. p. 368* 

2) See DF. p. 369 ff. 

3) See DF. p. 374. 








c 



r 


t 










$ 









- 74 - 


Passion, als welche n&nilich Erkenntnis und Ver- 
fallenheit ist in einem." 1) 

—a reference to I;ann f s idea that music somehow has some- 

2 ) 

thing to do with evil and sin. 


" Und ich will’s meinen, dass sch8pferische, 

Genie spendende Krankheit, die doch hoch zu Ross 
die :i Hindernisse niramt, in kllhnem Rasch von pels 
zu -^elsen springt, tausendmal dem Leben lieber 
ist, als die zu Fusse latschende Gesundheit.” 3) 

This again expresses Ilann’s idea that physical or mental 

4 ) 

deficiency are often the portion of the genius. 


Now the Devil makes a definite guarantee of what 


Adrian may look for in his future: 

M Das sagt dir der unverballhornte Sammael. Nr 
garantiert dir nicht nur, dass gegon das Bnde 
deiner Stundglas-dahre das Geffthl deiner Yacht 
und Herrlichkeit die Scbraerzen der kleinen See- 
jungfrau me hr und mehr tiberwiegen und schliess- 
lich zu triunphalstem Whhlsein, zun enthusiast- 
ischen Gesundheitsaff ekt, zum Wandel eines Gottes 
sich steigern soil, —das ist nur die subjektive 
Seite der Sache, ich weiss, es wire dir nicht 
genug danit, es wtirde dir unsolid scheinen. So 
wisse: Wir stehen dir ftir die Lebenswirksamkeit 
dessen, was du mit unserer Hilfe vollbringen 
wirst. Du wirst ftthren, du wirst die Zunkunft 
den Ilarsch schlagen, auf deinen Kamen werden die 
Buben schwSren, die dank deiner T’ollheit es 
nicht mehr n8tig haben, toll zu sein. Yon deiner 
Tollheit werden sie in Gesunclheit zehren, und in 
ihnen wirst du gesund sein. Yerstehst' du? Nicht 
genug, dass du die lShmenden Schwierigkeiten 
der Zeit durchbrechen wirst,—die Zeit selber, 
die Kulturepoche, will sagen, die Epoche der 
Kultur und ihres ICultus wirst du durchbrechen 


1) 

See 

DP. p. 

374 

2) 

See 

also p. 

15 

3) 

See 

DP. p. 

375 

4) 

See 

also pp 

. 5 












- 75 - 


und dicli der Barbarei erdreisten, die’s zwei- 
mal ist, weil sis nach der Kumanit&t, nach der 
erdenkliclisten Wurze1 b ehandlung und bttrgerlichen 
Verf einerung komnt..." 1) 

The remainder of Adrian’s life bears out these promises, 
and also the Devil’s contention that those who call him 
"Dicis et non facis” are wrong. 


(Devil) 

" V;em willst du theologische Existenz zuerkennen, 
wenn nicht mir? Und wer will eine theologische 
Existenz filhren ohne mich? Das heligiQse ist 
so gewiss mein Each, wie es kein Each der btlrger- 
lichen Kultur ist...” 2) 

It is appropriate that in speaking of religion, the Devil 
should at this point again change form: 

(Adrian) 

?f Es war hier...dass ich gewahr ward: es sah 
wieder anders aus mit dem ICerl vor mir im Sofa, 
er schien der bebrillte Musikintelligenzler nicht 
mehr. ♦ .sass auch nicht melir recht in seiner 
Ecke, sondern ritt legerement im Ealbsitz auf 
der gerundeten Seitenlehne des Sofas, die Einger- 
spitzen in Schosse durcheinandergesteckt, und 
beide Daumen starr davon wegstreckend. ^ Ein ge- 
teiltes BSrtchen am Kinn ging ihm beim &eden auf 
und ab, und tiberm Munde, dr in kleine scharfe 
Z&hne sich sehen liessen, stand ihm das spitzge- 
drehte SchnurrbSrtchen strack dahin.” 3) 

4) 

This is the exact picture of Schleppfuss of Halle, and acts 
as a confirmation of the.symbol I suggested earlier, that 
Schleppfuss personified the Devil. 


To Adrian’s question as to what he may expect in 
Hell, the Devil replies with an extended dissertation on 

1) See DE. p. 376. 

2) See DE. p. 377. 

3) ibid. 2) 

4) See DE. p* 157. 







. 

■ 
















. 











* 

<:*• ,:V- « 

* * 












- 76 - 


the qualities of that place and the manner in which those 
who come there pass their time* It is a frightful account 
of their suffering and depravity. 


A final transformation now occurs when the figure 
before Leverktlhn again assumes its original qualities — 
those of the losel and rapscallion who first greeted him 
with "Du”. 


(Devil) 

” Bist aber auch ein attraktiver Fall...V 0 n frtih 
an hatten^rir ein Auge auf dich, auf deinen ge- 
schv/inden, hofSrtigen JCopf, dein trefflich in- 
genium und memoriam. Da haben sie dich die Gottes- 
wissenschaft studieren lassen, wie’s dein Dtinkel 
sich’s ausgeheckt, aber du wolltest dich bald 
keinen Theologum mehr nennen, sondern legtest die 
hi. Geschrift unter die Bank und hieltest es 
ganz hinfort mit den figuris, characteribus, und 
incantationibus der Musik, das gefiel und nicht 
wenig...So richteten wir f s dir mit Fleiss, dass 
du uns in die Arms liefst, will sagen: meiner 
Kleinen, der Esmeralda, und dass du dir T s holtest, 
die Illumination, das Aphrodasiacum des Hirns, 
nach dem es dich mit Leib und Seel und Geist so 
gar verzweifelt verlangte...” 2) 

The past is thus confirmed and the early symbols of Adrian’s 

future have been borne out. 


(Devil) 

” Zeit hast du uns genomen, geniale Zeit, hoch- 
tragende Zeit, voile vierundzwanzig Jahr ab dato 
recessi, die setzen wir dir zum Siel. Sind die 
nerun und vortiber gelaufen, was nicht abzusehen, 
und ist so eine Zeit auch eine Ewigkeit,—so sollsfc 
du geholt sein. Herwiderumb wollen wir dir unter- 
weilen in alien untertanig und gehorsam sein, 
und dir soli die E811e frommen, wenn du mu* ab- 
sagst alien, die da leben, alien Himmlischen, 

1) See DF. p. 378 ff. 

2) See DF. p.383 f. 







e 



t 


t 


< 

















- 77 - 


Heer und alien MensChen, denn das muss sein." 1) 
One more the terms of the pact are restated: the time, 
twenty-four years; the payment, Adrian’s soul; the re¬ 
quirements, denial of everything human— 

" Liebe ist dir verboten, insofern sie wSrmt. 

Dein Leben soli halt sein—darum darfst du keinen 
Menschen lieben...Eine GesamterkSltung deines 
Lebens und deines Verh&ltnisses zu den Menschen 
liegt in der Natur der Dinge—vielmehr sie liegt 
bereits in deiner Natur.•• Ist etwa die KS.lte bei 
dir nicht vollgehildet, so gut wie das vSter- 
liche Hauptweh, aus dem die Schmerzen der kleinen 
See Jungfrau werden sollen? ICalt wollen wir dich, 
dass kaum die Flammen der Produktion heiss genug 
sein sollen, dich darin zu v/temen. In sie wirst° 
du fltlchten aus deiner Elite." 2) 

And lastly: 

” Eine werkgeftillte Ewigkeit von Menschenleben 
lang soilst du’s geniessen. Lief das Stund- 
glas aus, will ich gut Macht haben, mit der 
feinen geschaffenen Creatur nach meiner Art und 
Weise und nach meniem Gefalien zu schalten und 
walten, zu ftlhren und zu regieren,—mit alien, 
es sei Leib, Seel, Fleisch, Blut und Gut in alle 
Ewigkeit..." 3) 

•ith that comes a final tremour of disgust, a glacial wave 
of cold, and Adrian finds not the Devil, but Rtldiger Schild- 
knapp sitting in the corner of the sofa. The die is cast 
for Leverktthn T s future. 


During his time in Munich, Adrian and Schwerdt- 
feger had occasionally made trips into the environs by 
bicycle. Cn one such trip Leverktihn made the acquaintance 
of the village of Pfeiffering and the Schweigestill farm, 

which lay in a setting -almost exactly like that of his own 

1) See DP. p. 384. 3. See DF. p. 386. 

2) See DF. p. 385. 





. 














« 






I 



























- 78 - 


1 ) 

home at Buchel. There was a little hill corresponding to 
the "Sionsberg" called the "Rohmbtlhel"; a pond like the 
"Kubmulde" with exceptionally cold water, called the 
'Klammerweiher"• In the yard was a tree, not a linden, but 
and elm this time, with a bench around its trunk* There 
was a yard-dog too, who could laugh like Suso at Buchel, 
who was called "Kaschperl"• There was a stable-girl, whose 
bosoms flapped as she ran, with bare feet caked with dung, 
who bore the unusual name "Vlaltpurgis*. Eyen the family 
itself corresponded to the Leverkilhn household. There was 
Eerr Schweigestill and his wife (who talked unceasingly— 
quite contrary to what her married name suggests), a grown 
son Gereon (not George as at Buchel), and a daughter Clem¬ 
entine. There was no second son, but this place Adrian 
Leverkilhn was eventually to fill. 

Though Leverkilhn never mentioned the likeness 
which was so obvious between Pfeiffaring and Buchel, he 
chose this transplanted site of his own home as his future 
residence upon returning from Italy. It was in every sense 
a "return home"; a return home to fulfil the terns of the 
compact with the Devil; it was a return to the mediaeval 
setting which abounded at Buchel and Eaisersascherm, and 
of which Adrian was ail his life a part. It had all the 
diabolic symbols of his early childhood, not least among 
1) Of. DF. p. 43 f. & p. 317 f. 







« 






- 

* 




' , 








„ 

, 








. 




















. . 





















* 















- 79 - 


tliem the dog "Baschperl", the affinity of v. r hose name with 
that of one given to the Devil has already been remarked 
upon. 

The house had formerly been a cloister, and one 
of the rooms given to Adrian was the "Abbot’s room", the 
former study of the head of the Augustine Order of Monies. 
Pictures of saints hung on the wall. In this room Lever- 
Idihn was henceforth to produce all his hell-inspired musi¬ 
cal works. 

The season of his arrival symbolized the future 

of this highly gifted and long since damned life: 

” 3s ging der Oktober zu Ende, das Wetter...war 
rauh schon und dttster. Die Blatter fielen... 
die im Wege stehende alte Ulme.. .deren Blatter 
zum guten Teil schon auf der sie umfassenden Bund- 
bank lagen..." 1) 

Kaschperl, the dog, set up a terrible howling and yelping, 
and only became quiet after Adrian spoke to him. But he 
addressed him as Suso, and as if he had no wish to let the 
dog’s real name cross his lips, addressed him as such 
ever af'terwards. Adrian had a high-pitched whistle, which 
only the dog could hear. This whistle served to herald 
his approach when Adrian had occasion to arrive home late 
at night, so that Kaschperl-Suso never barked or made a 
noise at his coming. The whistle is a real symbol of the 
1) See DP. p. 393. 







e 






c 











- 






" 

- 














- 80 - 


secret compact Adrian had with the Devil—no one could 
hear the whistle except the dog. 


"Love’s Labour’s Lost”, the opera based on Shak¬ 
espeare’s play, on which Adrian had worked in Italy, was 
now concluded and published* It was a fantastic travesty, 
a parody, a caricature* Zeitblom characterizes it thus: 

’’ Es war eine in artistischer Beziehung Mchst 
bewundernswerte Musik* • *Aber alles war streng 
kammermusikalischen Stils...eine kluge Groteske 
in ISnen, kombinatorisch-humoristisch*.•; in 
dieser selbstzentrierten und vollkoromen lctthlen 
Esoterik—die nun aber a 1 s Esoterik, im Geist 
des Sttlckes auf alle Weise sich selbst ver- 
spottete und parodistisch tlbertrieb, was einen 
Tropfen Traurigkeit, ein Gran Hoffnungslosig- 
keit in das Entzllcken mischte.” 1) 

h'hen it was presented in Ltibeck two-thirds of the audience 

walked out. All agreed with the critics that it was a 

2 ) 

"dezimierende Musik”. Only one aged music professor, Inaner- 

thal, called it "ein zukunftshaltiges Werk voll tiefer 
3) 

Musik”. In comparison with this man who spoke so highly 
of the piece, Zeitblom calls those who rejected it, "spine¬ 
less and torpid fellow-critics"—"seine kritisch schlaffen 

4) 

und stumpfen Schreibkollegen”. One sees in this:,., of course, 
a subtle "dig" at the people of Mann’s own native city. 


Leverktlhn went again to Blake, arranging music 
for his "Silen£,Silent Night", of which the last stanza 

1) See DF. p. 337 f. 

2) See DE. T>. 405. 

3) Ibid 2) 

4) ibid 2) 





c 


I 







t 




< 










« • 









- 81 - 


reads: 

tT 3ut an honest joy, 

Does itself destroy, 

For a harlot coy” 1) 

Surely Leverktthn had his "Esmeralda" experience in mind 

when he chose this poem* ^r again,in the choosing of 

Keats T "Ode to a Nightingale" and an "Ode to Melancholy"* 

He set music to Klopstock's "Frtihlingsfeyer", and Zeitblom 

himself gives us the symbolic significance of this piece: 

" Erst sp&ter habe ich die Komposition der Frtih- 
lingsfeyer als das werbende Sfthneopfer an Gott 
verstehen gelernt das es war: als ein Werk der 
attritio cordis geschaffen, wie ich schaudemd 
vermute, unter den Drohungen jenes auf seinem 
Schein bestehenden Besuchers." 2) 

— i*e., the Devil* 

But something else lay behind the composing of 

this music as well* Like his father before him, Adrian 

had been "speculating the elements", as was borne out by 

the knowledge of nature and the cosmos which he described 

to Zeitblom* pretended he had made a deep-sea voyage 

with an American scholar named Capercailzie (Scottish 

"akercocke" or "heathcock"),with whom he had descended 

into the depths of the sea at St. George's near Bermuda. 

The occasion, so he pointed out, had provided him with 

fantastic, almost forbidden sights: 

"Adrian sprach von dean Srkenntniskitzel, den es 
bereitete, das Unerschaute, nicht zu Ersehauende, 

1) See DF. p. 405. 

2) See DF* p. 409. 










: 











‘ 
















- 82 - 


des Geschauwerdens nicht sich versehende dem 
31 ieke blosszustellen. Das damit verbundene 
Geftlhl der Indiskretion, ja der Stlndhaftigkeit...” 

The whole fantastic account represents a symbolic descent 
into Hell, and reminds us of Dante T s "Purgatorio”. More¬ 
over, the name "Capercailzie” is symbolic: 

" Warum z.B., Adrian an Teufelsforschungen in 
Bermuda unter Leitung des amerikanischen Prof¬ 
essors Capercailzie teilnimcit wird erst ver- 
stSndlich, wenn man weiss,dass Capercailzie das 
schottische Wort ftlr Auerhahn ist. So heisst 
eine Purie im alten Faust Puppenspiel, und die 
Episode erweist sich als eine Parallele zu dem 
Besuch in der HSlle, den Paust im *Volksbuch f 
untemimmt urn ihre *Q,ualitfit und Substanz zu 
ergrtJnden*”. 2) 


Leverktlhn also displayed his knowledge of ”unseres 

ganzen Planetsysterns, also der Sonne mit ihren sieben Tra- 

3 ) 

banten, innerhalb des Milchstrassenwirbels..This again 

takes us back to Paustus: 

tf Adrians ^escMftigung mit der kosmischen Welt- 
physik, in dem das Sonnensystem nur einen unter- 
geordneten Platz hat und mit Eometenschweifen 
von Pullen operiert, entspricht der Heise Dr. 
Pausti T in das Gestern hinauf*”. 4} 

These studies, and the writing of the music to the ”Frtih- 
lingsfeyer” were preparations for Leverktlhn T s next pro¬ 
duction, ” Die Wunder des Alls”.* 

” Ich wusste nicht, hfltte es mir aber denken 
kSnnen, dass es mit all dem auf ein Werk hinaus- 
wollte...Es war die erstaunliche eins&tzige 

1) See DP. p. 412. 

2) Prederick C. Sell, ” Ein Kommentar zu Thomas Manns T Dok- 
tor Paustus*, Monatshefte, Yol. XL, Id. 4, Aer^l, 

1943, p. 199. 9 9 

3) See DF. p. 415. 

4} ibid. 2) p. 199. 









c 













' < 












— 83 — 


Symphonie Oder Orchester-Phantasie die er w&h- 
rend der letzten Ilonate des Fahres 1913 und der 
ersten von 1914 ausarbeitete und die den 
Titel "Die '.'.under des Alls" erhielt." 1) 

However, it had nothing of the spirit of humble glorifi¬ 
cation of the previous work: 

" Vlesen und Sssenz jenes ungefShr 30 Minuten 
dauernden orchestralen Welt-Portftaits ist der 
Spott,—ein Spott..eine luziferische Sardonik, 
ein travestierendes Schalkslob das nicht nur 
dem fUrchterlichen Urwerk des WeItbans, sondern 
auch dem Medium zu gelten scheint, in dem es 
sich malt, ja wiederholt: der Musik, dem Kosmos 
der Tflne, und nicht wenig dazu beigetragen hat, 
dem EBnstierturn meines Freundes den Vorwurf 
einer virtuos antildinstlerischen ^esinnung, der 
L&sterung, des nihilistischen Frevils zuzuziehen." 
S) 


During this time, though Leverktlhn now lived at 
Pfeiffering he did have some social contacts• -^e made 

occasional visits to various salons in Munich, including 
that of the Rodde family in Rambergerstrasse, that of the 
Schlaginhaufens, and that at the home of Radbruch, Schild- 
knapps publisher in the Ftirstenstrasse. Finally, also 
the gatherings at the home of Bullinger^the Rhineland 
paper manufacturer^saw Adrian as one of the guests. These 
salons and their members are to be referred to more fully 
in the second section of this work. At this time it is 
to be noted that Leverktlhn remained largely aloof from 
their discussions, returning to Pfeiffering by the eleven 

1) See DF. p. 423 

2) See DF. p. 425 f. 



















- 84 - 


o T clock train, and never failing to let Kaschperl-Suso 
know when he was approaching the Schweigestill residence, 
with his whistle. 


He was working now on another composition whose 

themes he took from the old history and anecdote book, 

the 1T ^esta Romano rum” ♦ The War of 1914-1918 which had 

begun in the meantime, seemed not to concern him at all; 

He had been declared unfit for service; 

” Hr war wfihrend der Jahre des Verfalls und der 
stetig schSrfer nagenden Hntbehrungen bei seinen 
Ackerbtlrgern.«.ohne es recht zu wissen und zu 
wtlrdigen, fast unbertlhrt von den auslagenden 
VerSnderung deifjdas blockierte und zernierte, 
wenn auch milit&risch immer noch ausgreifende 
Land unterlag. Hr nahm das mit Selbstverst&nd- 
lichkeit und ohne Erw&hnung hin, me etwas das 
yon ihm ausging und in seiner Hatur lag, deren 
BeharrungskrMfte und Bestimmung zum Semper idem 
sich gegen die Sussern TJmstSnde individuell 
durchzusetzen." 1) 


While the war was raging, however, in equal meas¬ 
ure Adrian Leverkuhn was progressing toward his ultimate 
downfall and doom. The Devil f s "little ones"—"Hetaera 
Esmeralda"—were at their work, slowly but surely pre¬ 
paring this condemned man for his further sublimely dia¬ 
bolic productions, as well as for the madness which was.to 
end his career. 

Adrian suffered frequently, fie smoked heavily, 
finding this distraction necessary: 

1) See m. p. 479 f. 






; 












' 




















- 85 - 


" Deia Tabak, die Zigarette angehend, so ver- 
zichtete Adrian gezwungen darauf, das heisst an 
Tagen, wo die Migr&ne wie schwere Seekrankheit 
auftretend ihn anfiel, und er in verdunkeltem 
Zimmer das Bett htltete, was zwei-bis dreimal 
im I.Ionat geschah." 1) 

It is symbolic that on these occasions he required "dark¬ 
ness" in order to procure relief; for these were periods 
wheii his creative genius raged synonymously with his dis¬ 
ease; these were drwad periods when the devilish triad-- 
Leverktlhn, "Esmeralda" and the Devil himself—hatched 
their plans for his musical productions and at the same 
time drew him onward to his fate. 


While the war, to all outward appearances, seemed 
not to affect him, he was nevertheless spiritually aware 
of its consequences; for while still working oh the "Gesta 
Romanorura", a new work was already taking shape in his im¬ 
agination: 

" Am Horizont.. .stand schon damals, wfihrenhein- 
lich schon seit Ausbruch des Krieges, der ja 
ftlr eine Divination, wie die seine, einen tiefen 
Ab-und Einschnitt, die Erdffnung einer neuen, - 
tumultuSsen und grundhthrzenden, nit wilden 
Abenteuern und Leiden ttberftillten ^eschichts- 
periode bedeutete,—am Horizont seines schbpfer- 
ischen Lebens stand bereits die "Apocalipsis 
cum Figuris", das Wtrk, das diesem Leben einen 
schwindelnden Auftriob geben sollte, und bis zu 
welchem...er sich mit den genialischen Puppen- 
Grotesken die Wartezeit vertrieb." 2) 

The characters for the "Gesta-Romanorum" on which he was 

1) See BE. p. 483. 

2) See BE. p. 484. 





T 


t 




















'm ■ 














- 









- 86 - 


then working, were not to be men, but puppets, and in this 
connection be was using Ideist's essay on marionettes* 


Rtldiger Scbildknapp had introduced Adrian to the 
old book which passes for the source of most of the rom¬ 
antic myths of the Middle Ages:- "diese TJebersetzung der 

aitesten christlichen MHrchen-und Legendensammlung aus dem 

1 ) 

Lateinischen.•They read it together; "und was dabei 

vor allem auf seine Kosten gekommen, war Adrians Sinn fUr 

Komik gewesen, diese Begierde nach dem Lachen—Ja Tr&nen 

2 ) 

lachen n . When we read Zeitblom’s description of these 

3 ) 

tales, we can understand only too well why Leverktihn chose 

them for his themes; there can be no doubt that the 

choosing of such background material for his musical work 

symbolizes the oneness of Leverktihn with the Devil; 

n Auf diese fiberschw&nglieh stindhafte, einfaltige 
und gnadenvolle Geschichte also hatte Adrian 
alien h'itz und Schrecken, alle kindliche Sin- 
dr inglichkeit, Phantastik und Beierlichkeit der 
musikalischen Ausmalung versamelt." 4) 


While Leverktihn is thus brooding upon his dia¬ 
bolic themes and his disease is driving him on to ever 
more brilliant musical techniques, while he is approaching 
the climax of his career by slow and painful degrees, let 
us look for a moment at whht had been taking place in his 

1) See DP. p. 484. 

2) ibid 1) 

3) See DP. pp. 484-485 ff. 

4) See DP. p. 490. 
















- 87 - 


circle of acquaintances, for they reflect in a way, what 
is happening in his own life* 

1 ) 

Inez Rodde had married Dr. Helmut Institoris, 

although actually in love with Rudolf Schwerdtfeger• The 

latter, on his part, had continued his unholy wooing of 

Adrian Levcrldihn, and on an appropriate occasion, when 

Adrian was suffering from a severe attack of headpains and 

in the intimacy of the dark room where Adrian had found 

it necessary to retire to seek relief, had asked him to 

2 ) 

write him a violin concerto* 

The Institoris-Rodde union which had taken place 

at the he ginning of the v.'ar of 1914-1918, produced, in tine, 

three children, VJhether these children were actually those 

of Helmut Institoris, Thomas x %nn leaves us to conjecture. 

W& know that Inez Institoris(nee Rodde) lived in adultery 

with. Rudolf Schwerdtfeger for years after her marriage, 

because the latter simply did not have the strength of 

character to deny her her wishes. Rudolf was blond and- 

blue-eyed, as we have learned. Helmut Institoris was 

blond and blue-eyed: ,T Sr war ein blonder LangschSdel. •. 

5) 

hinter der goldnen Brille blickten die blauen Augen". 

4) 

The children bom to his wife: n Alle drei waren weisse n . Ho, 

we do not know who is the father; but I see in these three 

1} See p. 49 f. 

2) See p. 53 ff. 


o) See DU 1 . n • 441 
4} See DS. p. 504 














- 88 - 


children once more the number-symbol "three" which early 
became manifest in this study—the symbol of. an unholy 
nexus with its roots in evil. 

The occasion upon which Schwerdtfeger asked Lever- 

ktihn to write him a concerto referred to just above,was in 

point of time toward the close of the war; 

" Die Zeit, von der ich schreibe war ftlr uns 
Deutsche eine Aera des staatlichen Zusammenbruchs, 
der Kapitulation, der ErschSpgungsrevolte, und 
des hilflosen Dahingegebensein in die H&nde der 
Fremden." 1) 

The times are symbolical^ portrayed in Leverktihn’s illness 

at that period: " Leverkflhn.. .war ausserordentlich leidend 

2 ) 

damals". ^e suffered dreadful tortures for days on end— 

a stomach ailment accompanied by a permanent head-pain above 

the eyes with a paralysis-like feeling from the top of the 

head to the toes* which even affected his speech. He 

craved darkness: "..das dringliche Terlangen des Kranken, 

verschont su sein vom Lichte.. .nach Finsternis dfirstete 

3) 

und sie wie ein wohlt&tigen Element genoss". Though he 
refused to have a physician, Frau Schweigestill, who treated 
him as her son, finally called in Dr. Hfirbis herself. After 
some time his diagnosis settled on the brain. H© recom¬ 
mended a cure; but Adrian refused to leave his familiar 
surroundings. 

1) See DF. p. 514. 

2) See DF. p. 523. 

3) See DF. p. 525. 





- 

•• 
















i • 





















* 


! 














- 09 - 


V!e see in this illness, of course, the affects of his 
syphilis, a heralding of his coning insanity. It was the 
hind of suffering the Devil had promised him—the symbolic 
struggle with the forces of evil in preparation for a new 
he11-inspired musical work. 


In the spring of 1919 his illness passed: 

,f ...im Frtlhjahr, 1919, der Krankhsitsdruck wie 
durch ein Funder von ihm abfiel, und sein Geist, 
PhOnixgleich, sich zu hdchster Freiheit und 
s t aunens we r t e r. Mac lit ungehemmter, um nicht zu 
sagen: hemmungSloser, Jedenfalls unaufhaltsamer 
und reissender, fast atemloser Hervorbringung 
erhob... ” 1) 

The new work to which he now applied himself was the ”Apoc- 

alipsis cum figuris”, based on the ”Johannes Apocalypse”— 

” gine aus dem 15. Jahrhundert stammende franzSsische Yers- 

2 ) 

tibertragung der Paulus Vision" and " das erste Blatt der 

3 ) 

dUrer’schen Holzschnitt-Serie zur Apocalypse”. Or again, 

Clementine Schweigestill had read to him during his illness 

”...die ekstatischen Srlebnisse der Uechthild von 
Magdeburg; las ihm,..Ausschriften vor...der 
frtihchristlichen und mittelalterlichen Yisions- 
literatur und Jenseitsspekulation.•.Waren es - 
diese nicht, so war es eine Yerdeutschung der 
T Eistoria Scclesiastica.gentis Anglorum f des 
gelehrten M8neh.es 3eda venerabilis, eines Werkes 
in dem ein gut ^eil der keltischen Jenseits- 
Phantasieen, der Yisionserlebnisse aus irdisch- 
angels&chsischer christlicher Frtlhzeit tlberlief- 





ert 

ist.” 

1) 

See 

DP. 

p. 

539. 

2) 

See 

DP. 

P- 

544. 

3) 

See 

DP. 

P. 

543. 

4) 

See 

DP. 

p. 

545 f. 













- 90 - 


Sho also read to him the "Lamentation des .lesekiel". 


V/hen he began the work however, he drew on still 
further materials: 

".o.aus den dttstern Partieen des Psalters, zun 
Jeispiel £enes durchdringende f Denn meine Seele 
ist voll hammers und mein Leben nahe bei der 
H811e T ; auch die ausdrucksvollen Sohreckbilder 
Denunziationen der Apokryphen, ferner gewisse 
heute unsctglich anztlglich-wirkende Fragmente 
aus ^eremias Klageliedern; dazu noch Entlegeneres. 
• •einer HOllenfahrt, worin die lenseitsvorstel- 
lungen frtiher, sclismenhafter Stufen und die von 
Antike und Christentum bis zu Dante entwickelten 
visionhr verarbeitet sind." S) 


It was this ecstatic literature from the pre- 

christian and early Christian eschatologies then, 

,T o..in die Adrian sich einschloss, urn sich ftlr 
ein .Jerk zu stimmon, das alia ihre Elemente 
in einen Brennpunkt sammelt, sie spater in IcOnst- 
lerischer Synthese drohend zusanmenfasst und 
nach unerbittlichen Auftrag der Menschheit den 
Spiegel der Offenbarung vor Augen halt, damit 
sie dann erblicke was nahe herangekommen." 3 ) 

^his sublime and withal depraved work was conceived and 
set do jtl in six months* In that time Leverktlhn had a re¬ 
lapse, "so uneroittlich bestStigt* * .einen tiber drei VJochen 

4) 

sich streckenden Rttckfall-und Uebelkeitszustand." 


A discussion of the technical ramifications of 
this work belongs to the'field of the specialist. I have 
spoken of it at length, however, because I feel that it 
symbolizes the fulfilling, in part, of the contract with 

1) See D3?. p. 547. 3 ) See pp. p . 545 . 

3) See DP. p. 548. 4) gee DP. p. 553. 











c 


§>: R 



C 



* 





t 















- 91 - 


tlie Devil, that it hears out the agreement reached on 
that dreadful occasion in Italy* The sands of Adrian Lev- 
erktlhn’s hour-glass of time are slowly exhausting them¬ 
selves . 

It was at this time that Clarissa Rodde’s. days 

1 ) 

came to a sudden and frightful end* Frau Senator Rodde 
had removed to Pfeiffering after her daughter Inez had 
married and Clarissa had gone into the provinces to play 
small parts on the stage* It was here, at Pfeiffering, 
Where Clarissa took her own life with cyanide* One vio¬ 
lent, suffering death had now occurred in the circle of 
Leverktthn*s acquaintances. Two more were to follow. Rud¬ 
olf Schwerdtfeger was the second; the third was the angelic 
little Nepomuk Schneidewein* 

In 1924 parts of Leverkflhn’s n Apocalipsis cum 
figuris ?t were performed at Prague, although the work was 
not yet quite completed. This was the signal for a new 
figure—an invisible but highly symbolic figure—to make 
its appearance on Adrian’s horizon* Or rather, I should 
say, was brought into the line of vision of our chronicler, 
Serenes Zeitblom ©hd through him introduced to the reader; 
for LeverMhn may have known her in symbolic form since 
his childhood, and in concrete human form since his Leipzig 

1) See DP* p. 585 













, 

o ' -'v r 







, 

c 

: ? - 
’ 


■; • ■ • v 

jov: . 




















- 92 - 


days* 


After extracts of the "Apocalipsis" had been 
performed in Prague, an article appeared in a Vienna mus¬ 
ical magazine written, ” aus der Peder des ungarischen 

J-) 

Husikologen und Kultur-Philosophen Desiderius Peher”. Hie 

article had praised Adrian’s work on the grounds of n die 

intelektuelle H8he und religiJJsen Gahalte, dem ^tolz und 

die Verzweif elung, die sttndige, ins Insuirative getriebene 

2 ) 

Hlugheit der Musik...” Moreover, Peher stated that he 
found Leverktlhn f s music had its basis in n der SpMre der 
Liebe und des Glaubens, des EWIG-WEIBLICHEN (italics mine) 11 
Indeed, this was so; for had not LeverlcQhn long been under 
the influence of "hetaera Esmeralda”, that girl in the 
Spanish Jacket whom he had pursued and sought out in Hun¬ 
gary, and from whom he had the syphilis? . Let us keep 
this in mind as we discuss Prau von Tolna, the mysterious 
woman who is now brought to our attention; there would 
seem to be a relatioh* » 

In connection with the Peher article, then, a 
certain Dr. Edelmann, a music editor from Vienna, appeared 
one day at Pfeiffering while Adrian was still suffering 
intensely free the illness we spoke of, which held him in 
its grip around the end of 1918. Dr. Edelmann came with 
the offer to publish the n Apocalipsis cim figuris w as soon 

1) See DP. p. 594. 

2 ) ibid. 1) 























- 


c. 




















- 93 - 


as it was completed* During this visit lie inquired of 

Adrian if he knew "Frau von Tolna"* Leverktihn denied 

"knowing her"; hut, and Zeitblom found this strange, he 

did not go on to ask the natural question, "WJxo is Frau 

von Tolna?" The only explanation which Fdelmann offered 

1 ) 

was, "Jedenfalls haben sie...koine wfirmere Verehrerin". 

It came out with time, however, that Leverktihn 
did know her, and had been corresponding with her for some 
time. She v/as the wife of a dissipated Hungarian noble¬ 
man who had died in a racing accident, leaving her his 
vast estates and personal property* It appeared that she 
had long followed Adrian’s career closely, knew all about 
him, had been everywhere where his work had been performed 
indeed, wherever Leverktihn himself had been; that she had 
put her vast estates and her money completely at his dis¬ 
posal, and with her first letter from Brussels had sent 
him a gift of a most unusual and valuable ring. This ring 
Adrian never wore in public; rather he wore it only when 
he was working at his music, and had carried ifi on his 
left hand through the writing of the whole of the "Apocal- 
ipsis"* 

Zeitblom points out that in the correspondence 
which had gone on between them, Leverktihn , "fttr sein Toil 
(ging) an die Grenze der Mitteilsamkeit und des Yertrauens 

1) See DF. p. 596* 












. 





■ .• V 


t 

■ 









< 

' 













1 




: 












-94- 

deren die £insamkeit f&hig ist”. Especially during the 
composition of the "Apocalipsis" had they carried on an 
extended correspondence, in which she had made suggestions, 
and had provided materials which he wished to use, which 

were hard to obtain. It was she who had instigated the 

✓ 

article by Desiderius Peher; who had been responsible for 
Dr* Edelnann’s visit to Pfeiffering with the offer to pub¬ 
lish the "Apocalipsis", and who had made an anonymous 
gift to assist in the production of the Tr G-esta Homnorum 1 ’ 
at Domaues chingen* 

Eor Biany years, then, this woman whom Zeitblom 
lets us believe LeverktQm never saw, had been an invisible 
influence on Leverkfihn’s life. Victor A. Oswald in an 
article on Prau von Tolna, claims that she is none other 
than T! Esmeralda' n , the prostitute whom Adrian first met in 
Leipzig, and whom he later followed to Pressburg (Hungarian, 
Poszony) in Hungary, and from whom, he contracted the dread 
disease which contributed so materially to his musical 
genius as well as to his ultimate insanity, fie bases his 
premise on several discoveries in the text of her story. 

1. Textual cross-reference. 

ZEitblom(Maiin) tells us that the Leipzig ^Esmer- 
Alda T? went to Pressburg for hospital tratment, and then 
adds the explanation that the Hungarian name for Pressburg 
1) See JSF. p. 596. 














- 95 - 


is Poszony. Frau von Tolna, we are told, is the wife of 
an Hungarian nobleman known for his excesses, Oswald con¬ 
sider;! tliat for such a person at the turn of the century 
this could mean nothing else than sexual dissipations 

"He must have been the sort of roue who would 
marry anyone who had the gift to cope with his 
desires--and it must be remembered that Old 
ITick T s little girl had not merely talent, but 
powerful connections". 


2# Further on textual cross-references, 

"In Jeitblom’s discourse on the fatal embrace 
in Fressburg, he says quite eloauently that he 
found Adrian, after that epoch, *outwardly un¬ 
changed, in truth however, a narked man, a man 
smitten by the shaft of fate'* (2), His elaborate 
Justification for Adrian’s act of self-immola¬ 
tion is that it was, in effect, an act of love, 
since it involved the choice of object; but he 
feels that this consoling thought is indissol¬ 
ubly linked to another, ’...that love and poison 
were here Joined, once and .for all, in a dread¬ 
ful^ union: the mythological union that is em¬ 
bodied in the ■’arrow’ ’ (3) . As for the serpent, 
Old hick, in his dialogue with Adrian, taunts 
him with his having included the ’h e a e es : * 
cipher in his setting of «0, lieb M&del’, and 
quotes from the poem the lines, *the serpent 
has sucked fast to the wound’(4)," 


5, The theme "arrow" and serpent" dealt with in 
the above quotation is carried over into the device on 


the ring which Frau von Tolna gave Adrian, 

"It is a’winged serpentine monster whose pro¬ 
truding tongue has the shape of a dart* (5), 



Victor A Oswald Ir 
Hnigma of Frau von 
Dec,, 1948, Ho. 4, 
See DF, p, 256, 

See DF. p. 239 


^Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus’ 
Tolna", The Germanic Review, Vol 
pp, 92-95, 

(4) See DF. p. 354. 

(5) See DF. p. 599. 


: The 


T 







1 


t 







- 96 - 


It suggests to Zeitblom thG wound of Philoctetes; 
Aeschylus’ epithet for the arrow, ’hissing 
winged snalce'*; Apollo and the rays of the sun. 

Any doubt as to the infernal associations of 
this monster can be dispelled by consulting the 
picture of the Demon Barbiel in the f Drei- 
facher KSllenzwangf, where you will find it among 
other creatures surrounding the central figure. 
( 1 )" 


4. An entomological pun. 

’’Guileless Zeitblom, musing about the significance 
of Frau von Tolna in Adrian’s life asks himself: 
’That name should be given her in relation to 
Adrian Leverktlhn? What name did she wish, did she 
claim? That of a tutelary goddess, an Egeria, 
an incorporeal Beloved?’ An Egeria is the 
entomological name for the clear-winged moths, 
the tribe of our friend n heatera Esmeralda”— 
the Aegeridae.( w 


5 o Etymological evidence 

’’The ring is a ’magnificent example of the bright 
green Ural Smaragd’. The etymology of Smaragd 
is the Greek smaragdos, maragdos; Latin, smarag- 
dus; Vulgar Latin, smaraldus; French, femeraude; 
English, emerald; and, of course, Spanish, es- 
merlada. ( 3 )" 


6. The hidden cipher in the ring. 

’’••it concerns the Greek verse which is inscribed 
along with the winged serpent, on the surface of 
the emerald. Zeitblom, the encyclopedia of hum¬ 
anism, promptly recognizes the lines as the be¬ 
ginning of Chllimachus’ ’Hymn to Apollo’, and he 
translates stante pede into excellent German 
verse, so that the reader never gets to see the 
Greek original. But it is Zeitblom himself the 

PL) Doktor Johannes Faust,’’Magia naturalis et innaturalis 
Oder dreifacher HSUenzwang”, Stuttgart, Verlag von J. 
Scheible, 1849, picture between pp.42 & 43. 

>2) Brehms ’’Tierleben”, hrsg. von Otto zur Strasse, Bd.II, 
p. 219 ff. 

3) See Webster’s New Internl. Diet, of Eng. Lang., 2nd edn., 
Springfield, Mass,, 1947, p. 387. 









* l 










t 








6 




c 



i 





t 



t 



t 











-97- 


incorruptible, who advises us, in the course of 
.his disquisition on the "h e a e es ,f cipher, 
that f Leverktlhn was not the first composer and 
will not have been the last, who loved to in¬ 
corporate into his works secrets in the guise of 
logograms and ciphers T (1)." 

"The original Greek verse reads as follows: 

Ocoy 6 i&decL'To &cL<fiycyo$ 

oZdi S > O/lo^ OC'T t s 

O.Xc'Tjoa^ 

"One can see at a glance that the *h e a e es* 
cipher is not there. But if you transcribe the 
aspiration of olo^ with an T h T —no concession 
when you take into consideration the entymology 
of T hetaira f —then^the first four words, ignor¬ 
ing the proclitic 6, are h-t-es-da: Hetaira Es¬ 
meralda." 


Ilf. Oswald, or., seems to have proved his case 
fairly conclusively. He has,however, overlooked the need 
to account for the discrepancy between the Leipzig "BSraer- 
alda" being a prostitute, and Frau von Tolna being a re¬ 
fined, highly cultured woman* It is the only unconvincing 
note in his argument. On the other hand, perhaps it is 
not too much to assume that a prostitute might have had ■ 
an early cultural training before her fall, which, after 
she found it necessary to leave her sinful life due to 
disease, could then have been taken up again in the cir¬ 
cumstances of a financially advantageous marriage* We 
must not forget that Frau von Tolna suffered from a chronic 
illness, which required a personal physician in attendance f 
(1) See DF* p* 240. 















-98- 


but which did not prevent her fron moving about from place 
to place* We are never told, of course, what this disease 
is; but it is just as likely as not to be a chronic syph¬ 
ilitic condition, just as Leverktlhn’s is. 

If Frau von Tolna is "Esmeralda", then my earl¬ 
ier statement that this symbol hovers over Adrian’s whole 
life is fully borne out. Indeed, in that case, it was 
right with him to the end, for at his grave in addition to 
friends and relatives, Seitblom tells us that there was, 
'"eine unkenntliche verschleierte Fremde, die wfihrend die 

Erdschollen auf den eingebetten Sarg fielen, wieder ver- 

1 ) 

schwunden war•" 

Zeitblom, who does not always necessarily repre¬ 
sent the ideas of Mann, sees her as a symbol of "the world", 
from which Leverktlhn separated himself, and the ring as a 
symbol of the "world" connecting him with the outside: 

"...da es sich um eine Frau von Welt handelte, 
Welch® dem Finsiedler von Pfeiffer5mg auch wirk- 
lich reprgsentierte—die elt, wie er sie liebte, 
brauchte, ertrug, die Welt im Abstand, die aus 
intelligenter Schonung sich fern haltsnde Welt." 

S) 

In fine, then, whether Thomas Mann subtly pre¬ 
sents Frau von Tolna as the real "Esmeralda" or intends 
her as a symbol of the "world", there can be no doubt of 
the influence she had on LeverkUhn’s life and art, whether 

1) See DF. p. 772. 

2) See DF. p* 596: see also p. 600 re the ring: "...sondern 
sah in dem kostbaren Glied...kauri urnschrieben war". 














-99- 


abstractly or concretely* 


A "Faustus" tale would not be complete without 
a "Mephistopheles" • This daemonic element Thomas Mann 
symbolizes in one "Herr Saul Fitelberg, Arrangements musi- 

/ d 

caux. Hepresentant de nombreux artistes prominents"* 


Fitelberg was a Jew, a "Weltmann", as Frau Sch- 

weigestill announced him, the day he arrived in Pfeiffer- 

ing, shortly after the "Apocalipsis cum figuris"had been 

published, to tempt Adrian out of his retreat: 

" Und dennoch, figorez-vous, bin ich gekommen, 

Sie zu entftihren, sie zu Vor&bergehender Untreue 
zu verftlhren, Sie auf meinem Mantel durch die 
Ltlfte dieser Welt und ihre Herrlichkeit zu seigen 
mehr noch, sie Ihnen zu Ffissen zu legen. • • " 2) 

His plan was to arrange a world tour for Adrian to play 

and direct the productions of his own works* Of course he 

was refused. 


Symbolizing Mephistopheles as he does, Mann has 
painted a very striking (and by no means attractive) pic¬ 
ture of the typical pseudo-cultured business-man Jew, plump 
pompous, intrusive, yet not wholly objectionable: 

"•.osogar anziehenden Typ eines internationalen 
Musik-G-ewerbrnams und Kbnzert-Unternehmers . *. 
diese.o.Ubergegangene Leichtigkeit.•.Xmmer schie.n 
sie ausdrticken zu wollen: f Aber warum denn nicht? 
Was denn weiter? Hat nichts zu sagenl Seien wir 
vergntigtj" 3) ■ 


1) 

See 

DF* 

Po 

606* 

2) 

See 

DF. 

p. 

609* 

3) 

See 

DF* 

P. 

605 ff. 











-100- 


Ee makes some very pertinent remarks about Jews and. Ger¬ 
many, and in this respect we are to meet him again in 

1 ) 

PART OTO of this work. 

I have already spoken of the concerto which Le- 
verktlhn wrote for Rudi Schwerdtfeger• The first perfor¬ 
mance had been in Vienna. Toward the end of 1924 the con¬ 
certo was again given in Berne for the second time, and in 
Ztlrich for the third and final time by the person for whom 
it had been written. On both of these latter occasions 
Leverktihn appeared "hand in hand" v/ith the violinist Sch¬ 
werdtf eger to receive the applause—something the composer 
had never done before* It was against his principles and 
contrary to his nature. Indeed,as the years had gone by 
he had become more and more aloof: 

"..die Atmosphere unbeschreiblicher Fremdheit 
und Einsamkeit, die ihn in wachsender mass—in 
diesen Jahren irnmer fUhlbarer und distanzier- 
ender—umgab, und die einem wohl das GefUhl 
geben konnte, als k&me er aus einem Lande, wo 
sonst niemand lebt. w 2) 

It is an indication how far Schwerdtfeger had been able . 
to influence him. However, this third presentation of 
Rudolf’s concerto has a much more ominous significance 
for it touches off a series of events which is to bring 
further tragedy into Leverktihn’s world. 

At a social gathering which took place after the 

1) See p. 138 ff. 

2) See DF. p. 626. 
















-101- 


concert in Ztlrich, at the home of Herr and Frau Reiff, 
Adrian Leverktthn was to meet the second person whom he 
dared to love contrary to the terms of his contract with 
the Devil. This was Marie Godeau, who had the "coal- 
black" eyes of Adrian 1 s mother. When Marie Godeau came to 
Munich with her hunt shortly after this first meeting, 
Leverktlhn confessed to Zeitblom that he was contemplating 
marriage with this young lady. asked Zeitblom to ar¬ 
range an excursion into the country for the ladies, and 
though the suggestion had originally come from Rudolf 
Schwerdtfeger, he wi^ed Zeitblom to give them the impres¬ 
sion that he, Adrian, had made it. It was almost as if 
he had an instinctive feeling that he would not dare to 
approach the woman personally. 

This excursion was arranged as requested. It 
took the party into the Alps, to 0berammergau, village of 
the Passion Play, and by coach to Linderhof, the castle 
of Ludwig II, the "mad monarch", who had been dethroned 
and legally restrained on the ground that he was mentally 
unbalanced. It was Leverktlhn who had suggested these 
places. Considering that he himself was approaching in¬ 
sanity, this latter was a most symbolic choice—as if he 
had unconsciously wished to see what the surroundings had 
been of one who was considered mad. Or again it may sym¬ 
bolize the utter madness of the plan which he had in mind, 









-102- 


marriage with Marie Godeau; even madder perhaps, his 

plan to have his most intimate friend, Rudolf Sohwerdt- 

1 ) 

feger—"dieser elbische Platoniker"—present his suit* 

And this plan was shortly put into effect: 

"Adrian bat seinen ungarischen Reisegef&hrten 
telephonisch nada Pfeiffering* Er'mOge sobald 
kommen* Die Angelegenheifc die er mit ihm zu 
sprechen habe, sei dringlich." 2) 

An agreement was made that Rudolf should propose to Marie 

Godeau on Adrian’s behalf, although it came out during the 

discussion that Schwerdtfeger was in love with her too. Of 

3) 

the result of this I have spoken. It was in fact a betrayal 
of the friendship into which Schwerdtfeger had seduced 
Adrian Leverktihn; at the same time it constituted a cessa¬ 
tion of the liaison with Inez Institoris, who shortly was 
to shoot him and herself go mad. Schwerdtfeger’s star 
had set. Iwo of Adrian’s forbidden loves had now been re¬ 
moved from his sphere. 

n Die Prophetie des Endes, genannt ’Apocalipsis 
cum figuris’ erklang, schneidend und gross im 
Fehruar 1926, zu Frankfort am Main." 4) 

—about a year after the death of Rudolf Schwerdtfeger. 

Leverktihn did not attend the performance; in fact, he never 

heard this work performed. At the time he was suffering 

from the symptoms of his disease again. In addition he 

lived in a fearful period of mental vacuity which made him 

believe that he would never write another note: " Adrians 

1) See DF. p. 648. %) See p. 57. 

2) See DF. p. 661. 4] Se.e DE. p. .689. 









-103- 


Leben war nSmlich wfihrend dieses ganzen Jahres leer von 

D „ 

Arbeit"* "e was without ideas, impotent to write a note* 

In letters to Zeitblom appeared such expressions as,"M8ge 

2 ) 

die HBUe sich meiner erbarmen", and n Bete ftlr mich". 

" Auch ging .. . ein neues Tief seiner G-esunft- 
heit, mehr als Begleitung, denn als Ursache wir- 
kend, mit der Stagnation schQpferischen KTSfte 
zusammen: Schwere Migrdneanf&lle hielten ihn im 
Dunkel, Magen-,Bronchial-, und Rachenkatarrhe 
setzten ihm...weehselnd zu." 3) 

This period may be regarded as another period "in Hell" 
for Leverktlhn, a preparation, a setting of things to right 
for his nest musical production. RUdiger Schildknapp, who 
could make him laugh, we remember, was his frequent com¬ 
panion. 

At the end of 1926, both Leverktihn 1 s father and 
Mas Scbweigestill died at the same age and almost on the 
same day. Death in Leverkflhn f s life on one hand; new 
life on the other. For with the new year his health im¬ 
proved, and with it came a new phase of brilliant compo¬ 
sition. First some chamber music, and after that the 
greatest diabolic masterpiece of them all, the "Dr. Fausti 
Weheklag". 

Zeitblom remarks that at this time he noticed a 
more frequent and extensive use of the archaic style in 
Adrian’s speech and letters—something he had been given 

1) See DP. p. 690. 

2) See DP. p. 691. 

3) See DP. p. 691 f. 










-104- 


to since his Halle days. He felt that it was a signifi¬ 
cant foreboding: 

” -iin erster "/ink war es ftir mich, als mir eines 
Tages auf seinem Arbeitstisch ein Notenblatt 
in die Augen fiel, worauf er nit breiter Feder 
die Y/orte geschrieben hatte: ’Diese Trawrig- 
keit bewegte Doktor Faustum, dass er seine Wehe- 
klag aufzeichnete." 1) 

For this new oratorio one final catastrophe was needed in 
LeverktShn’s life. Clarissa Rodde had died by her own hand. 
Rudolf Schwerdtfeger of the "blue eyes" had died a violent 
death. His murderess, Inez Institoris was mad. Marie 
Godeau of the "black eyes" had served her purpose in Ad¬ 
rian’s "hell-bent" destiny. The one who makes up the third 
in the trinity of "eyes", Repomuk Schneidewein, was yet to 
play his part. 

Nepomuk Schneidewein, five years of age, son of 
Adrian’s sister Ursula of Buchel, came to Pfeiffering in 
the middle of June, 1928, to recover from an attack of 
measles, and to enable his mother to take a cure. He cal¬ 
led himself "Echo”, and with his nafve and winning ways . 
melted the heart of everyone at Pfeiffering. 

This "angel-child” with the clear blue eyes, 
before whom the women had a tendency to kneel down, and 
who reminded Seitblom of the Christ-child in the arms of 
the Madonna,—this child cane into LeverktLhn’s life and 
won his love. But in that love lay the poison of death, 

1) See DF* p. 697. 








t 



1 






t 







t t 




c 


« 












' : 












-105- 


for Leverktlhn had been forbidden human love* Until Hepo- 
muk Schneidewein was out of the way he could not reach the 
apogee of his career, the terms of his contract with Old 
Nick could not be fulfilled: "Liebe ist dir verboten, in- 
sofern sie w&rmt. Dein Leben soil kalt sein. Darum darfst 

i) 

du keinen ^enschen lieben”. 


Ag the name "Echo” which Hf.epomuk gave himself 

implies, he was destined to live but for the moment, then 

to disappear into the void from whence he cane. Adrian 

realized only too well the transitory qualities of this 

ethereal being, and immortalized him in music which he set 

2 ) 

to the songs of Ariel. "Echo” was attacked by the dread¬ 
ful disease spinal-meningitis, and after a period of heart¬ 
rending suffering and pain, died in August, 1928. 


For the first time Leverktlhn cursed his fate and 

the evil forces which lay at the root of his being. His 

fate, too, was now once and for all clear to him. There 

was no hope; the consummation of the pact la}/ at hand; . 

w Ten habe gefunden.♦. essoll nicht 
s e i n...Das Gute und E< 3 le...was man das Mensch- 
liche neimt, obwohl es gut und edel ist. Um was 
Henschen gekSmpft, woftlr sie Zwingburgen ge- 
stflrmt, und was die Erftlllten jubelnd verkttndigt 
haben, das soli nicht sein. ES wird zurftckge- 
nommen, Ich will es zurtlcknehmen.. .Die Neunte 
Symphonic." 3) 

The latter is, of course, a reference to the great chorale 

1) See DF. p. 385. 

2) Ariel, a spirit of the air in Shakespeare’s TEE TEMPEST. 

3) See DF. p.*72jT. 












-106- 


of hope with v;hich Beethoven 1 s Ninth Symphony comes to a 
close. 


Simultaneous with the progress of his last and 
ultimate work, the "Dr* Fausti Weheklag", was the progress 
of Leverktlhn's approaching insanity. It was manifested in 
outward signs symbolic of the end. His appearance, for 
example, had gradually undergone a noticeable change. 


"...durch einen dunkeln, mit Qrau vermischten 
Bartwuchs, eine Art von Khebelbart, in den ein 
schmales ©berlippenbSrtchen hinabhing.•.Die Ver- 
fremdung, die diese partielle Bedeckung der 
Zt!ge bewirkte, hahm man in den Kauf, weil der 
Bart es war, der wo hi zusammen mit einer wach- 
senden Neigung den Eopf zur Schulter geneigt 
zu tragen, dem Antlitz etwas Vergeistigt-Leid- 
endes, ja Christushaftes verlieh." 1) 

Nereis the symbolic suggestion in parody, on which I have 
remarked before, of Christ who also knew what his fate 
would be. 

Following are further outward signs which, I 

Mann 

suggest, foreshadowed LeverkHhn T s insanity, although/allows 
Zeitblom to find rational excuses for all of them: 

1. An almost excessive energy and an apparently exception¬ 
able state of health. 

E. A somewhat retarded, sometimes hesitant, sometimes 
slightly monotonous manner of speech. 

3. Byes exaggeratedly Yri.de open, a strip of white showing 


1) See DF. p* 733 











- 107 - 


above the iris—a widened gaze, a fixity, a stare, 
the pupils unaffected by alteration in lighting. 

4. Internal rigidness—a habit of moving the eyeballs 
rapidly to and fro, rather far from side to side. 

5. A tendency to slovenliness in the appearance of his 
dress. 

6. Almost all social intercourse, trips, walks, etc., 
given up. 


With all this,however, the years of 1929-30 were 
for him, ft Jahre einer ungeheuren und hocherregten.. .mon- 

D 

strSsen...sch5pferischen Aktivitat”. lie continued to work 

on his u Dr, Fausti W©heklag w . As the name implies, he 

used sections of the "Faustus 11 as found in the old chap 

book. Zeitblom characterizes this work as, 

f1 ...die ICLage des OTllensohns, die furchtbarste 
Menschen und Gottesklage die, ausgehegd vom 
Subjekt, aber stets weiter sich ausbreitend und 
gleichsam den Kbsmos ergreifend, auf Srden je 
angestimmt worden ist...um eine immerwahrende, 
unerschSpflich akzentuierte iCLage von sehmerz- 
haftester Ecce homo-Gebtrde handelt es sich... f? 2) 


The music reflects the experience with Nepomuk 
Schneidewein: 

ft ...in Leverktlhns letzter und Mchster ScMpf- 
ung ist dieses Lieblingsdessin des Baroch, das 
Echo, oftmals mit unsgglich schwermiitiger Wirk- 
ung verwendet..." 3) 

The ^hetaera Esmeralda 1 * symbol is present again as in the 

1) See DP. p. 732. 

2) See DP. p. 736. 

3) See DP. p. 737. 















- 108 - 


lied "0 lieb Liadel, wie schlecht bist du": 

w ..•die...Hetaera Esmeralda-Figur, das 
h e a e e s, selir oft Melodik und Harmonik be- 
herrscht: ttberall da n&mlich wo von der Yer- 
schreibung und Yersprechung, dem Blut-Rezess nur 
imaer die Rede ist." 1) 


The " Dr. Fausti Yeheklag" is the acme of Lever- 

21 

ktlhn f s style, the "strict style" for which he early strove 

"...das magische Quadrat eines Stils Oder einer 
Technik,...die noch die Susserste Mannigfaltig- 
keit aus identisch festgehaltenen Materialien 
entwickelt und in der es nichts Unthematisches 
mehr gibt...es gab keine freie Note mehr." 5) 

This technique symbolizes the inescapable trap of Lever- 

ktthn f s life. Zeitblom characterizes it further as:- 

"Ein ungeheures Yariationenwerk der KLage—neg- 
ativ verwandt als solches dem Finale der Neunten 
Symphonie mit seinen Yariationen des Jubels." 4 

This reminds us at once of the words of Adrian at the 

5) 

death of Nepomuk Schneidewein. 


In one of the oratorios of this piece—"Oratorio 

Fausti ad Studiosus”—he used as his theme the words of 

6 ) 

Faustus: " Denn ich sterbe als ein BSser und guter Christ" 
To the twelve syllables of this sentence he set the twelve 
notes of the chromatic scale. Here he has finally devel¬ 
oped and employed the "twelve-note system" which he once 

explained to Zeitblom as they walked on the "Zionsberg" 

7) 

and around the "Kuhniulde" hack in Buchel long ago. 


1) See DF. p. 742. 

2) See p. 41. 

3) See DF. p. 73S. 

4) ibid. 3) 


5) See p, 105. 

6) See DF. n. 739. 

7) See p. 7. 





■ 







- 109 - 


The "Christ-like" qualities of Adrian towards the end 

1 ) 

have already been discussed, and here we see the symbol of 
Christ who with his twelve disciples (notes) has fulfilled 
his life’s work and ambition; symbolized, that is, in its 
use throughout the ” Dr. Fausti Weheklag". For it dom¬ 
inates the work: " Es liegt zum Grunde alien, was da klingt, 

-besser: es liegt als Tonart fast, hinter alien. w 2) 

ri 3) 

The end, "Ein Lied, an die J-rauer" symbolizes the 

revocation of Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony: 

"...es ist gleichsam der umgekehrte Weg des 
Liedes an die Freude, das kongeniale Negativ 
jenes Ueberganges der Symphonie in den Vokal- 
Jubel, es ist die SUrftcknahme." 4) 

It contains three notable parodies: a parody of Christ’s 

"Natch with me" at G- e thsemane, in the use of Faustus’ ad- 

5 ) 

monition to his friends—"mit Ruhe schlafen"; a parody 
of the Last Supper of Christ, in the drinking of Johannes® 
wine with the company of his friends; and Satan’s efforts 
to tempt Jesus are parodied in the scene where the neigh¬ 
bour invites Faustus to visit him so that he may convert, 
him. While we are on the "Christ" theme, we may very well 
look upon Rudolf Schwerdtfeger as symbolizing Leverkfthn’s 
Judas. 


With the completion of the ’’Dr* Fausti Weheklag" 
which took him three years to complete, Adrian LeverMhn 


1) See p. 106. 

2) See DF. p. 73S 

3) See DF. p. 743 


4) ibid. 3) 

5) ibid. 3) 

























I 




t 

■' 

. 


1 























- 110 - 


had attained to the absolute finite possibilities of his 
musical genius. Aided and abetted from earliest child¬ 
hood by diabolic influences both external and internal, 
his artistic destiny had now been fulfilled. Step by step 
he had travelled via the pathways of spiritual corruption 
to the brink of the "Flaming Pit". The terms of his com¬ 
pact with "Black Kaspar" had been fulfilled; he whom 
Ehrenfried Kumpf was wont to call "Dicis et non facis" had 
given the lie to this name, for his promises to Adrian had 
been most diabolically kept. Twenty-four years of musical 
genius, of "illumination" with the aid of his "little ones" 
--"hetaera Esmeralda"—sypStcildls --had been his contribu¬ 
tion. The day of reckoning was at hand; Adrian LeverkEhn 
had now to pay the price. 


There was, as I said at the beginning of this 
work, no hope for Thomas Mann f s "Eaustus". Since he was 
a "Eaustus", it was natural that we should look for a sym¬ 
bolic parallel in the end,with that of Eaustus in the chap 
book: 

"Darum, als das Tahr 1930 fast auf seine Hfilfte 
gekommen war, in Monat Mai, l&dt Leverktihn auf 
verschiedenen Wegen eine G-esellschaft zu sich 
hach Pfeiffering, all seine Ereunde und A e kannten 
auch sogar solche, nit denen er wenig Oder gar- 
nicht bekannt, eine Menge Leute, an die dreissig. 

i) 

The language of this extract is unmistakably Biblical, so 
that one is again reminded of The Last Supper of Christ. 

1) See DF. p. 745. 




- 

, 

--- r* / 












, 

■ < 
t 

, 

< 














- 111 - 


The ostensible purpose of this gathering was to 
introduce his "Dr* Fausti Y/ehelclag" to this group of friends 
and acquaintances* Evidence of the state of Leverktlhn’s 
nind at the time is clear in the fact that he gave Frau 
Schweigestill no indication whatsoever that he was expect¬ 
ing such a large group of people* 

The weather was symbolically correct for the occas¬ 
ion: "...das Y/etter hielt sich, obgleich ein Gewitter leise 

1 ) 

grollend am Horizonte stand.*." All through the arrival of 
the guests, Kaschperl-Suso the dog, bayed incessantly, as 
if he too, knew what was in the air. YJhen the stage was 
set he became silent. 

Mien at last all that motley crowd of friends, 
acquaintances and the purely curious were seated, Lever- 
Idlhn began, To Zeitblom (and to the reader) the true pur¬ 
pose of the gathering became at once evident. 

Step by step Leyerktihn recounted his life’s story, 

every significant, diabolic, repulsive event which had 

brought him to his doom. When the last words of this soul- 

shattering confession had been uttered, the Devil was at 

his side to claim his due: 

"*..er (i.e., Adrian) breitete, tiber das Instru¬ 
ment gebeugt, die Arme aus, als wollte er damit 
umfangen, und fiel pldtzlich, wie gestossen, 
seitlich vom Sessel zu Boden." 2) 

1) See DF. u. 747. 

2) 3qQ DF. p. 763, 








- 112 - 


Leverktthn's rational existence had come to a climaxing 
finale; ”hetaera Esmeralda” had done her work; the con¬ 
tract with the Devil had seen the payment of the price. 

Then Adrian came out of a twelve hour period of 
unconsciousness (one might say one for each note of the 
chromatic scale which had raised him to the pinnacle of 
technical musical magic,and had brought him to his present 
state) he was completely insane. A three months* confine¬ 
ment in a private hospital for nervous diseases at ITymph- 
enberg brought the news that he was incurable, fhree m onths 
—'Mann employes his symbolism persistently right to the 
end. Uhy three months? Perhaps that length of time is re¬ 
quired to come to a definite medical diagnosis; but we 
cannot forget that the symbol ”three” has been employed 
over and over again in this tale. He might just as easily 
have said two months or five months. 

Just before Eisbeth Leverkiihn came to fetch her 
son, now once more as a little child to his home at Buchel, 
Adrian tried to commit suicide by drowing in the ?, IOLammer- 
weiher” pond at Pfeiffering,—the pond where the water, as 
in its counterpart the ”Kuhmulde n at Buchel, was so extra¬ 
ordinarily "cold”. Por ten years, up to his death on the 
25th of August, 1940, he relived his childhood with his 
mother, under the old linden tree in the court-yard, around 
the ”Kuhmulde”, walking on the ”Zionsberg”. He had always 









mm- 










- 113 - 


belonged to Buchel, to Kaisersaschern, to the Iliddle Ages. 
It was a Tt return to the original”, just as he had striven 
in his compositions to return music to its original status 
in the realm of art. 




















- 114 - 


PART WO 

SYMBOLISM AFFECTIHG GERMANY AND ITS PEOPLE 

"Letztens und erstens aber—und diese Rechtfer- 
tigung war noch immer die gtiltigste, wenn nicht 
vor den Menschen, so doch vor Gott: ich babe 
ihn geliebt—Mit Entzetzen und S&rtlichkeit, mit 
Erbarmen und hingebender Bewunderung—und wenig 
dabei gefragt, ob er in mindesten mir das Ge- 
ftihl zurtlckgSbe ... n 1) 

These are the words of Serenus Zeitblom, chronicler of the 
life-history of Adrian Leverktthn. But they are really the 
words of Tiionas Mann, and in them lies the key to the 
reasons for the writing of this novel,, The love which 
Zeitblom expresses for Adrian Leverktlhn is the love of 
Thomas ^ann for his Fatherland* When an artist is plagued 
with an intensity of feeling so great that it causes him 
paib, suffering and agony, there is for him only one path¬ 
way to relief, namely an expression of this feeling in his 
art. For Thomas -■‘arm the writing of DOICTOR FAUSTUS is 
such an attempt to find relief. Indeed, this fantastic 
drama of the life of a composer may have been for its 
author a catharsis, in the same way as the dramas of the 
Ancients was intended to serve as a catharsis for the aud¬ 
ience* Adrian Leverktihn is a German; he is also Germany, 

1) See DF. p* 13. 









i 


1 


' 






- 115 - 


and his life and fate are the symbols of the fate of the 
German nation in its historical development and its down¬ 
fall in the double catastrophes of the First and Second 
World Wars. 

In the first section of this work, Adrian Lever- 
ktthnf has been discussed as an individual. In the trac¬ 
ing of his career from birth to death, I have emphasized 
that aspect of the symbolism in this novel which touched 
largely upon Adrian LeverktUm personally, as an individual 
artist-genius. Often this was of a technical nature em¬ 
ployed by the author to heighten and further the dramatic 
qualities of the novel, yet always forming an integral 
part of the network of events which brought him. as a human 
being to his doom. 


This second section is to concern itself with 
the treatment of the symbolism in DOKTOR FAUSTUB which in¬ 
volves the premise that Adrian Leverktlhn stands for Ger¬ 
many and the German people. Following are some remarks, 
made by others on this connection: 

Frederick C. Sell- 

ff Das neue \ferk, entstanden in und nach der 
Eriegsaeit konnte an der Gegenwart nicht vorbei- 
gehen. Si pakt das Problem an, das der breiten 
Masse der Deutschen erst in Zusammenbruch auf- 
gegangen ist, ihn aber (i.e., Thomas Hann) seit 
lahren gequfilt hat, die Frage, wie es mSgiich 
war, dass ein Yolk mit hochentwickelter Kultur 
sich dem Bgsen tlberlassen, sich ihm so ver$chret- 







1 ) 

ben konnte... 


- 116 - 


T» 

"Den Sonderfall eines dtoonisch inspirierten 
I31nstiers nit dem Schicksal eines ganzen Yolkes 
in Yerbindung zu setzen, ist das besondere An- 
liegen von Thomas Mann’s Kompositionskunst." 2) 


Andre von Gronicka- 

n It is unquestionably one of the most profound 
and bold statements of the topic of the German 
artist and the German nation.,.his compassion 
with the doomed German nation is deeply heart¬ 
felt. " 3) 

"We must accept at face value a modern individ¬ 
ual, a contemporary nation in dreadful submission 
to the devil incarnate. True, one has been told 
before that the Germans are a deeply problemat¬ 
ical, metaphysical, a visionary people, a ’dae¬ 
monic’ race. Yet never, perhaps, has a modern 
author ventured to present such a vivid, starkly 
life-like portrayal of the ’Faustian’ Germany 
surrendering to the devil in order to gain with 
his help visionary goals in the spiritual realm 
(Adrian) or the material world (Nazis )•’’ 4) 

"Zeitblom’s heaV3r heart and trembling hand are 
those of Thomas Mann as he contemplates and re¬ 
cords the fateful course of the doomed German 
artist and the German nation, so close, so dear 
to him*" 5) 


Charles 1. Rolo- 

"Its hero is am artist and the Devil is a German- 
German to the core." 6) 


1) Frederick G. Sell, "Sin iKommentar zu Thomas Manns ’Doktor 
Faustus’", Honatshefte, Yol. XL, No.4, April, 1948, 

p. 193. 

2) ibid. p. 200. 

3) Andre von Gronicka, "Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus T , 
(Prolegomena to an interpretation)’’, Germanic Review, 

Yol. 2XCII, No. 3, October, 1948, p. 206. 

4) ibid. 3), p. 206 f. 5) ibid. 3), p. 209. 

6) Charles 1. Rolo, "Mann and his Ilephistopheles", Atlantic 
Monthly, November, 1948, p. 92. 









- 117 - 


Ericii ICahler- 

" T .', T as in Adrian und nit Adrian geschieht, sch- 
liesst niclit nur das G-eschicle der modernen Eunst 
tlberhaupt und des geistigen MensChen, sondern 
das Verhtognis Deutschlands, das im Ilintergrund 
sich abrollt, und des deutschen Characters, an 
dem Adrian teilhat, ja, dartlber hinaus das Ver- 
Mngnis unserer heutigen Vlelt." 1) 


Victor Zuckerkandl- 

w Bs ist klar, dass damit mehr gemeint ist als 
ein pers8nlich.es Schick&al, die Lebenskatastrophe 
eines schSpferischen denies• Der Mann steht fttr 
Deutschland, sein Werk steht ftlr die deutsche 
Ivlusik, und die Vahnsinnsnacht, in der er ver- 
s inlet, hat in der deutschen Katas trophe ihr 
Gegenbild.* 1 2) 


One of the key figures in this connection is Serenus Zeit- 
blon— n the serene flower of the times 11 —through whose eyes 
we see not only LeverkfLhn himself, but also the world ar¬ 
ound him* lie writes of LeverkGhn and events contemporan¬ 
eous'with his productive years, 1885-1950* At the same 
time he also writes of the present, that is, the time of 
writing of the chronicle, 1943-1945. Past and present are 
thus fused into a harmonious whole revolving about the - 


central figure. 


Seitblom is, of course, in part a personifica¬ 
tion of Thomas Mann and his ideas. Indeed, Mann has in¬ 


jected himself into D0MT0R FAUSTUS to a greater extent 

1) Mrich Mahler,"SakulSrisierung des TeufelS..Thomas Hanna 
f Doktor Faustus*? Die Neue Rundschau, Nr. 10 (Frflhjahr), 
Bermann-Fischer Yerlag, Stockholm, 1948, p. 196. 

2) Victor Zuckerkandl, "Die Musik &es 'Doktor Faustus*", 
ibid. 1), p. 210. 










- 118 - 


tlian in any of his previous fictional works. The artist 

in Mann finds its symbol in Adrian Leverktlhn. In him 

I.Iann finds expression for his opinions about the artist and 

thereby about himself. For Thomas Mann "belongs to the 

anguished company of the T guilty artists’, who see in their 

gift a ’flower of evil’ and feel within themselves the 

1 ) 

seed of original sin". 

The other half of his personality is mirrored in 
Serenus Zeitblom: 


"Serenus Zeitblom personifies only one side of 
Ziann’s personality, only his serene, his enlight¬ 
ened self, only that part of his nature which 
has its roots in the bourgeois humanism of a 
passing era," 2) 

So it is the Humanist, Serenus Zeitblom-Mann who provides 
the clues to the fate of Germany in that of Adrian Lever¬ 
ktlhn: 


"Hr bildet das Btndeglied zwischen der Geschichte 
Leverktlhns und der TragSdie der Zeit,,,In kurzen 
Rtickblicken auf das eigene Leben, in Kapitel- 
anftngen und beiiSufigen Bemerkungen, versetzt 
er uns in die Zeit in^weloher er die Biographie 
schreibt, die Jahre 1943-45,• ,Wie die deutsche 
Intelligenz nach 1933 ftthrt er eine Sprache, die 
alles zwischen den Zeilen lesen lfisst, bis ihm 
das immer nSher kommende Drohen des Untergangs 
eine gehaltene Offenheit verstattet." 3) 


How then has Thomas Mann accomplished the iden¬ 
tification of Adrian Leverktlhn and Germany with Serenus 
Zeitblom as his agent? This is the question to which I 


1 ) 

2 ) 

3) 


Charles J, Rolo, "Mann and his Mephistopheles", p. 
Andre von Cronicka, "Thoims Mann’s ’Doktor Fernstus 
209 • 

F.clsell/^lin Hommentar zu T.Manns’Doktor Faustus’ 


92. 

,f %p. 

;'p. 338 S 














- 119 - 


want to provide an answer. 

First of all, Mann’s protagonist is a musician. 
It is true that Thomas Mann is said to possess a very ac¬ 
ute knowledge and understanding of music. The very man¬ 
ner of presentation of the material of DOICTOR FAUSTUS sug¬ 


gests the transference of musical technique to prose. But 

he would hardly choose a musician as protagonist in order 

to display his musical and technical erudition, great as 

this may be. Music has always played an important role in 

the life of our author as it has in the life of G-ermany: 

"How significant a role Mann assigns to music in 
the German national character is strikingly in¬ 
dicated in the following quotation from the es¬ 
say "Deutschland und die Deutschen’:- 


’E§ ist ein grosser Fehler der Sage (i.e., des 
Spiesschen Faust) und des Gedichtes (i.e., des 
Goetfeschen Faust), dass sie Faust nicht mit der 
’llusik’ in Verb indung br ingen. Er mtisste musik- 
alisch, mtisste ’Musiker’ sein. Die Musik ist 
d&monisches Gebiet...Sie ist bj^echnetste Ord- 
nung und chaostr&chtige Aider-Yernunft zugleich 
an beschwBrenden, inkantativen Gesten reich, 
Z&hlsnzauber die der Wirklichkeit fernste und 
zugleich die passionierteste der Idtnste, abstrakt 
und mystisch. Soil Faust der Repr§sentant der 
deutschen Seele sein, so mtisste er musikalisch 
sein; denn abstrakt und mystisch, d.h., musik¬ 
alisch ist das YerhSltnis des Deutschen zur 
Welt’". 1) 

Amongst the first leitmotifs we are introduced to 
in connection with Adrian Levork&hn are the migraine,which 
he inherited from his father together with a leaning to¬ 
ward the "mystical", and the "coldness" of his nature which 

1) Andre von Gronicka, "Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus’, 
p. 213. 







- 120 - 


ha d its roots in a diabolic arrogance and pride: 

"Lange sciion bevor ich mit den giftigen Faktor 
koste, war meine Seele in Hochnut und Stolz zu 
den Satan unterwegs gewesen, und stand mein 
Datum dahin, dass ich nach ihn traelitete von 
Jugend auf." 1) 

These qualities were rooted in his nature, then, born in 
him through his father. 

I have spoken previously of Leverktthn f s "migraine" 
as a "warning bell" for what was to come later in his life; 
in short, as a symbol of the gnawing inherent "pain" in 
his make-up, which in time was to become greatly intensi¬ 
fied through the germs of syphilis which attacked his 
brain; a symbol of a basic, daemonic urge, which in its 
actual manifestations grew in him, aided by both external 
(environment) and internal (disease) influences, until it 
reached the monstrous proportions of the extended periods 
of torturous suffering of later years,. These, in them¬ 
selves, as we have seen, were but preludes to his technic¬ 
ally superb ahd brilliant musical compositions. His lean¬ 
ing toward the mystical conditioning his choice of themes 
as it did, also played its part, indirectly, in his tech¬ 
nical success. 

Leverktlhn made of his music a sort of cult, a 
barbaric religion, which drove him farther and farther 
from the sphere of the "human" into the lofty "coldness" of 

1) See DF. p* 756. 
















- 121 - 


his arrogance and pride, and always and inexorably closer 
to his doom. As his nusical shill increased, progressively 
raising him nearer to the ultimate regions of perfection, 
in the same degree did he progressively descend toward the 
depths of spiritual corruption; so that when he attained 
to the former, he attained to the latter at one and the 
same time, thereby making the tragedy of his life a double 
tragedy. 

Speaking of Adrian’s inherent characteristics, 

musical and theological background, Charles J. Rolo says: 

" But a sense of the mystery of the natural el¬ 
ements, a sense of the myth and the supernatural, 
is fraught with peril. The anti-rational out¬ 
look, when allied with an illiberal, anti-human 
temper, degenerates into barbaric cultism. This 
temper is a manifest strain in the German Kultur 
and in the Geftman character..." 1) 

Here is Leverkilhn’s "inherited migraine’ 1 symbolized in an 

inherent quality in the German national character. 

Zeitblom begins his chronicle of Leverktlhn’s life 
on the 27th of May, 1945, three years after his death. We 
remember that the star of Nazi G eman y still shone at its 
brightest at this time. Now concurrent with the events of 
Adrian’s personal life and that going on around him, Mann 
interposes remarks about the actual present events, so that 
there is always a parallel fluctuation between Adrian’s 
life and the life of Germany t "The tragedy of Leverktlhn 
1) Charles j. Rolo, "Mann and his Mephistophelean, p. 93. 









- 122 - 


gains its full force) 

only when seen against the background of Germany’s aber- 

1 ) 

ration and destruction 11 . This method is a very definite 
piece of evidence that Mann intends Leverkilhn as the sym¬ 
bol of Germany and its people. 


Having introduced the principal character and 
some of the chief symbolic leitmotifs of his tale, Mann 
proceeds with the first hint of this background against 

Li 

which he is painting Adrian’s life. Zeitblon, speaking 
of the possible eventual publication of his Tt chronicle” 

says: 

’’Dieser Seitpunkt wird gekommen sein, wenn unser 
zwar weitlfiufiges und dennoch enges, von erstick- 
end verbrauchten Luft erffllltes Gef&ngnis sich 
Sffnet, das heisst: wenn der gegenwStrtig tobende 
Krieg* so odor so, sein Snde gefunden hat.” 2) 


After Adrian has gone through the Kaisersaschern 

phase, the Halle phase, has made his decision for music 

at Leipzig and has entered into the pact with the Devil 

through "hetaera: Esmeralda” in Pressburg, Hungary* the 

3) 

author-chronicler brings us up to date again. The Allies 
have begun wholesale destruction of German cities from 
the air, the Pwussians are pushing the German troops back 
from the East, an allied landing has been made in Sicily; 
although the end is. certain, the mad and senseless strug¬ 
gle goes on: 

4) Andre von Gronicka,”Thomas %.nn f s ’Doktor Faustus’” n.211 
2) See DF. p. 49 f. 






- 123 - 


"Ja, wir sind ein gtozlich verschiodenes den 
ITtlchtern-Ueblichen widersprechendes Volk, von 
mflchtig tragischer Seele, und unsere Liebe ge- 
h8rt dem Schicksal, jedem Schicksal, wenn es 
nur eines ist, sei es aucli der den Hinmel mit 
GOtterdlfrmierungsrttte entztindene Untergang." 1) 

Adrian Leverktlhn too, knows bis fate after the Leipzig 

"Ftihrer” episode; but be presses on to tbo blood-pact 

with Phetaera Esmeralda". 


In tbe same way, Germany, led astray by a n Ftih- 
rer'J struck with tbe mad disease of lust for power eating 
its way slowly into tbe ”brain ,? of tbe nation, having 
signed tbe horrible pact with tbe first blood of its peo¬ 
ple, continues to rush on to its ultimate doom, Vith Mbn- 
signor HinterpfQrtner, symbol of tbe long since impotent 
power of tbe church under tbe heels of tbe Nazis, Zeit- 
blom is in agreement: 

T? Ja, Monisgnore Hintsrpfortner bat recbt: wir 
sind verloren* Will sagen: der Krieg ist ver- 
loren, aber das bedeutet mebr, als einen ver- 
lorenen Eeldzug, es bedeutet tatsfichlich, dass 
w i r verloren sind, verloren unsere Sacbe und 
Seele, unser Glauben und unsere Geschichte. Es 
ist aus mit Deutschland*.*es ist die Verzweifel- 
ung, ist der Wabnsinn* ff 2) 


Adrian progresses from Leipzig to bunion to Italy 
and tlie final confirmation of tbe pact with Satan, tbe 
statement of tbe terms, and tbe setting of tbe time-limit* 
Tbe Devil bad promised richly productive times and times 

1) See DF* p* 269. 

2) See DF. p* 270 f* 








- 124 - 


of suffering as part of the price to ho paid. So also had 
the Nazi "devils" promised their nation time—one thou¬ 
sand years of glory—a "tausendjShrige Geschichte", and 
here too, suffering was to he the price—"Blut und Boden". 
Tragedy hovers thickly over Leverktlhn’s life. Personally 
there is no longer any escape from his fate. Political 
forces in the Germany of his time, 1912, point to the war 
of 1914-1918. 


In the immediate present, April, 1944, the scene 
in Germany daily becomes blacker and more hopeless. The 
Russians are pressing on with continued successes. And in 
the West: 


"Unterdessen wSehst der Schrecken der fast tfig- 
lichen Luftangriffe auf unsere wohlumgSrtete 
Pestuhg Europa ins Ueherdimensionale...Tausende 
verdunkeln den Himmel des ktlhn geeinten con¬ 
tinents und immer. weitere unserer Stadte sinken 
im Trtbumer." 1) 

The threat of invasion of Prance is growing: 

"Der Angriff von alien Seiten, mit ilberlegenem 
feterial und Millionen Soldaten auf unser euro- 
p8isch.es Castell—Oder soil ich sagen unser Ge- 
fSngnis, soli ich sagen: unser Narrenhaus? wird 
e r w a r t e t." 2) 

Closer and closer is the catastrophe approaching home, "bhe 
sacred German soil" itself. 


With this revelation before us, the author pro¬ 
ceeds with the account of Leverkiihn’s settling down at 

1} See DP. p. 389. 

2) See DP. p. 390. 



* 











s 







c 






v 3 

5 < C 


• 










t 




, 












‘ 














* 

, 




. 1 












- 125 - 


Pfeiffering after his return from Italy. Y/ith what con¬ 
summate shill does Thomas Ylann employ his symbolism! Ee 
has just told us that the actual invasion by land forces 
on territory now held by the Germans is daily expected; in 
short, that the final stages of the horrible, diabolic 
blood-letting are to take place "at home". This he fol¬ 
lows, then, with a casual account of how Leverktthn takes 
up residence in the Schweigestill home at Pfeiffering, 
which, as we have seen, is Buchel in all but name. He too, 
comes home for the final stages of his life, for the ful¬ 
filment of the terms of the pact with the Devil. 


Around him events march on. The First World War 

has broken out. Leverktthn lays his plans for the "Gesta 

Romanorum" and the "Apocalipsis cum figuris". When we 

are next brought up to date, the background war of 1914- 

1918 is almost over, while in the immediate present the 

invasion of France has begun: 

" Die Zeit, von der ich schreibe,war fttr und 
Deutsche eine Aera des staatlichen Zusammenbruchs 
der Capitulation, der Erschttpfungsrevolte und 
des hilflosen Dahingegebenseins in die Httnde der 
Frenden. Die Zeit i n der ich schreibe,... 
trttgt, grSsslich schwellenden Bauches, eine vater 
Ittndische Katastrophe in Sclioss, mit der ver- 
glichen die Niederlage von damals als mSssiges 
Missgeschick, als verstandige Liquidierung eines 
verfehlten Unternehemens erscheint..«" 1) 


Y/hile Germany’s fateful progress toward final 


1) S e e DF 


p. 515 







- 126 - 


madness and collapse is recorded in the raging war, Adrian 
Leverktthn’s musical works under the influence of his dis¬ 
ease and the events of his external environment, also 
point to the end. Vhile Germany has discovered a diabolic 
new weapon of defence—the robot bomb—,Adrian continues 
to show increasingly more brilliant technical virtuosity 
in his compositions. Round and about Germany and within 
her own borders, ever increasing destruction and hellish 
suffering; Adrian Leverktthn overtaken by a monstrous 
attack of his disease, lying in darkness and excruciating 
pain. The German leaders refuse to be advised, to see the 
end, though the outcome of their mad struggle is plain to 
everyone; Adrian Leverktthn fights against seeing a phy¬ 
sician, because he is afraid to hear the truth. For, when 
one is finally called in against his wishes, the diagnosis 
settles on the brain. Against the book's background of 
the fantastic, unbelievably barbaric battle of Europe, 
where human beings are the puppets, vdiere the voices of 
millions of people ring out in an agonized chorus of suf¬ 
fering and death, vying with the crashing detonations of 
the weapons of war, Leverktlhn completes his "Apocalipsis 
cum figuris t? in which the characters, too, are marionnet- 
tes. There too, is a chorus against abackground—of music— 
but there is no longer a clear distinction between the two: 

?l iian lasse mich hier doch. ♦ .ein Wort einschalten 

tlber die Behandlung des Chores in dem h'erk meines 














- 127 - 


Freundes, dies© nie erprobte Auflockerung des 
Vokal-I3Srpers ins gruppenmflssig geteilte nnd 
verschrflnkte Y.'idereinander, ins Dramatisch- 
Dialogisch und in :inzelruf e, die allerdings den 
Antwort-Schlag *Barabam! T aus der* Ilatthfius- 
Passion zum klassiscli entfernten Vorbild haben,.. 
Chor und Orchester stehen einander nicbt als das 
I'enschliche und das Dingliche klar gegentlber; 

sie sind einander aufgelBst:-der Chor ist in- 

strumentalisiert, das Orchester vokalisiert-—in 
dem Grade und zum Ende, dass tats&chlich die 
Grenze zwischen Mensch und Ding verrtlckt ersch- 
eint, was sicher der ldlnstlerischen Einheit- 
lichkeit zustatten kommt, da es dock—wenigstens 
filr mein Gemtit—auch etwas Beklemmendes, GefShr- 
lickes, BBsartiges an sich hat.” 1) 

"•..die Epinnerung an das Pandfimonium des Each- 
ens, das H811engel£chter, das, kurz, aber grfts- 
slich,<J.en Abschluss des ersten Teils der *Apoc- 
alipsis* bildet.. .zuhl Tutti-Fortissimo grauen- 
haft anschwellenden, ttberbordenen, sa.rdonischen 
Gaudium gehennas, dieser aus lolen, Iliafen,Erei- 
schen, Meckern, RBhren, Heulen und Aiehern 
schauderhaft gemischtes Salve von Hohn-und Tri- 
umphgelSchter der H811e. 2) 


DOOM—the reader is overwhelmed with the feeling 
of doom which hangs over the figures of Adrian LeverktShn 
and the German nation. Over Germany the clouds loom heavy 
and threatening; destruction and despair are rife. In 
Leverktihn’s environment tragedy piles upon tragedy. 

Clarissa Rodde commits suicide. 


n 0 Deutschland, du gehst zu Grunde, mid icfe ge- 
dehke deiner Hoffnungenl" 3).. . 

Rudolf Sehwerdtfeger who long has pressed his un¬ 


healthy wooing of Adrian, has broken through to his heart 

1) See DP. p. 572. 3) See DP. p. 591. 

2) See DP. p. 576 f. 










- 128 - 


and lias won his love. The consummation of their relation¬ 
ship is a concerto dedicated to Rudolf; they are "per du". 
Three performances follow* The final performance is the 
occasion for Adrian to meet his second forbidden love— 
Marie Godeau. He is now contemplating marriage, he who had 
been forbidden all human bonds, far away in Italy bn that 
fateful day. An excursion for the ladies is arranged when 
Marie Godeau and her aunt cone to Munich shortly after she 
had first met Adrian, at the conclusion of which he sees 
Marie Godeau to her lodging-place* Onward, onward he 
presses, while the destructive web of Rate draws its con¬ 
stricting threads more tightly and viciously about him. 


"Ueber Deutschland schlSgt das Yerderben zu- 
sarnmen, in Schutt unserer St&dte hausen, von 
Leichen fett, die Batten, der Donner der russisch- 
en Ki&nonen rollt gegen Berlin, der Rhein-Ueber- 
gang der AngelsSchsen war ein Ifinderspiel, unser 
eigener "Jille, der sich mit dem des Eeindes M , i<5fc ‘*‘ 6r 
scheint Ihn dazu gemacht zu haben; das Ende kom- 
mt, es kommt das Ende, es genet schon auf und 
bricht daher liber dich, du Einwohner des Landes, 

—aber ich fahre fort. 11 1)........ 


Leverktthn requests Schwerdtfeger to make the 
proposal of marriage to Marie Godeau for him. The result: 
betrayal of a friendship, followed by the death of Schwerdt¬ 
feger at the hands of Inez Institoris, who goes insane...... 

’’Heine Ei*z&hlung eilt ihrem Ende zu—das tut al- 
les. Alles drSngt und stiirtzt dem Ende entge- 
gen, In Endes Zelchen stent die Welt,—steht da- 


1) See DP. p* 660 f 












' 












* 








„ 

4 










/ • .' ■ :.r. ■ 












- 129 - 


-rin wenigstens ftir uns Deutsche, deren tausend- 
j&hrige ^eschichte, widerlegt, ad absurdum ge- 
fllhrt, als unselig verfehlt, als Irrweg erwiesen 
durch dieses Erg©bnis, ins Nicht^ in die Verzwei- 
felung, in einen Bankerott ohne Beispiel in eine 
von donnernden Flammen untanzte IlSllenfahrt 
mtlndet." 1) .. 

Since the Softerdtfeger-Inez Institoris-Marie G-odeau affair, 

Adrian has completed his tT Apocalipsis cum figuris", that 

work which contains the symbol of the end—"Die Prouhetie 

2 ) 

des Endes": 


TT Als im lahre 1926, die "Apocalipsis 1 .. .ihre 
erste und vorl&ufig letzte Aufftlhrung*• .erlebte, 
wurde der Susserst schwierige Part nit Meister- 
schaft von einem Tenoristen eunuchalen Typs... 
gesungen, dessen durchdringende Ansagen sich 
tatsSchlich wie ‘neuste Berichte von Weltunter- 
gang* ausnahmen. ?t 2) 

After its completion Leverkflhn falls into an extended pe¬ 
riod of creative sterility and physical suffering, when 
not a note is written, no progress is madej the last dread 
period of its kind, which had been promised him by the 
Devil. It is a final preparation for the end--the climax 
of his musical career—the " Dp* Fausti Weheklag", and his 
step from the rational world into the darkness of insanity. 


The death of -^epom.uk Schneidewein, "Echo" the 
"Angel-child", the third of 3jeverkfthn f s loves—prohibited 
human loves—provides the final abortive push needed as 
inspiration for the dreadful lamentation of "Doktor Eaustus" 
—of Adrian LeverktLhn—of the German nation*... 

1) See DP. p. 687. 

2) See DP. p. 575 f. 











- 130 - 


tf Seit Fnde I.SBrz sell on—wir schreiben den 25* 
April dieses Schicksaljahres, 1945—ist im West- 
en des Landes unser Widerstand siclitlicli in vol- 
ler AuflOsung begriffen*..Kein Halten mehr: 
alles gibt sich gefangen und lSuft auseinander..• 
linger den Grossen des Regimes, die sich in ilacht, 
Reichtum und Unrecht gewStlzt, wtttet richtend der 
Selbstmord.**Der grausige Mann, der voriges 
Lahr dem Anschlage verzweifelter, auf Rettung 
der letzten Substanz, der Zukunft bedachter Pat- 
rioten mit dem Leben, allerdings einem nur noch 
irre flackernden und flatternden, entrann, befahl 
seinen Soldaten, den jUigriff auf Berlin in einem 
I.Ieer von Blut zu ertrSnken und jeden Offizier zu 
ersebiessen, der von Ueborgabe spreche...O jam- 
mervolle Groteskel So wird bis zuletzt das robe 
Mtochen, der grimme Sagenniederscblag im Gemilt 
des Yolkes, nicht obne vertrauten Miderhall, an- 
gerufen..*Fluch, Fluch, den Yerderbern, die eine 
ursprtlngliche biedere, reebtlieb gesinnte, nur 
allzu gelebrige, nur allzu gern aus der Theorie 
lebende Menscbenart in die Scbule des BBsen 
nabmen l n 1). 


In Adrian Leverktihn's bistory we are now in tbe 
years 1929-1950: 

ff ...diese beiden Jahre. . «nach dem Scbeitem sei¬ 
nes Mheplanes, dem Yerlust des ITreundes, der 
Hinwegnabme des wunderbaren Kindes, das zu ibm 
gekomnen war, sie gehOrten ja sebon dem Earauf- 
steigen und Umsicbgreifen dessen an, was sieb 
dann des Landes bem&chtigte und*in Blut und 
Flammen untergeht. f? 2) 

By -lay, 1930, the^Dr. Fausti Meheklag” in wbieb Adrian 
reached tbe extreme of bis brilliant musical technique is 
complete. And with its completion tbe sands of bis hour¬ 
glass of time nave been exhausted* Tbe ?! Faustian ? * finale 
is described to ua in bis confession to bis friends. Tbe 

end has come; tbe pact with tbe Devil has been fulfilled: 

3) 

”Dieser - ann.. .clieser Mann ist v/almsinnigl” 

1) See DP. p. 728 ff. 3) See DF. p 762. 

2) See DP. p. 732. 










- 131 - 


The tale of Adrian LevorktUm lias been told; and 
with it, symbolically, the tale of Germany. For in May, 
1945, the European holocaust came mercifully to an end. 

Even as Leverktlhn, who, when.he regained consciousness af¬ 
ter his paralytic stroke, "...fand sich wieder als ein 

fremdes Selbst, das nur noch die ausgebrannte Htllle seiner 

1 ) 

PersOnlichkeit war", so did Germany, after the smoke of 
battle had lifted from her face, lie unrecognizable, a 
burnt-out husk, and knew herself not. 

Thomas ^ann provides one last symbol in the par¬ 
allel between his artist protagonist and Germany in the 
closing chapter of the book. The "death" of Germany, at 
the time standing upon the pinnacle of her diabolic car¬ 
eer, is symbolized in the death and burial of Adrian Lever¬ 
ktlhn in August, 1940. That is to say, the high point of 
the Nazis r achievements symbolizes at one and the same 
time the inevitable end, the certain catastrophe: 

"Deutschland, die Nangen hektisch gerStet, taum- 
elte dazumal auf der HOhe wilster Triumphe, im 
^egriffe, die We It zu gewinnen kraft des einen 
Vertrages, den es zu halten gesonnen war, und 
den es mit seinem Blute gezeichnet hatte." 2) 

With the last lines of his prodigous work, Thomas -ami con¬ 
firms for us again the symbolic parallel which we have 
been discussing, at the same time giving expression to his 
love for Germany, which has never wavered: "Gott sei eurer 

1) See DF. p. 766. 

2) See DF. p. 773. 



) 












■a 




c 






. 

, * 

1 --.v- 1 





- 132 - 


armen Seele gn&dig, mein Freund, mein Vaterland." 1) 

In addition to the mechanical techniques employed 
in this novel for the establishment of the connections be¬ 
tween Adrian Leverldlhn and the German nation, Thomas Mann 
supplies three other principal pieces of evidence with 
which we may further establish our case. These are: the 
members of the "Winfried Verein M at Halle, where Adrian 
took his theology—the voice of youth; the members of the 
salons of Frau Senator Rodde and others where the same 
people attended, in Munich; and the ICridwiss discussion 
group, also in Munich during the late twenties. 

The "Winfried Verein ?? is depicted to us in a 

smaller exclusive group consisting of Bailor inski, head of 

the Verein, w f emer der sttamige Delitschlin, dann ein ge- 

wisser Dungersheim, ein Carl von Teutle.ben, und noch ein 

paar junge Leute, die Hubmeyer, MattMus Arzt und Schap- 

1 ) 

peler hiessen”. Adrian and Zeitblom joined this group now 
and again in their discussions and excursions. From a . 
discussion they held one time while on an excursion into 
the country, we learn of the pretensions of the intellec¬ 
tual youth of Germany, who were to play their part as 
mature men in the ultimate German catastrophe, and whose 
ideas were to be perpetuated in the youth of the ITasi era: 

"Ich gebe die Reden dieser jungen Leute so wie- 

der wie sie gehaltsn .wurden, in ihren AusdrUcken, 

1) See DF. p. 180. 









- 133 - 


die einem gelehrten Pargon angehOrten, dessen 
G-espreiztheit ihn n nicht im mindesten zum Be- 
vmsstsein kam; vielmehr bedienten sie sich 
.Seiner in alien Vergntlgtheit und Bequemlichkeit, 
ganz natttrlich, indem sie das gestelzt Anspruchs 
voile nit virtuoser Anspruchslosigkeit zuwar- 
fen. *H a turale Lebensztlge 1 2 3 und T theonome Bind¬ 
ing’, das waren solche Preziositaten.. .Gern stel 
lten sie die ’Wesensfrage T , r^deten von ’sak- 
ralen Raum’ Oder dem ’politischen Raum’Oder 
von ’akadenischen Raum*, von ’Strukturprinzip 1 , 
von *dialektische»)r* innungsverh&ltnis 1 , von 
’seinshaften Bntsprechungen’, und so fort." 1) 


They discussed "youth”. Deutschlin("little Ger¬ 
many") at first expressed the opinion that youth ought not 
to discuss itself: 

"...es sei hSchst ge s china cklos, wenn Pugend die 
Pugend erStere. Bine Lebensfomi, die sich sel- 
ber besprache und untersuche, 18se eben damit 
als Porn sich auf, und wahre Bxistenz habe nur 
das direkt und unbewusst Seiende." Z) 

Hubmeyer, Schappeler and feutleben disagreed, maintaining 

that youth, as such, must be allowed to speak about youth. 

There must be a "Lebensgeftthl" and a'^Selbstbeviusstsein",— 

"...und heutzutage ntlsse nan in Bewusstheit sei- 
nen Harm stehen und nit artikulieretem Selbstge- 
flihl seine spezifische Lebensfom behaupten— 
lange genug habe es gedauert, bis die Augend -als 
eine solche anerkannt worden sei." 3) 

Here, of course, is the echo of the ideology put into piac 

tice by the youth of the Third Heich. further: 

” Der Pugendgedanke ist ein Yorrecht und Yorzug 
unseres Yolkes, des deutschen,—die andern ken- 
nen ihn kaum, Pugend als Selbstsinn ist ihnen so 
gut wie unbekannt, sie wundern sich ttber die 
ihr unbtlrgerlich.es Kosttln.. .Bie deutsche Pugend 

1) See DP. p. 188. 

2) See DP. p. 181. 

3) ibid. 2). 










- 134 - 


repr&sentiert, eben als Jugend, den Yolksgeist 
selbst, den deutsch.cn Geist, der jung ist und 
zukunftsvoll—unreif ,‘wenn man will...Die deut- 
schen Taten geschahen immer aus einer gewissen 
gewaltigen Unreife. • .Y/o bliebe die Veit auch, 
wenn Reife das letzte '.Tort ware I Wir werden 
ihr in unserer Unreife noch manche Frinnerung, 
manche Revolution bescheren.” 1) 

"Jung sein heisst ursprUnglich sein, heisst den 
Quellen des Lebens nahe feeblieben sein, heisst 
aufstehen und die Fesseln einer tlberlebten Civ¬ 
ilisation abschtltteln kdnnen, wagen, wozu anderen 
die Lebenscourage fehlt, ntalich wieder unterzu- 
tauschen im Elementaren. Jugendmut, das ist der 
Geist des Stirb und Verde, das Wissen um Tod u&d 
Aidergeburt.” 2) 


They discussed religion, economics, politics; 
they expressed their views on capitalism, nationalism 
and socialism. Deutschlin and ^eutlehen, with their 
symbolic names, ably upheld the position of Nationalism, 
while Arzt showed himself a ’’Christian Socialist”. 


Frederick C, Sell comments ably on this discus¬ 
sion, which took place one night when they were prepar¬ 
ing to go to sleep on the hay in a friendly and tolerant 
peasant’s barn: 


”Im nSchtlichen Scheunengespr&ch j ugendbewegter 
7ingolf i ten wird erdtert und vorweggenommen, was 
Schlagwort und Lieblingstheorie der Yor-und ITach- 
kriegszeit war (i.e., the W a r of 1914-1918 and 
after): die Problematik der Augend, erdtert von 
ihr selbst, die Behauptung von der besonderen 
Augendlichkeit des deutschen Yolkes, von deutsch- 
em Verden und dem unendlichen Unterwegssein des 
deutschen Uesens.” 5) 


1) See DF. p. 184 f. 

2) See DF. p. 185 f. 

5) Frederick C. Sell,^Ein K 0 mmentar zu Thomas Manns 
Faustus’ f ’, p. 201. 


’Do. 


tor 





i 


c 












- 135 - 


1 ) 

I have already spoken of the Rodde salon in con¬ 
nection with the influence some of its habitues had on the 
personal life of Adrian Leverktlhn. In this Thoms ^lann 

gives w a superb characterization of the forces leading to 

2 ) 

the debacle" (i.e., of the German nation). 

In addition to i 7 rau Senator Rodde and her two 
daughters, there were usually present Leverktlhn, Zeitblom, 
Schildknapp, Schwerdtfeger, Helmut Institoris (later Inez 
Rodde’s husband), the EhOterichs, Kranich, Zinc and Speng- 
ler, occasionally some musical celebrity such as Tania Or¬ 
lando and Harald Rioeielund, His Excellency, Baron von Ried 
esel who was General-Intendant of the Royal theatres, and 
3. former cavalary officer, and finally Dr, Chain Breisacher 
an intellectual Eew. 

These people, (outside of Zeitblom, perhaps, who 
describes them) are the symbols of decay and decadence in 
the German intellectual world. They are almost all sickly 
often consumptive, useless and doomed, with traces of the 
diabolic in their nature. As such they contributed to Le¬ 
verktlhn’s personal catastrophe, as I hs!ve already shown-, 
and to the German cataclysm as well. 

There is Baron von Riedesel (the latter part of 
his name is excellently symbolic) who "in his abysmal ig¬ 
norance and inborn stupidity supports everything ’ ancient f 

l)See p. 36 ff. 2) Andre von Gronicka, "Thomas Mann’s 

’Doktor Eaustus’", p. 216. 












t 




' 

- 






- 136 - 


and historical 1 , vaguely sensing therein a bulwark against 

1 ) 

change and radical ideas”: 

"Baron Riedesel also sah in alien Alten und 
Historischen eine Trutzburg gegen das IJeuzeit- 
liche, eine Art feudaler Polemilc dagegen, und 
untersttltzte es in dieser Gesinnmng, ohne in 
V/ahrheit irgend etwas davon zu verstehen. Denn 
so wenig man das Neue und Junge verstehen kann, 
ohne in der Tradition zu Eause zu sein, so un- 
echt und steril muss die Liebe zun Alten bleiben, 
wenn man sich dem Neuen verschliesst, das mit 
geschichtlicher Notwendigkeit daraus hervorge- 
gangen. So scMtzte und protegierte ^iedesel 
das Ballctt, und zwar, weil es *grazi8s T sei. Das 
Wort T grazi8s f bedeutete ihm. ein konservativ- 
polemisches Schiboleth gegen das Mo&ern-Aufrtthrer- 
ische.” 2) 


It is against another type, however, that Thomas 

Mann directs his most bitter invective and denunciation 

in the sabotaging of common-sense, decency and a healthy 

progress* These are the really brilliant minds symbolized, 

for example, in Dr* Helmut Institoris. Here we have a 

sickly, intellectual, rather effeminate creature—”...er 

hatte tlbrigens auch einen trippelilden Gang.*.Dr* Insti- 

toris war—nan muss hinzuftigen: Du lieber Gotti—mit Haut 

3) 

und liaar ein Renaissancemensch”. The very antithesis of 
the Renaissance superman, raving about ”sch8ne Ruchlosig- 
keit und italienische Giftmorde”, he found a morbid and 
vicarious datisfaction in a blind worship of brute force. 


Finally Thomas Hann points to the guilt of the 

1) AUdre von Gronicka, ^Thomas Mann f s T Doktor Faustus*, p. 
216. 

2) See DF. p. 426. 

3) See DF. p. 443. 


4) See DF. p. 444 









- 137 - 


Jews in Germany’s fall, presenting as the symbol of their 

guilt, the private scholar, Dr. Chain Breisachcr: 

”.. .ein* V hochgradig rassigen und geistig fortge- 
schrittenen, ja waghalsigen Typs von fazinier- 
ender Hfisslichkeit...die Rolle des fermentOsen 
spielte...Ich sah inner einen inteEcktuellen 
Quertreiber in ihm...’’ 1) 

He was a disciple of Spengler and his theories of decay 
and decadence: 

"Hr war ein Polyhistor, der liber alles und jedes 
zu reden wusste, ein ulturphilosoph, dessen Ge- 
sinnmng aber insofern g e g e n die Eultur ge- 
richtet war, als er in ihrer ganzen Geschichte 
nichts als Sintn Verfallsprozess zu sehen vorgab 
Die verSchtlichste Vokabel in seinen llunde war 
das Wort ’Portsehritt’”. 2) 

He condemned painting, music, his own race and its intel¬ 
lectual history. He pulled to pieces and made fun of the 
Old Testament and its prophets, saying of Solomon the Wise 

11 Der Mann war ein von erotischen ^enussen ent- 
nervten Aesthet und in religiSser Beziehung ein 
fortschrittlicher Dumnkopf, typisch fto die Rflck 
bildmng von Knit des wirkend gegenw&rtigen 
Uationalgottes itto Hiimnel, von der Yolksreligion, 
also zur AllerweItsreligion.” 3) 


VJith respect to Mann’s treatment of the lews-as 
symbolized in this supercilious individual and their, part 
in the conspiracy against decency and progress, Andre von 
Gronicka writes: 


’’Hann explicitly defines those Jewish traits of 
character which made of then ignite natural par¬ 
ticipants in this strangest of all revolutions, 
in this ’reactionary revolution’ n :- 

1) See DP. p. 429. 

2) See DP. p. 42S f. 

3) See DP. p. 433. 







- 138 - 


1 ICann man es ttbrigens dem jtldischen Geist ver- 
sage^wenn seine liellhOrige Empf&ngliehfaeit 
fttr das Kommende Neue sich auch in vertrackten 
Situationen bewfihrt, wo das Avantgardische mit 
dem ReaktionSren zusammenffillt? Jedenfalls habe 
ich die neue Welt der Anti-Huminitfit...durch 
eben diesen Breisacher zuerst zu spttrcn bekom- 
men.’(1) 

w This ’avant-garde’ often unaware of the dread 
final effect of its messages, aroused the racial 
and national, the irrational and mystic forces 
in the German nation, and eagerly laboured to 
prepare its own and Germany’s doom*” 2) 


What amazed Zeitblom is that not one person ob¬ 
jected to all this. Quite on the contrary: 

"Irgendwie ftlhlte die Salonbesatzung der geboren- 
en von Plausig (i.e., Frau Rodde) sich von die¬ 
sen Ansichten angeheimelt, und eher noch, glaube 
ich, hatte sie ein Geftthl daftir, dass 3reisacher 
nicht ganz der Rechte war, sje zu vertreten, als 
daftir, dass sie nicht die rechten Leute sein 
mSchten, ihnen zu applaudieren.” 3) 


Here I must again speak of Kerr Saul Fitelberg 
whom I have previously symbolized as Leverktlhn’s "Mephisto- 

^)#i 

pheles. Eis remarks on Germany and the Jews have a place 
at this point. 


Speaking of Adrian’s refusal to accept his offer 

of a tour to present his works, Fitelberg says: 

” Sie wissen wohi garnicht, maitre, wie Deutsch 
Ihre repugnance ist, die sich, wenn Sie mir er- 
lauben, en psychologue zu sprechen, aus Hochmut 
und inferioritatsgeftlhlen charakteriStlsch 

(p See DF. p. 437. 

2) Andre von Gronicka, Tf Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus’,p.217 

3) See DF. p. 430. 

4) See p. 99 f. 




. 












<; . 




- 139 - 


zusamnensetzt, aus Yerachtung und Furcht,—sie 
ist, mOchte ich Sagen, das ressentiment des 
?iCrnstes gegen den Salon der Welt*" 1) 

Here is first of all,a reaffirmation of my symbol: Adrian 
Leverktlhn as representing Germany. However, it is his 
further remarks about the parallel between the German nat¬ 
ional character and the Jewish character which point with 
amazing clarity to the position of the Jews under the Nazi* 
regime, and some reasons why they were intolerable in the 
latter’s plan for his country. One can just imagine how 
such an attitude would "go over" with a faction which 
planned " a pure Aryan race"J:- 

" Hun, ich bin Jude, ijiftssen Sie wissen.. .Ich habe 
das Alte Testament in Leibe, und das ist eine 
nicht weniger ernsthafte Sache, als das Deutsch- 
tum—es schafft im Grunde geringe Disposition 
ftlr die Sphere des Yalse brillante. Zwar ist es 
ein deutscher Aberglau.be, dass es draussen nur 
Yalse brillante gibt, und Ernst nur in Deutsch¬ 
land. Und doch, man ist als Jude im Grunde 
skeptisch gesinnt gegen die Welt, zugunsten des 
Deutschtums, aufc die Gefahr hin, natftrlich, Fuss- 
tritfce einzuhandeln ftlr seine Neigung. Deutsch, 
heisst vor allem: volksttbnlich—und wer glaubte 
einem JudenYolksttSmlichkeit? Nicht nur, dass 
man sie ihg nicht glaubt,—man gibt ihm ein paar 
tlber den Schfidel, wenn er die Zudringlichkeit 
hat, sich darin zu versuehen. Wir Juden haben 
alles zu fUrchten vom deutschen Charakter, qui 
est essentiellement anti-semitique,—Grund genug 
ftlr uns nattlrlich uns zur Welt zu halten..." 2) 

"Sollen wir Juden, die wir ein priesterliches 
Yolk sind, auch wenn wir in Paris er Salons min- 
audieren, uns nicht zum Deutschtum hingezogen 
ftlhlen und uns nicht ironisch stimmen lassen von 
ihm gegen die He it und die Eunst... Yolks tftmlich- 
keit ware fttr uns eine den Pogrom herausfordernde 
Frechheit. Wir sind international—aber wir sind 


1) See DF. p. 619. 

2) See DF. p* 619 f. 













- 140 - 


sons t pro-deutsch, sind es wie niemand sonst in 
der '.Volt, schon well wir garhicht umhin kflnnen, 
die Yerwandschaft der Rolle von Deutschtum und 
ludentum auf Srden wahr zunehmen. Une analogie 
frappante! Gleichweise sind sie vorhasst, ver- 
aclitet, gefttrchtet, b neidet, gleichermasse be- 
fremden sie und sind befremdet. I Ian spriclit vom 
Zeitalter des Nationalisms • Aber in Wirklich- 
keit gibt es nur zwei Nationalisjnen, den deutsch- 
en und don jtldischen, und der*anderen 1st Kind- 
erspiel dagegen—wie? das Stockfranzosentun eines 
Anatole France die reine MondUnitfit ist im Yer- 
gleich mit der deutschen Hinsankeit—und den 
jtldischen Erw&hltheitsdtlnkel. • .France—ein nat- 
ionalistischer non de guerre. Fin deutscher 
Scbriftsteller kSnnte sick nicht gut •Deutsch¬ 
land'* nennen, so nennt man hOchstens ein Kriegs- 
schiff. Dr mUsste sich r nit ^Deutsch 1 vergntlgen, 
—und da g&be. er sich einen jtldischen Namen,— 
Oh, la, laj" 1) 

w Ich dage nur eines noch. Die Deutschen sollten 
es dam luden tlberlassen, pro-deutsch zu sein. 

Sie werden sich nit ihrem Nationalismus, ihren 
Hoobnut, ihrer Unvergleichkeitspuschal, ihrem 
Hass auf Einreihung und Gleichgaltung, ihrer 
Weigerung, sich bei der Welt einftLhren zu lassen 
und sich gesellschaftlich anzuschliessen,--sie 
werden sich danit ins Ungltlck bringen, in ein 
wahrhaftig Jtldisches Ungltlck, je vous le jure. 

Die Deutschen sollten den luden erlauben, den 
mediateur zu nachen, den manager, den Impresario, 
den Unternehner des Deutschtuns—er ist durchaus 
der rechte Mann daftir, nan sollte ihn nicht an 
die Luft setzen, er ist international, und er 
ist pro-deutsch. n 2) 


Between Dr. Chaim Breisacher and Herr Saul Fitelberg, Mann 
has symbolized the position of the lew in Germany,and his 
contribution to his own fate as part of the fate of Ger¬ 
many itself, with a masterly hand. 


The members of Frau Rodde T s salon in Munich,whom 
I have just discussed (Herr Saul Fitelberg excepted) were 

1) See DF. p. 621 f. 

2) See DF. p. 622. 







r ' • i t 










t 


c 


i 






-141- 


those of the tine before and during the First World War® 

The other group in which Thomas Mann delineates Germany, 

namely the Kridwiss circle, has its setting in the period 

of the middle twenties. Zeitblam speaks of this time as, 

"...die Zeit nach dem Zusammenbruch des deutsch- 
en Autorit&tsstaates mit ihrer tief greifenden 
diskursiven Lockerung...Das ^eftlhl, dass eine 
Epoche sich endigte, die nicht nur das neunzehnte 
Jahrhundert umfasste, sondern zurdckreichte bis 
zum Ausgang des Mittelalters, bis zur Sprengung 
scholastischer Bindungen, zur Emanzipation des 
Individuums, der Geburt der Freiheit...die Epoche 
des bttrgerlichen Humanismus; das Geftihl.. .dass 
ihre Stunde geschjagen hatte, eine Mutation des 
Lebens sich vollziehen, die Welt in ein neues 
noch namenloses Sternezeichen treten wollte." 1) 


For Zeitblom, then, there was hope in the air 
for Germany and for the world at that time. But his par¬ 
ticipation in the Kridwiss evenings was soon to destroy 
his hopes, a process no little aided by his being witness 
to the growth of Leverktihn’s "Apocalipsis cum figuris", 
that dreadfully symbolic prophecy of the end—of his end, 
add of Germany’s: 

"...denke ich an die verworrenen Diskussionsabende 
in der Schwabinger V'ohung eines gewissen Sixtus 
Kridwiss,...dass die bei ihm stattfindenden 
Zusaimenkttjftfte und geistigen Beratungen, an -denen 
ich mich aus purer Gewissenhaftigkeit afters be- 
teiligte, mir nicht wenig zusetzten,—wShrend 
ich zugleich mit ganzer, tief erregter und oft 
entsetzter Seele der Geburt eines VJerkes aus 
freunschaftlicher NShe beiwohnte, das gewisser 
Mhner und prophetischer Beziehungen zu jenen 
BrSterungen nicht entbehrte, sie auf hSherer 
schQpferischer Ebene bestStigte und verwirklichte". 
2 ) 

1) See DF. p. 540. 

2) See DF. p. 541. 








-142- 


Tho host to these gatherings was Sixtus &id- 


wiss, 

"Graphikor, Buchschmuck-ISInstler und Sammler 
ostasiatischer Farbenholzschnitte und ICeramik... 
ein kleiner, altersloser Herr von stark rhein- 
hessischer Sprechweise und ungewOhnlicher geist- 
iger Anregenheit.•*Er liess os sich angelegen 
sein, seine ' ohnung...zu einem Ireffpunkt ftthr- 
ender Oder doch eingeweihter und am geistigen 
Leben beteiligter HOpfe zu machen." 1) 

Some of the guests often present we have met in Frau Rodde's 
salon— Dr. Chain Breisacher, the Jewish lover of paradox; 
Bullinger, the manufacturer, admitted only because his in¬ 
come tax was high, and who talked incessantly on the loft¬ 
iest cultural themes, though he had not the vaguest idea 
what it was all about; Dr. Helmut Institoris. In addition 
there was Dr. Ngon Unruhe, 

” ...einen philosophischenRaiaozoologen, der in 
seinen Sehriften die Tiefschichten und Verstein- 
erungskunde auf sehr geistvoile Weise mit der 
Rechtfertigung und wissenschaftlichen Verifi- 
zierung uralten Sagengutes verband, sodass in 
seiner Lehre, einem sublinierten Darwinismus, 
wenn man will, alles wahr und wirklich wurde, 
waran im Brnst zu glauben eine entwickelte llensch- 
heit l&ngst aufgehSrt hatte. 2) 


Zeitblom admits that he liked none of the ”table- 

round**. He distrusted Unruhe, and he distrusted Professor 

Georg Vogler, whom Hann has most certainly modelled after 

3) 

Joseph Nadler : 

H den Literarhistoriker, der eine vielbeachtete 


1) See DF. p. 553 f. 

2) See DF. p. 555. 

3) Joseph Nadler, (1884- ) who wrote a w Literaturgeschichte 
der deutschen St&mme und Lands chaften ,f (4 Bde., 1912- 
28, 3. Auf1•) • 






1 



t 











, 





-143- 


Geschichte des deutschen Schrifttums unter dem 
Gesichtspunkt der StammeszugehBrigkeit geschrie- 
ben hatte, worin also dor Schrifsteller nicht so 
gerade bin als Schrifsteller und universell er- 
zogener Geist, sondern als blut-und landschaft- 
gebundenes Echt-Produkt seines realen, konkreten, 
spezifischen, fttr ihn zeugenden und von ihm be- 
zeugten Unrsprungswinkels bebandelt und gewertet 
wurde.” 1) 


finally there were, n Der Kunstgelebrte und Dtlr- 

2 ) 

erforscher Professor Gilger Holzschuher w , and tbe poet 
D a niel zur HObe, neither of whom 'appealed to Zeitblom in 
tbe least. Tbe germs of Nazi ideologies are plain in 
Professor Georg Vogler's history of German literature, 
written from "the point of view of racial origins”. And 
Mann’s picture of Daniel zur H8he is equally as clear in 
its insinuations: 

liebte es die Arme tiber die Brust zu kreuzen, 
Oder eine Hand napoleoniscb im Busen zu bergen, 
und seine Dichtortrdume galten einer in blutigen 
Feldztigen dem reinen G-eiste unterworfenen, von 
ihm in Schrecken und boben Ztlcbten gehaltenen 
Welt, wie er es in seinem, icb glaube einzigen 
Werk, den scbon vor dem Eriege auf Btlttenpapier 
erscbienen *Proklamationen T bescbrieben batte, 
einem lyriscb-rbetoriscben Ausbrucb achwelger- 
iscben Terayorismus, dem man erbeblicbe Wortge- 
walt zugesteheii musste. Der Signator dieser 
Proklamationen war eine Wesenheit nanens Christus 
imperator mazimus, eine kommandierende Energie, 
die todbereitete Truppen zur Unterwerfung des 
Erdballs warb, tagesbefeblartige Botscbaften er- 
liess, geniesserisch-unerbittliche ^edingungen 
stipulierte, Armut und Keuscbbeit ausrief und 
sich nicht genug tun konnte in der hammernden, 
mit der Faust aufgescblagenden Forderung frag- 
und grenzenlosen Geborsams: f 3oldaten! T scbloss 
die Dicbtung, ’ich tlberliefere eucb zur Plflnder- 
ung die Welti’” 3) 

1) See DF. p. 555. 3) See DF. p. 556. 

2) ibid. 1) 








t 


X 


< 




x 


t 


t 




~ 


X 




' 


K 


X 


X 


t 






1 1 








? 7 
* 









-144- 


Through Zeitblon, Mann speaks of the disturbance 
and destruction of fixed values of life apparently brought 
about by the First Mforld War* the lose of value which 
the individual had sustained in Germany; the indifference 
to suffering and destruction of hunan lives, to the indi¬ 
vidual fate, which might conceivably be a&ntributed to 
the war* But he adds: 

"...aber man liess sich nicht tSuschen: wie in 
manch anderer Hinsicht hatte auch hier der Krieg 
nur vollendet, werdeutlicht mid zur drastischen 
Erfahrung gemacht, was l&ngst vorher sich an- 
gehahnt, einem neuen Lebensgeftlhl sich zugrunde- 
gelegt hatte* ?? 1) 

These people in their discussions and expressions of opin¬ 
ions accompanied an objective perception of the times with 
a "many-sided, all embracing critique of the bourgeois 
tradition", 

"...womit ich meine: an den Werten der Bildung, 
AufklSrung, Humanit&t, und solchen Tr&umen wie 
der Hebung der VOlker durch wissenschaftliche 
Gesittung..2) 

Zeitblom was frightened by their blithe and unconcerned 
attitude: 

w Dass es Manner der'Bildung, des Uhterrichts, 
der issenschaft waren,^ v cLiese Kritik tibten—und 
zwar mit Meiterkeit, nicht selten unterselbst- 
gefailig-geistegfrommen ^elSchter tibten, verlieh 
der Sache noch einen besonderen, prickelnd be- 
unruhigenden Oder auch leicht perversen Reiz; 
und wohl tlberfltlssig ist dabei, zu sagen, dass 
die uns Deutschen durch die Uiederlage zuteil- 
gewordene Staatsform, die mis in den Schoss ge- 
fallene Ereiheit, mit einem Wort: die demokrat- 
ische Republik auch nicht einen Augenblick als 

1} See BE. p. 557. 

2) See BE. p. 558. 



' 

. 

: ? € 


S 


€ 




t i 


' - 1 




- 145 - 


ernstzunebmender Rahmen ftlr das visierte Neue 
anerkannt, sondern mit einntltiger Selbstver- 
stfindlichkeit als ephemer und ftlr den Sachver- 
halt von vornberein bedeutungslos, ja, als ein 
scblecbtcr Spass tlber die Achsel geworfen 
wurde.’’ 1) 

"Han zitierte Tocqueville (Alexis de), der ge- 
sagt hatte, aus der Revolution seien vile aus 
einer gemeinsamen Quelle zwei StrBmen entsprung- 
en: der eine ftlr die Nenscben zu freien Cin- 
ricbtungen, der andere zur absoluten Macht. An 
f freie Binricbtungen’ glaubte von den bei ICrid- 
wiss konversierenden Herren niemand mebr." 2) 

’’ Auf Diktatur, auf Gewalt lief obnebin alles 
binaus, denn mit der ZertrtSinmerung der tlber- 
lieferten staatlichen und gesellscbaftlichen 
Formen durch die JranzBsiscbe Revolution war ein 
Zeitalter angebrochen, das, bewusst oder nicbt, 
eingestanden Oder nicht, auf die despotisebe 
Zwangsherrscbaft tlber nivellierte, atomisierte, 
kontaktlose und, gleicb dem Individuum, bilf- 
lose Massen zusteuerte." 3) 

"Niemand wird sicb wundern, dass bei den Unter- 
haltungen dieser kulturkritiscben Avantgarde ein 
sieben Jabre vor dem Kriege erschienenes Such, 
die ’Reflexions sur la violence’ von Sorel eine 
bedeutende Nolle spielte. Seine unerbittlicbe 
Vorhersage von Krieg und Anarcbie, seine Eenn- 
zeicbnung Buropas als des Bodens der krieger- 
iscben Eataklysmen, seine Lelire, dass die Vfilker 
dieses Brdteils sicli imner nur in der einen Idee 
vereinigen kBnnten: Krieg zu ftlbren,—dies alles 
berecbtigte dazu, es das Buck der Npociie zu nen- 
nen...Dieses war in der Tat die krasse und erreg- 
ende Prophetie des Bucbes, dass populSre oder 
vielmebr mas senge re elite Ilytlien fortan das Vebikel 
der politiseben Bewegung sein wtlrden: Fabeln, 
W@bbbilder, Hirngespinste, die mit ' ab.rb.eit, 
Vemunft, Y/is sense baft tlberbaupt nicbt zu tun 
baben brauebten, um dennocb scbBpferiscb zu sein, 
Leben und Gesebielite zu bestimmen und sicb danit 
als dynaraisebe RealitSten zu erweisen." 4) 

1) See DFo p. 558. 

2) ibid* 1) 

3) See DF. p. 559. 

4) See DF. p. 559 f. 







« 




< 




9 


« 






c 


£ 

3 








- 146 - 


!, Und nun stelle nun sich vor...wie diese Herron, 
Vissenschaftlicher selbst, Golehrte, Iiochschul- 
lehrer, Vogler, Unruhe, Holzschuher, Institoris 
und dazu Breisachcr, sich an einer Sachlage er- 
gtttzten, die ftir mich so viol schreckhaftes 
hatte, und die sie entweder sclion als vollen&et, 
oder doch als notwendig kommend betrachteten.V 1) 

tf Sic koimten sicli nicht genug tun in Amusement 
tlber das verzweifelte Anrennen von Kritik und 
Vernunft gegen den durch sie ganz unbertlhrbaren, 
vBllig unverletzlichen Glauben ..." 2) 

"Die vergnttgte Tischrunde z&gerte nicht, der 
Justiz, die das letzte Wort zu sprechen, das TJr- 
teil zu fallen hatte, die gleiche Selbstverleug- 
nung zuzuschreiben, die sie selber tibte..." 3) 

"Es war eine alt-neue, eine revolution£r-rt!ck- 
schiagige Welt, in welcher die an die Idee des 
Individuums gebundenen ?/©rte, sagen wir also: 
Wahrheit, Freiheit, Recht, Vernunft, vSllig ent- 
krffftet, und verworfen waren oder doch einen von 
den der letzten Jahrhunderte ganz verschiedenen 
Sinn angenomnen hat ten, indem sie n^mlich der 
bleichen Theorie entrissen und blutvoll relativ- 
iert, auf die weit Mhere Instanz der Gewalt, 
der Autoritat, der Glaubensdiktatur bezogen 
waren..." 4) 

"Den Gedanken war Freiheit gegeben, die Gewalt 
zu rechtfertigen." 5) 

”0 ja, die Gewalt schuf einen festen Boden unter 
den Filssen, sie war anti-abstrakt. ♦." 6) 

"Sie gaben sich mehr die Hiene distanzierte-r Be- 
obachter, und...fassten...die allgeneine und 
schon deutlich hervortretende Bereitschaft ins 
Auge, sogenannte kulturelle Errung^haften kurz- 
erhand fallen zu lassen, urn einer als notwendig 
und zeitgegeben empfundenen Vereinfachung willen, 
die nan, wenn man wollte, als intentionelle Re- 
barbari sie rung bezeichnen konnte..." 7) 

1) See DF. p. 560. 

2) See DF. p. 561. 

3) ibid. 2). 

4) See DF. p. 563. 

5) ibid. 4). 

6) See DF. *0. 564. 

7) See DF. p. 565. 






■5 

















- 147 - 


"Zweifellos wttrde man aucli die Nicht-Bewahrung 
des Kranken im gr8sseren Stil, die Tatung Le- 
bensunffihiger und Schwachsinniger, wenn man eines 
Tages ttberging, volks-und rassehygienisch be- 
grttnden, wtthrend es sich in Vlirklichkeit—man 
wollte das garnicht leugnen, sondern betonte es 
im Gegenteil—um weit tiefere Hntschlttsse, urn 
die Absage an alle humane Verweichiichung handeln 
wttrde, die das W©rk der bttrgerlichen Jpoche ge- 
wesen war: um ein instinktives Sich in Form 
bringen der Menscliheit fttr harte und finstere, 
der Eumanit&t spottende L&ufte, fttr ein Zeit- 
alter umfassender Kfiege und Revolutionen, das 
wohl hinter die christliche Civilisation des 
llittelalters weit zurttckftthren und eher die 
dunkle Eboche vor deren Fntstellung zuruckbringen 
werde." ~1) 

Zeitblom tried to convince himself that these people were 
joking, that what they were saying was nonsense—all by 
way of brilliant pastime. But he knew the truth only too 


well: 


”...sie symphatisierten mit dem was sie erkan- 
nten und was sie, ohne diese Sympathie, wohl 
garnicht erkannt batten” 2) 

Shocked as he was, he never undertook to contradict them, 
to point out to them the dangers of their attitude toward 


the things which were imminent in Germany’s future: 

w Obgleich mir unwohl war in der Magengrube', 
durfte ich nicht den Spielverderber machen mid 
mir von Hiderwillen nichts annerken lassen, son¬ 
dern musste in die allgemeine Heiterkeit ein- 
stimnen so gut es ging, zumal ja diese nicht 
ohne Weiteres Zustimmung, sondern,wenigstens 
Yorderhand, nur lachend geistesfrohe E^kenntnis 
des Seienden Oder Hommenden bedeutete. Ich 
schlug wohl einmal, T w r enn wir einen Augenblick 
ernst sein wolien’, vor, zu ttberlegen, ob nicht 
ein Denker, dem die !T8te der Geneinschaft sehr 
wohl am Herzen lttgen, dennoch vielleicht besser 

1) See DF. p. 565 f. 

2) See DF. p. 567. 






- 

% 



t 












< 

< « 

? 









- 148 - 


tato, sich die ‘ ahrheit und nicht die Gemein- 
scliaft zuri Ziele zu setzen.. *Aber ich habe nie 
in Leben eine Berner kung gemacht, di kompletter 
und widerhalloser unter den Tisch gefallen 
ware, als diese 0 <,*Viel besser tat ich, in her¬ 
ein nit der angeregten Tafelrunde dieses ITeue 
zu betrachten und zu erkunden und, statt eine 
unfruchtbare, recht eigentlich langweilige Op¬ 
position dagegen zu maciien, meine Vorstellungen 
den Gange der Dislcussion einzusclxmiegen und nir 
in ihrem Rahmen ein Bild der kommenden, unter 
der Hand schon in der Bntstehung begriffenen 
Y.'elt zu nachen—wie inner es nun dabei un die 
Geftlhle meiner llagengrube bestellt sein miJchte*" 
1 ) 


Hith the above words Mann symbolizes the meagre 
attempts made by the very people who might have counted 
in stemming the tide of events which led to the German 
catastrophe* But, and I believe Thomas Mann admits his 
own guilt in the process, they failed to do their part, 
and so the inevitable resulted: eventually the ITazis took 
over Germany and brought it to rack and ruin* 


1) See DB p. 562 f. 












- 149 - 


part turk : 

A WIDER SYMBOLISM 

Up to this point I have dealt with the symbolism 
of DOKTOR FAUSTUS as pertaining, first of all, to the life 
of an individual—Adrian Leverktthn. In ]?ART OTO I advanced 
from the individual to the nation by discussing the symbol¬ 
ism of the novel in its application to Germany* The third 
and final section of this study is to carry beyond both 
the individual and the nation* For I believe that Thomas 
Mann’s gaze did not stop at the borders of his Fatherland 
when he wrote DOKTOR FAUSTUS, but rather that he cast his 
eye with apprehension upon the troubled waters of the 
whole of Restem civilization,—yes, on humanity itself. 

The treatment of this third aspect of the symbol¬ 
ism of DOKTOR FAUSTUS must of necessity involve an element 
of speculation, for who can see into the innermost heart 
of a writer, get at his most intimate meaning, unless, per¬ 
haps, he should write a tf Dichtung und 'ahrheit^ to enable 
us to see more clearly into his intentions? 


I have already shown how LeverktQm’s madness 











- 150 - 


and death at the end of the novel symbolized the madness 
and imminent ’’death” of the German nation at the time* 

That I want to establish, if possible, is this: that the 
symbolism of D0KT0R FAUSTUS goes beyond its most apparent 
application to Leverktlhn and Germany; that it has a much 
wider, a universal application; that whereas the fate of 
Adrian Leverktihn stands as the symbol of the fate of Ger¬ 
many, Germany, through him, in turn stands as the symbol 
of what may, ultimately, happen to humanity. 

Once more we must revert to a reference to the 
title of the book, D0KT0R FAUSTUS. he know how Goethe’s 
FAUST has influenced the previous works of Thomas Mann. It 

played its part in DFR 2AUHERBSRG, and by his own admission 

1 ) 

it was his guide in the "Joseph” series. I have already 

quoted Mann’s own words that he considers ’’Faust” as a 

"symbol of humanity".. ."this enormous mixture of magic opera 

2 ) 

and mankind’s tragedy”. There can be little doubt, there¬ 
fore, of his acknowledgement of the great work of Goethe 
as the fundamental inspiration for his own D0KT0R FAUSTUS. 

In his choice of title then, lies, I feel, the 
primary clue to the wider symbolic significance of this 
work. The reason that his is a "Faustus" rather than a 
"Faust” is simply this: the nature of world-events in 
the 19th and 20th centuries as evident to Mann the Humanist, 

1) See p. 3. 

2) ibid. 1). 




, 

< 

* 

■ • i « • • 



t • ' t * 



- 151 - 


could not pemit him in all conscience and out of loyalty 
to his art, to write a wo: had in mind, in 

which the protagonist would find redemption in the end, 
Mann had to use for his book the title of the legen¬ 
dary figure, in order that there would be no miscon¬ 
ception concerning the symbolic value of this title. 

To recapitulate then: I believe that the choice 
of title had a triple significance for Thomas liann. In 
the first place it symbolized to perfection the personal 
life and fate of his composer-hero as he had conceived it. 
In the second place it fitted most appropriately the fate, 
as reflected in its history, of the nation for whom Adrian 
Leverktlhn was to serve as symbol. And finally it embodied 
that vaster symbol of a civilization, of a culture—of a 
world—which for him appears to be in the process of dis¬ 
integration and self-destruction. 

At the beginning of the book, next to the title- 
page, we find a quotation from Dante's IIMPTRITO, Canto II, 
Here is further evidence to support the thesis that Mann's 
purpose with DOKTOR FAUSTQS went beyond national borders. 
Dan-ce's IHFTRI'TG like Soethe's RAUST represents the exper¬ 
iences not only of an individual but of humanity at large. 
While these lines are ostensibly quoted as an invocation 
to the Muses to assist the author in recording the fate¬ 
ful story of Adrian Lever Mini-- 








- 152 - 


"0 !*uses, 0 high genius, now assist me I 
0 memory that didst write dov/n what I saw, 

Here thy nobility shall be manifest.” 

—there can be little doubt that they contain, together 

with the title, the kernel of a tfision which passed out 

of the pages of the book to mankind. 

Gradual decadence, progressive decay, inevitable 
doom—these are the three qualities of DOKTOR FAUSTUS 
which loom undeniably and ever more threateningly in the 
reader’s consciousness as he pursues the tale from page to 
page. There is no escape from it, no light moments are 
there, to relieve the pressure, He, the reader, sees re¬ 
vealed before his eyes the gradual process of the damning 
of a mortal soul to Hell. It is frightening enough when 
we think of^just in terms of Adrian Leverktlhn. But our 
alarm grows, when the conviction is borne upon us that 
this tragic tale has a much more ramified connotation than 
mere printed words had at first led us to believe. 

Te kno~. , of course, that Thomas Mann is a follower 
of Schopenhauer. This would perhaps suffice to explain the 
pessimistic tone of DOKTOR FAU8TEJS, were we not av/are that 
he is also a disciple of Arthur Spengler. Here is one of 
the outstanding pieces of evidence of the wider significance 
which I feel belongs to this novel; for the decay and de¬ 
cadence of DOKTOR FAUSTU3 echoes that expressed by SPHlTGLER 
in his TJNT3RGAHG DE8 aBHMDIAHDES . 











c 

























- 153 - 


1 ) 

Spengler considers "culture" as an organism which 
grows, reaches its height, then declines and eventually 
falls into oblivion. Acoording to him the process for 
’ estern civilization began with the Reformation, reached 
its apex in the 18th century and has since been receding 
as evidenced in the gradual breaking down of ideologies, 
of the mediaeval conecpt of life. He bases his supposit¬ 
ions, for example, on music, art,politics, economics, re¬ 
ligion. 

Mann has chosen one phase of this process as the 
pivot for the exposition of his concurrence with the Speng- 
lerian theory, namely, music. Firstly, as I have already 
pointed out, because it has for him an especially daemonic 
appeal; secondly, because he feels it to be part of the 
German national temperament; and thirdly, I believe, be¬ 
cause the language of music is international. 

When we contemplate the fate of Adrian Leverkdhn 
we come to the conclusion that it was his music which 
brought him to his doom. His music mirrors the gradual de¬ 
cay and decadence of his own body and spirit as well as 
that of his external environment—his friends, his acquaint¬ 
ances, society in general around him. In its more exten¬ 
sive implications, music comes to symbolize a process of 

1) Oswald Spengler (1880- ), n Untergans des Abendlandes: 
Umrisse einer Horphologie der Heltgeschichte", lAtnchen* 
Beck, 1927, 2 Volumes. 









A . 























« ' 







- 154 - 


cultural decay such as Spengler conceived it, no longer 
confined to Adrian Leverktihn nor Gemany, but pointing to 
' 'e.stem civilization, and then by further extension, to 
humanity* 

I think ono could look to modern "jazz" as 

an example of the process of decay which has set into the 

reato of music, if "jazz" can be said to be music at all. 

It is said to reflect the spirit of the 20th century. This 

is, perhaps, a quite proper classification. It appeared 

in Leveridihn’s "Apocalipsis cum fijjuris" too: 

"Man halte daneben noch einmal die allerdings 
sehr gelegentlichen, zu rein infernalischen 
Zwecken benutzten Jazz-Klange, und man wird mir 
die schneidende Bezeichnung ’stream-lined 1 zu- 
gute halten ftir einWerk..." 1) 

In his attempt to "break through" via music, Ad¬ 
rian Leverktlhn destroyed himself. Divorced from the "hum¬ 
an" he pursued the study of the science of musical tech¬ 
nique until he had attained to the very ultimate of ordered 
perfection; his reward was annihilation. (Germany seeking 
to "break through" via "Blut und Boden", swept aside the 
humane and made a science of war and systematic elimination 
and destruction, only to serve in the end as her own execu¬ 
tioner. 

* 

V.Tien Adrian Leverktihn liad completed his ovm de - 


1) See DF. p. 576 













- 155 - 


struction, that of Germany was still in process according 
to the facts of DOKTOR FAUSTUS* Germany*s sentence has 
now been carried out. But is the process really at an 
end? 

Lashed to furious activity by the exigencies of 
past world-wars and wars still threatening, modern scien¬ 
tists have pushed their investigations and experiments to 
the very limit* Yes, they have done the well-nigh impos¬ 
sible, the thing which one might almost consider the for¬ 
bidden—they have split the atom* The mad race for the 
production of atom bombs and the even more destructive hy¬ 
drogen bomb is on. Germ warfare has been investigated and 
contemplated until it is dangerous to even think about it* 
Did Thomas Harm not have these things in mind when he 
wrote DOKTOR FAUSTOS? Are we not constrained to ask as 
read: "Will modern science, eventually destroy itself, and 
with it humanity, with its own creations—products of a 
"cold" intelligence too great for its own good,-- wven as 
Adrian Leverktthn’s scientifically investigated musical 
works, products of pride and arrogance and a too dangerous 
intelligence destroyed him? 

Serenus Zeitblom again and again speaks of the 
disappearance of "humanism" from the contemporary scene. 
Thomas Mann had long seen this frightening trend, and events 
in Germany during the last twenty-five years confirmed his 














r 


n 










e 



r • ' " ■ " . . • . ' • o 





- 156 - 


fears only too fully. That was true of Germany in that 
respect is true, of course, of the rest of the civilized 
world as well, and the process still continues. It must 
be clear that there is a new collectivism on the way in 
the world today—state control of industry, nationalization 
of art, education etc., Communism represents this process 
driven to a dangerous extreme. Bven in the so-called 
"democratic"countries it is becoming increasingly more evi¬ 
dent. Present events in Great Britain provide a good 
example. 


Humanism and science, although one is loathe to 
agree, cannot go hand in hand. Thomas Mann has to admit 
it too, though he does it through the mouth of Adrian Lever- 
Ictlhn, for whom the "human" was forbidden, and who symbolizes 
thi s modem trend: 

"PopulSrer Teise halt man den Humanismus ftlr Wis- 
senschaftfreundlich; aber er harm es nicht sein, 
denn man kann nicht die ^egenst&nde der '.'issen¬ 
se haft ftlr Teufelswerk erachten, ohne auch in ihr 
selbst dergleichen zu sehen." 1) 


Both the steady surge away from the humane and 
the unhealthy emphasis on science are dangerous to present 
civilization. Is Thomas Hann not then suggesting with 
DOKTOR FATJS TUS that the result for the modern world is as 
inevitable as was the result for Adrian Leverhtlhn—who was 
from the first destined to live apart from the "human", as 


1) See DP. p. 421 










Cu ' - ' 

t 












.'J 




. 





























- 157 - 


he was destined for music and through it, damnation? 

A discussion of music as a key force in this 

work seems unavoidable. I have quoted Thomas Harm on the 

1 ) 

connection he sees between music and "Faust". I have 
stated that for him a "Faustus" tale and music are com¬ 
plementary and inseparable—both Faustus and music are in¬ 
ternational, universal. The connection bet ween LeverktJhn’s 
music and his fate as depicted in DOCTOR FAUSTUS has been 
suggested as the symbol of humanity. I now put it that 
Mann intends Leverktlhn T s music finally as the symbol of 
what is, for him, afoot in the human sphere at large. 


The reader’s attention is drawn again to Lever- 
ktthn’s two outstanding works, the "Apocalipsis cum figuris" 
and the "D£# Fausti Ueheklag". Of the first Zeitblom- 
Mann writes: 

" Ich bewahre einen Brief, den Adrian mir zu 
jener Zeit von Pfeiffering nach Freising schrieb 
—aus der Arbeit heraus an dem Lobegesang der 
T grossen Schar, welche niemand zShlen konnte, 
aus alien Heiden und VSlkern und Sprachen, • vor 
dem Stuhl stehend und vor dem Lamm... 1 2 3 " 2} 

Of the second he writes: 

"...die Klage des HSUensohnes, die, ausgehend vom 
Subjekt, aber stets weiter sich ausbreitend und 
gleichssm den ICosmos ergreifend, auf Drden je 
angestimmt worden ist." 5) 


1) See p. 119. 

2 ) See DF. p. 568 f. 

3) See DF. p, 736. 

























* 






















. 











- 158 - 


Ref erring to both, ho states: 

"Nun, habe ich nicht, als ich vfl>n Levorktthns 
apokalyptischem Oratoriun ein Bild zu geben 
suchte, auf die substanzielle Identit&t des Sel- 
igsten nit den GrSsslichsten, die innere Hiner- 
leiheit des Engelskinder-Chors nit den HOllen- 
gelflchter hingewiesen? Da ist, zun mystischen 
Schrecken des Bemerkenden, eine formale Utopie 
von schaulicher Sinnigkeit verwirklicht, die in 
der Faus t-Kantata (i.e. in the "Dr. Fausti Wehe- 
klag") universell wird, das Gesamtwerk ergreift." 
1 ) 

Again of the "Dr* Fausti Heheklag": 

"Rein orchestral ist der Schluss: ein symphoniseh- 
er Adagiosatz, in welchem der nach den HSllen- 
galopp m&chtig einsetzende ICLage-Chor allmStlich 
ttbergeht,—es ist gleichsan der umgekehrte Wag 
des Leides and die Freude, da.s kongeniale Neg- 
ativ Jenes Uebjerganges der Synphonie (i.e. Bee¬ 
thoven’s Ninth) in den Vokal-Jubel, es ist die 
Zurllcknahme." 3) 

Here we are reninded of the words of Adrian Leverktihn at 
the death of Neponuk Schneidewein, which must be quoted 
again: 


"Ich habe gefunden... ES SOLE NICHT SHIN...Das 
Gut;e und Edle...was nan das Menschliche nennt, 
obwohl es gut und edel ist. Urn was die Menschen 
gek&mpft, woftir sie Zwingburgen gesttimt, und 
was die Erfttllten jubelnd verldindigt haben, das 
soil nicht sein. Es wird zurttckgenDnnen. Ich 
will es zurtlcknehmen." 3) 


This is Thomas Harm’s "revocation" too, and the connotation 
is universal. 


Finally, I would refer once more to the discus¬ 
sions of the members of Frau Rodde’s salon, and of the 


1) See DF. p. 738. 

2) See DF. p. 742 f. 

3) See DF. p. 725. 























- 159 - 


Kridwiss group, dealt with at length in PART T.70. Specif¬ 
ically symbolic of what occurred in Germany during the 
Nazi regime, I feel that the decay and decadence so obvious 
there, the anti-humanistic opinions expressed by these 
people representative of the intellectual life of one nat¬ 
ion, may very well symbolize the present world trend away 
from the individual toward a collectivistic society, in 
which process, unfortunately, many brilliant minds of many 
nations and peoples are playing their part. Others again, 
are doing nothing but voicing their opinions in loud and 
empty words, as practised by the Kridwiss group. To these 
we may, perhaps, apply the words of Serenus Zeitblom: 

"Nut ware ich...so unendlich flankbar gewesen... 
wenn sie selber etwas erschrockener tlber ihre 
Refund e gewesen w&ren und ihnen ein we nig moral- 
ische Kritik entgegengesetzt hfitten. Sie hStten 
sagen mSgen: 'Unglticklicherweise hat es ganz 
den Anschein, als wollten die Dinge den und den 
Lauf nehmen. Eolglich muss man sich ins Mittel 
legen, vor dem Kommenden warnen und das seine 
tun, es am Kommen zu hindern*. Was sie aber, so- 
zusagen, sagten war: ’Das Ilommt, das kommt, und 
wenn es da ist, wird es uns auf der H8he des 
Augenblicks finden. Es ist interessant, es ist 
sogar gut--einfach dadurch, dass es das Kommende 
ist, und es zu erkennen ist, sowohl der Leistung 
wie des Vergntlgens genug. Es ist nicht unsere 
Sache, auch noch etwas dagegen zu tun 1 .” 1) 


Kow many "Kridwiss group s 1 * have we not in our midst 

today? 


1) See D3?« 566 f 








- 160 - 


C0NCLUDI0IJ 

Thomas Mann T s DOK'TOR FAUSTUS covers such a multi¬ 
plicity of subjects, such a wide range of intellectual and 
cultural themes, that no one analytical or critical work 
could possibly hope to cover all of them; for each of 
them offers the challenge of a specialized, intensive 
research problem* Here an attempt has been made to examine 
only into the "symbolism" employed by Thomas Haim in the 
presentation of the life-story of Adrian Leverkfthn; to see 
how it was used in this respect, as well as to discover 
through it what the wider significance of the book may be. 

In the INTRODUCTION I quoted Vernon Venable on 
Mann’s symbolism and the methods he employs* That Venable 
has said of the symbolism in DDR TOD IN VSNKDIG has most 
certainly been applied in epic proportions by Mann in 
D0ICT0R FAUBTUB. 

Vie have seen how the smallest things, mentioned 
apparently at random and in passing, came to possess power¬ 
ful symbolic value. Pertaining at first to the personal 
life and fate of Adrian LeverktLhn, their significance es- 







- 






























t 





















' f 












■ 








, 










— 161 - 


panded and grew under the hand of the author until they 
drew first a nation and then mankind itself into the vast 
network of connected facts. Je have seen the skilful em¬ 
ployment of a mechanical technique which mirrored the life 
of a nation the while it ostensibly told only the life- 
story of a musical genius. People, animals, inanimate 
objects, numbers, disease, death, love, music, external 
events, the past and the present, madness and Hell—all 
these and many others have served the author as subtle 
agents of symbolism in the creation of his work. Prom the 
title-page and the quotation from Dante’s IHFEELTO to the 
last fervent words of Serenus Zeitblom, we follow through 
a labyrinth of connected passageways which cross and re¬ 
cross, lead us from the beginning of the book to the end, 
to the middle and back again to the beginning^ in and out 
and back and forth through a world of art, music, theology, 
society, war, death and destruction, forever pursued by 
the spectres of decay, decadence and the Devil. 

"Wie ungebunden die ErzShlung zu fliessen,.die 
Srfindung zu spielen scheint, hier ist nichts 
Zufall, hier steht nichts fttr sich allein, alles 
zielt auf alles, alles durch das ganze deterain¬ 
ier t . Ereuz und quer, zwischen Anfang und Elide, 
Oben und Tjnten laufen die Entsprechungen in einer 
labyrintischen Mathematik. Yon Buchel zu Pfeif- 
fering, vom ’Elemente spekulierenden’ Yater zur 
’Symphonia Cosnologica* des Sohnes und seinen 
Phantasieexkursionen in die galaktischen und sub¬ 
mariner. SphSren, von der Urmutter Elsbeth zur 
Uagd ’VJaltpurgis f und von dem lachenden Hunde 
8uso zun Teufelshaus in Palestrina zum Hunde 









ft 


T 








t 


' t 

■ 


* 



- 162 - 


Kasohperl (mit seinem Anklang an den Teufels- 
nanen) , von Lachen des Ilundes zur Lachlust 
Adrians und der notgedrungenen Entwicklung seiner 
' usik zur Parodie, zur f luziferischen Sardonik’, 
von Glasfltlglcr zur Eure und von den ’fressendon 
Tropfen’ und den osmotischen, heliotropischen 
PseudogescMpfen zu den pathologischen Lumbal- 
wanderungen der SpirocMten und den Glieder- 

der f Gr a . . T , on der Dttrerschen 

Apokalypse zum Id istschen I.Iarionetteentheater, 
von den Schicksal der Aerzte zu den der Schwes- 
tern Rodde und von der Ilallensor Theologen— 
Professoren und ^tudenten—zu den Sturz des 
Geistes beschmunzeln.. .durch alles und jedes spin- 
nen sich konvergente Beztlge, alles ist durch- 
drungen und umfasst von einen einzigen System 
rationaler D&nonie." 1) 


Parody and irony—these two are the servants 
which assist Thomas Mann in employing his symbolism in 
DOICTOR FAUSTUS vdth the greatest of precision and artistic 
skill. True, DOICTOR FAUSTUS offer*no bright rays of hope 
for humanity; the novel is the symbol of Thomas Mann’s 
revocation of the Ninth Symphony, of the "Ode to Toy” of 
Beethoven. This work has not had as its purpose the 
defence or criticism of the philosophy of the novel; it 
has confined itself to a study of the symbolism only. As 
a work of literature, as a work of art—from that stand¬ 
point it is in my opinion, unsurpassed. 


FINIS 


1) Erich Kahler, ’’S&kularisierung des Teufels: Thomas 
Manns Faust 5 ’, p. 195. 








-163- 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Cleugh, James: ”T1lomas Mann: a Study”, London, Martin 
Seeker, 1933. 

Neider, Charles C. (ed.): "The Stature of Thoms I.Iann” 

(a critical anthology), New York, 
Hew Directions, 1947. 

Blackmur, R.P.: "Parody and Critique: Notes on Thomas 

Harm’s ’Doktor Faustus’", The Kenyon Re¬ 
view, Kenyon College, Cambier, Ohio, Yol., 
XII, No. 1, Winter, 1950. 


Zuckerkandl, Yictor: 


"Die Musik des 
Neue Rundschau, 
Bemann-Fischer 
1948. 


’Doktor Faustus’". 
Nr. 10 (Frtthjahr) 
Yerlag, Stockholm 




Suhl, Abraham: "Anglizismen in Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faus- 
tus’”, Monatshefte, Yol., XL, No. 4, 
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, His. 
April, 1948. 


Sell, Frederick, C.: "Sin Kommentar zu Thomas Manns ’Dok¬ 
tor Faustus’”, Monatshefte, Yol., XL, 
No. 4, University of Wisconsin Press, 
Madison, Wis., April, 1948. 

Rolo, Charles I.: "Mann and his Mephistopheles”, Atlantic 

Monthly, Atlantic Monthly Co., Boston, 
mss a j /ol., CT i XXX"I, -ovember, 1948. 

Oswald, Yictor A., Jr.: 77 W# Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus’: the 

Enigma of Frau von Tolna”, Ger- 
mnic Review, Yol., XXIII, No. 4, 
Columbia University Press, Balti¬ 
more 2, Mdo, December, 1948. 

Oswald, Yictor A., Jr.: "Full fathom Five: Notes on some 

Devices in Thomas Ioann’s "Doktor 


(continued next page) 









-164- 


Faustus*”, Germanic Review, Vol., 
XXIV, Columbia University Press, 
Baltimore, Md., December, 1949* 

Maier, Hans, A.: "Die Stellung des ’Doctor Faustus’ im 

Gesamtwerke Thomas Manns", Modern Lang¬ 
uage Quarterly, Vol., IX, University of 
Washington Press, Seattle, 1948* 

Kahler, Erich,: "S&kularisierung des Teufels: Thomas 

Manns Faust”, Neue Rundschau, Nr. 10, 
(Frtlhjahr), Bermann-Fischer Verlag, 1948. 

Blankenagel, John, C.: ” A Nietzsche Episode in Thomas 

Ilann/s ’Doktor Faustus’”, Modern 
Language Notes, Vol., LXEII, Johns 
Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1948, pp. 
387-390. 

von Gronicka, Andre: ”Thomas Mann’s ’Doktor Faustus’: Pro¬ 
legomena to an Interpretation”, Ger¬ 
manic Review, Vol., XXIII, No. 3, 
Columbia University Press, Baltimore 
2, Lid., October, 1948. 

Reichert, '17. Herbert; "Goethe’s FAUST in two novels of 

Thomas Mann”, The German Quarterly, 
Vol., XXII, No. 4, American Associa¬ 
tion of Teachers of German, Henasha, 
Wisconsin, November, 1949. 


































