








































©X iUBItlS 
mmksiwis 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/synthesisofhydroOOwrig 




UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE 


This is to certify that the undersigned have 
read and recommended to the Committee of Graduate 
Studies for acceptance, a thesis submitted jointly 
by S. R. Wright, B.Sc. in Chemical Engineering, and 
W. R. Dimock, B.Sc. in Chemical Engineering 
entitled: 


SYNTHESIS OF HYDROCARBONS FROM 
CARBON MONOXIDE AND HYDROGEN 


A general review of the process, the development 
of the technique of catalyst testing and studies 
of various catalysts. 


Professor 

Professor 


Professor 
















' 






















THESIS 


SYNTHESIS OF HYDROCARBONS FROM 
CARBON MONOXIDE AND HYDROGEN 

A general review of the process, the 
development of the technique of catalyst testing, 
and studies of various catalysts* 


Submitted in Partial Fulfillment 
of the 

Requirements for the Degree of 
Master of Science 

fry 

S* R* HEIGHT, B*Sc* 
and 

¥. R. DIMOCK, B*Sc. 

Under the Direction of Dr, S. G. Davis 

Time devoted to thesis work months 
out of 7 months devoted to M.Sc. work* 

Edmonton, Alberta. x April, 1947* 











ACKNOWLED GEME NT 


The authors wish to take this opportunity 
to extend sincere thanks to all those who have 
assisted in this investigation: 

To Dr. S. G. Davis, director of the 
project, whose assistance and advice was of 
great value. 

To the Research Council of Alberta, who 
financed the project. 

To the Department of Chemistry for services 
and supplies. 

To the Shell Oil Company for providing a 
Graduate Fello?m;hip under which one of the 


author*s worked 









TABLE OF CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION 


1 


LITERATURE REVIEW 


History...... 

Mechanism of Reaction... 9 

Synthesis Gas . 21 

Catalysts ............ 32 

Supported Catalysts ... 35 

Sintered Catalysts ......... . 40 

Alloy-Skeleton Catalysts ........... 41 

Suspended Catalysts ................ 42 

Fluid Catalysts .. 44- 

Influence of Operating Conditions ..... 46 

Synthesis Gas Composition .......... 47 

Temperature ..... 48 

Pressure .. 50 

Contact time .. 51 

Particle size and hulk density of 

the catalyst ..... 52 

Products .............................. 54 


Gasoline Fraction , 
Diesel Oil Fraction 
Wax Fraction ...... 

Residual Gas ...... 

Lubricants ........ 


57 

58 

59 

60 
62 
63 


By-Products .. 66 

Fatty Acids .. 66 

Edible Fats ........................ 67 

Soaps and Detergents ... 68 

Greases .. 69 

Alcohols. 69 

"COCO" Process .. 70 

Iso-Synthesis Reaction .. 71 

Aromatization Redaction ............. 71 

























































Economics .. 73 

APPARATUS . 79 

PROCEDURE AND RESULTS .. 88 

Analytical Procedure 90 

Catalysts .. 91 

Discussion .. 117 

SUMMARY .. 119 

BIBLIOGRAPHY .. 121 

























1 







1 


SYNTHESIS OF HYDROCARBONS FROM 
CARBON MONOXIDE AND HYDROGEN 


Excessive drafts on the petroleum reserves of 
this continent by World War II have only served to 
emphasize the fact that our petroleum supplies are 
an exhaustible resource and that the day is coming 
ever nearer when our requirements for liquid hydro¬ 
carbon fuels must be obtained from other sources, 
such as natural gas, oil shales, tar sands and coal. 
Economists, business men, scientists and the general 
public have viewed with decided interest all the 
facts and controversies over the extent of future 
supplies. The recent consumption rate of petroleum 
products has been at an all time high and there Is 
little reason to believe that this rate will be 
reduced in the near future by new sources of power. 

At the present time the proven oil resources of the 
world are estimated at fifty-two billion barrels 
which is only slightly greater than the world 
production to date.^ The present rate of consumption 









2 


■will deplete these reserves in a little over twenty- 
five years. It may he expected that the normal 
forces of supply and demand will automatically bring 
into use methods of recovery and refining which will 
probably double the life of the existing petroleum 
supplies. Though a petroleum famine does not 
appear imminent, an intensive search for petroleum 
substitutes has been undertaken. With the petroleum 
supply becoming more difficult to exploit, a period 
of rising costs and prices may soon be unavoidable 
and it may be desirable to begin using these other 
fuels long before the supply of petroleum becomes 
critically short. The research of chemists and 
chemical engineers has indicates that It is possible 
to make synthetic petroleum products from natural 
gas and coal. 

In the United States alone the present reserves 

of natural gas and coal would appear to furnish an 

almost inexhaustible source of petroleum products. 

The proven reserves of natural gas and petroleum are 

now greater than at any time in the history of the 

( 2 ) 

industry and are shown in Table I. 

The potential gasoline production from these known 
reserves of crude oil, natural gas, and coal are shorn 
In Table II. 























' 

, 


■ 

r : * 














TABLE I 


(American Reserves) 


Wei ght 

Thousands of 
Tons 

Heat 

Values 

Trillions 

B.T.TJ. 

Volumes 

Trill- Mil- 
ions ions 

Cu*Ft. Bbls. 

Natural Gas 

3,384,500 

150,000 

140 

Crude Petroleum 

3,135,000 

125,000 

20,455 

Coal 

suitable for 
Fischer Tropseh 
Synthesis 1, 

400,000,000 

36,400,000 


Coal 

all grades 5, 

178,000,000 

66,534,000 



TAB 

L E 11 



(American Reserves) 



Estimated Gasoline 
Production 

Yrs. of Gasoline 
Supply at 1940 
Rate of 
Consumption 


3rude Oil 100 billion barrels 18 


Natural Gas 11*7. 21 

3oal, suitable for 

Fischer Tropseh 2,100 5750 


oal, all grades 



























4 


These figures indicate that if an economical 
process for conversion of natural gas and coal can 
he developed there need be little alarm over future 
supplies of petroleum products. 

The picture of future supplies of natural liquid 
fuels in Western Canada is not very good. The Turner 
Valley field has no w passed its prime and its product¬ 
ion is falling off very rapidly and some estimates 
give only another fifteen years of production from 
this field. The proven natural gas reserves of 
Alberta have been greatly increased in recent years 
and the present rate of production is only a fraction 
of the rate of discovery of new reserves.^ The 
coal reserves of Alberta are estimated at 50 billion 
tons which would increase the oil reserves of 
Alberta by thirty billion barrels. The tar sands 
of Northern Alberta also offer a large reserve of oil 
supplies which are as yet undeveloped. If Western 
Canada is to become independent with regard to 
petroleum products it would seem that these reserves 
will have to be exploited in the near future. 

The overall world picture of oil reserves and 

(3) 

estimated future discoveries is shorn in Table III, 






























5 


TABLE III 


(World Reserves) 


Country or Region Estimated proved 

reserves 

(Billions of Bbls) 


Estimated 
■ future 
Discoveries 
(Billions Bbls) 


U.S.A. 

21 

50 

Caribbean Area 

9 

65 

Rest of 



Western Hemisphere 

0,5 

30 

Total Western Hemisphere 

30,5 

145 

Soviet Union 

6,0 

100 

Rest of Europe 

0,8 

8 

Middle East 

27,0 

150 

Far East (Southwest 



Pacific) 

1,0 

58 

Rest of 



Eastern Hemisphere 

0,5 

29 

Total Eastern Hemisphere 

35,3 

345 

G-rand Total 

65,8 

490 



















* 

* 

' 

* 

* 




















6 


In the search for an economical process for 
converting these reserves of natural gas and coal to 
petroleum, the Fischer Tropsch synthesis of hydro¬ 
carbons from carbon monoxide and hydrogen has received 
much attention. 

HISTORY - 

The fact that a hydro carbon (me thane) could be 
catalytically produced from carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen was pioneered by Sabatier in 1913. In the 
same year, the Badische Anilin and Soda Fabrik 
revealed that mixtures of higher hydrocarbons and 
oxygenated compounds could be catalytically produced 
from a similar mixture under high pressures and at 
elevated temperatures (300 - 400°C», 100 - 200 
atmospheres). Ten years later, Franz Fischer and 
Hans Tropsch who had noted similar results when they 
worked with an alkali-iron catalyst at 400 - 450°C. 
and 100 - 150 atmospheres pressure, observed that 
increasing yields of hydrocarbons were obtained as 
reaction pressures were lowered and that the’se 
compounds definitely predominated at pressures lower 
than seven atmospheres. More active catalysts were 
required to increase yields, however, since these fell 





,"*:;.<> : *rrir ;:K: :: i:"rv>'^ 

. 

, 

, 


) in' 


■ 

. 

- 

# 














7 


rapidly with the decrease in pressure, and it was 
not until 1925 - 1926 that the discovery of suitable 
catalysts made possible the process now known as 
the Fischer Tropsch Process. These new catalysts 
consisted of alkali-free iron and cobalt and gave 
a product consisting almost entirely of hydro¬ 
carbons ranging from ethane to solid paraffin. 
Further investigations by English and American 
workers as well as by Fischer and Tropsch in the 
catalyst field resulted in the development of 
catalysts which gave yields up to 65 % of the 
theoretical. This fact, along with several 
others, led to the development of the process on 
a commercial scale. 

The first commercial plant was built by the 
Ruhrcheinie A.G. in 1953 with a capacity of 1000 
tons per year. By the end of 1936, five plants 
were in operation in Germany, boosting the pro¬ 
duction of primary oils to 145,000 metric tons 
per annum. Germany continued to increase its 
production of synthetic fuels until, by 1942, a 
production of 5,900,000 barrels annually of 
gasoline, diesel oil, lubricating oils and waxes, 
(about 1/10 of the total German oil production) 











. 

, 

* 










V' 


. 




. . 










. 













. 

' 






< 
























• 















8 


had been attained. It should be pointed out here that 
although Germany produced a good share of its petroleum 
products by the Fischer Tropsch synthesis and other 
indirect processes, all such plants were subsidized 
by the government. Although Germany was far ahead of 
the rest of the world in the technological development 
of the process, other countries were interested in the 
process and were either erecting plants or carrying 
out intensive research programs with regard to the 
synthesis. 

One plant was operated at Harnes, France during 
the war. It was designed for a basic output of 20,000 
tons a year but it never reached this figure. Plans 
were projected for building a Fischer Tropsch plant 
in Italy that would use an iron catalyst but the 
plans never materialized. In Japan, by 1938, two 
plants had been reported giving an annual output of 
150,000 tons while three new plants were under 
construction. Later reports indicated that in 1944, 
Japan was operating three Fischer Tropsch plants whose 
total yearly capacity was about 110,000 tons of 
primary products. Actual production amounted to only 
a small fraction of this figure. In 1938, Great 
Britain was operating an experimental plant of 150 


































i. 














































. 


. 






- 
















. 


















9 


gallons per day capacity in which the Robinson- 
Bindley process was tested. It differed from the 
Fischer Tropsch process in several respects and 
particularly in that it operated with a higher carbon 
monoxide : hydrogen ratio. A still smaller 
experimental plant (4 gallons per day capacity) was 
erected by the Fuel Research Board. In the United 
States, the Bureau of Mines carried out an 
extensive research program beginning in 194S after 
a lapse of 12 years and have accumulated much 
valuable data. Hydrocarbon Reserach Inc. will 
probably have the first commercial-size Fischer 
Tropsch plant in the western hemisphere when it 
completes its projected building program at 
Brownsville, Texas. 

MECHANISM OF REACTION - 

The industrial development of the Fischer Tropsch 
process in Europe was preceded by a great deal of 
fundamental research on catalysts and mechanism of 
reaction. Most of the initial work in research and 
development was done by German scientists but more 
recently British and American investigators have taken 
great interest in both the research and developmental 


f i el ds 









10 


The catalytic synthesis step in the Fischer 
Tropsch process consists of the hydrogenation of carbon 
monoxide over such catalysts and under such conditions 
that the reaction product consists of hydrocarbons of 
various chain lengths and degrees of saturation. 
Depending upon a number of factors, chiefly the ratio 
of hydrogen to carbon monoxide in the synthesis gas 
and the type of catalyst employed, one or other of 
the following reactions predominates in the synthesis 

(although both almost always take place to some 

(4) 

extent); 

nCo 4 (2n+l)H --> CnH2nf2 4 nH^O (l) 

nCo 4 2nH ? —-» 0nE2n f nH^O (2) 

The first of these reactions is favored by relatively 
high ratios of hydrogen to carbon monoxide and catalysts 
of strong hydrogenating power, while the second is 
favored by low hydrogen-carbon monoxide ratios and 
catalysts of less strong hydrogenating ability. 

When iron catalysts are used instead of those 
containing nickel or cobalt, the reaction becomes^' 

2nC0 t nHr> 


CnH2n *4 nGOo 

9 C-j 










' 

























11 


The synthesis is generally conducted at 

temperatures of approximately 185°C. with nickel or 

cobalt-containing catalysts and at about 225°C. with 

iron catalysts. The usual operating pressure lies 

somewhere between zero and 150 psi. gauge. The 

synthesis gas is passed through reaction chambers in 

one or more stages; the heavier products are condensed 

from the residual gas; and the lighter products are 

adsorbed on charcoal or in oil. Considerable 

variations in the quantity and types of products are 

obtained under different reaction conditions* 

Most of the theories regarding the reaction 

mechanisms of the process stipulate the inteimediate 

formation and decomposition of carbides of the catalyst 

metals. It has been shorn that iron, cobalt, nickel 

and ruthenium (those metals which best catalyze the 

reaction) all possess the common property of forming 

relatively unstable carbides of nonionic crystal 

structure when exposed to carbon monoxide at temperatures 

within the range employed in the pro cess, i Below about 

o 

550 C. these carbides react with hydrogen to yield 
quantitatively methane plus a few percent of ethane. 

About 550°C., the carbides tend to decompose to carbon. 

It is probably significant that the optimum temperature 






. 


n ) > ' 










i: 





12 


o o 

ranges for the synthesis, 185 to 215 C. for cobalt 

and 240° to 320°C. for iron catalysts, lie below 

350°C # , the temperature above which the carbides break 

( 7 ) 

down to carbon. 

Fischer v has long been of the opinion that 
methylene radicals, (CH2) n are formed when the carbides 
are treated with hydrogen and that the products of the 
synthesis are formed by the combination of these 
radicals into chains of various lengths and degrees of 
saturation. At least as late as 1955, he was not 
willing to choose between two possible explanations for 
the mechanism of methylene radical formation from the 
catalyst carbides.^ He assumed either:- 

(1) that the normal carbide, Me^G, is formed in 
the presence of carbon monoxide and these 
reduced by hydrogen to the metal, giving 
rise to methylene radicals, or 

(2) that the normal carbide, Me^C, is carbonized 
to a higher carbide Me^Cg, which, upon 
reduction to the normal carbide, forms the 
(GHg) radicals. 

According to Fischer T s beliefs, this step of the 

reaction with nickel or cobalt catalysts may be 

(5) 

represented by the equation: 











. 










13 


CO + 2H 2 -> (CH 2 ) + H 2 0 f 175 B.T.U. 

and, with iron catalyst, by the equation: 

2C0 i H g - > (CHg) 4 C0 E f 173 B.T.U. 

Fischer’s reasoning may be summed up as follows: 
since only Group 8 metals which are known to react with 
carbon monoxide at temperatures near 200°C, are suitable 
as Fischer Tropsch catalysts, and since carbides of 
these metals are found in the spent catalyst, it appears 
that carbides are formed by the interaction of the 
catalytic metals with carbon monoxide and that the 
methylene radicals are produced by secondary hydro¬ 
genation of these carbides. In 1938, Fischer reiterated 
his assumption that the mechanism may involve the 

(5) 

alternate formation of higher and lower carbides. 

In the synthesis when a freshly reduced catalyst 
is exposed to hydrogen and carbon monoxide, the first 
hydrocarbon product is methane. However, within a few 
hours, higher molecular weight hydrocarbons appear. 

On the basis of the carbide theory, it appears that In 
the first stage of the process carbon monoxide is 
adsorbed on the catalyst forming the carbide, and that 
hydrogen subsequently reacts with the carbide to form 





























14 . 


methylene groups which either combine with hydrogen 

to give methane, or polymerize with the formation of 

higher hydrocarbons. Both reactions occur at the 

same time and at about the same rate. Experiments 

(9) 

reported by Herrington and Woodward indicate that 
two types of active centres are present on the surface 
of a cobalt catalyst. The Type A centre (probably 
cobalt carbide) is considered responsible for the 
formation of methylene radicals and their polymeriz¬ 
ation to hydrocarbons. The Type B centre (probably 
metallic cobalt) is believed to provide the surface 
upon which the hydrogenation and chain-liberation 
occurs. The predominance of one or the other type 
of centre explains some of the problems of preliminary 
methane formation and catalyst poisoning. 

Komarewsky and Riesz^^are also of the opinion 
that Fischer Tropsch catalysts must possess both 
a polymerizing and a hydrogenating effect in addition 
to the ability to form carbides of suitable stability. 
They have pointed out that nickel, cobalt and iron 
form suitable carbides and possess hydrogenating 
ability; when pure nickel is used as a catalyst, however, 
only methane is formed in the synthesis step, and 
hydropolymerization to form, higher hydrocarbons does 













15 . 


not take place. In such cases, a multi-component 
"complex-action” catalyst seems required; this is 
borne out by the fact that the catalyst compositions 
most favored for the Fischer Tropsch reaction are, 
as mentioned, composed of several elements* 

Experiments reported by Craxford and Rideal^^ 
have seemed to indicate that the reaction between 
carbon monoxide and cobalt to form cobalt carbide is , 
far too slow to explain the rate of synthesis of 
hydrocarbons from hydrogen-carbon monoxide mixtures. 
Craxford stated that at the temperature of the 
synthesis', carbon monoxide reacted slowly with the 
catalyst to give cobalt carbide as 

SCO + SCo ——* COgC + C0 g 

but that this reaction was always slower than the 

reduction of the carbide by hydrogen at the same 

temperature. However, recent tests conducted by the 

United States Bureau of Mines indicate that the rate 

of carbiding is of the same order of magnitude as the 
( 13 ) 

synthesis rate. Craxford*s suggested mechanism 

for the cobalt-catalyzed synthesis assumes that the 
first step is the reaction of both carbon monoxide and 
hydrogen to form the carbide: 







, 






■ 

. 






. 

' 




. 4. 






- 








. 















■ 











16 


2Co + CO + H 2 - > Co 2 C + H 2 0 

This reaction, which occurs more rapidly than 
carbiding with carbon monoxide alone, involves': 

(1) chemisorption of carbon monoxide .on the 
catalyst, 

(2) reduction of the chemisorbed carbon monoxide 
by hydrogen to give the carbide, and 

(3) reduction of the carbide by molecular 
hydrogen to chemisorbed methylene. 

In all their experiments, Craxford and Rideal noted 
a parallel relationship between ortho-para hydrogen 
conversion and methane formation. When.methane was 
the main product, the ortho-para conversion was high 
(an indication of the presence of chemisorbed hydrogen); 
conversely, when higher hydrocarbons were being 
produced, the ortho-para conversion amounted to only a 
few percent. Hence, in order to obtain oils, the 
conditions of the synthesis have to be adjusted so 
that only very few chemisorbed hydrogen atoms are 
present on the catalyst surface, and then, not only 
are the ortho-para-hydrogen conversion and the synthesis 
of methane inhibited, but also the water-gas shift 







17 


reaction, and the catalytic hydrogenation - cracking 
of paraffin hydrocarbons* 

( 1 A ) 

Craxford, in later experiments "'found that when 
a mixture of. carbon monoxide and hydrogen is passed 
over a catalyst suitable for hydrocarbon synthesis, 
the amount of oil formed at first increases to a 
maximum on increasing the length of the catalyst bed, 
and then decreases again, the oil formed in the first 
part of the catalyst bed being decomposed to methane 
in the second part. On passing this maximum, the 
water-gas-shift reaction also sets in, giving carbon 
dioxide as the oxygen product of the synthesis, 
instead of water* 

These facts fit in with and confirm the theory 
of the reaction previously proposed, according to 
which oils are synthesized when the cobalt in the 
catalyst surface is in the form of carbide, whereas 
uncombined cobalt gives methane, allows the water- 
gas shift reaction to take place, and is active for 
the hydrogenation - cracking of hydrocarbons. 

Storch has pointed out the possibility that 
hydrogen may catalyze the formation of metal carbides 
by forming an unstable metal hydride. This may result 
in sufficient distortion of the metal lattice so that, 






- 


„ 













* 

. 

. 

. 

, 

* 

' 

, 




18 


upon removal of the hydride hydrogen, by decomposition 

or by reaction with neighboring metal carbide or 

adsorbed carbon monoxide, penetration of the lattice 

by carbon monoxide is accelerated. The fact that iron 

catalysts sintered in hydrogen at 850°C. are quite 

(13) 

active, is pointed out by Storch as lending 
weight to the premise that only a very small fraction 
of the catalyst surface possesses the critical 
spacing of metal atoms which is necessary to 
facilitate the synthesis reaction. 

The reaction mechanism proposed by Matsumura, 

( 15 ) 

Tarama and Kodama' 1 assumes the transient existence 
of the metal oxide in the catalyst-carbiding step and 
the subsequent formation of chemisorbed water by the 
reduction of this oxide with hydrogen from the 
synthesis gas. These investigators consider the 
first step of the reaction to be: 

CO f 3Me —> Me 2 C + MeO 

Their explanation for the formation of hydrocarbons 
is not markedly different from those of the catalyst- 
carbide theories. The interesting feature in their 
theory is the explanation it affords for the formation 
of water as a reaction product of the synthesis over 









19 . 


cobalt, and of carbon dioxide from the reaction over 
iron. They believe that: 

(1) Through combination with atomic hydrogen 
adsorbed on the catalyst, the carbide forms methylene 
groups which, during their stay upon the catalyst, are 
polymerized, reduced, and converted into hydro¬ 
carbons, The hydrocarbons so formed and adsorbed 

on the catalyst eventually become desorbed. The 
three processes occur successively, attaining a 
sort of ’’steady state” in which hydrocarbons of 
various molecular weights are produced. 

(2) Hydrocarbons of the gasoline range are 

formed over cobalt catalysts at temperatures above 
o 

160 C. because only above this temperature are 
sufficient quantities of active hydrogen adsorbed 
on the catalyst. 

(3) The higher reaction temperature required 
when iron catalysts are used may be explained by the 
fact that the temperature of formation of iron carbide 
from the metal and carbon monoxide is greater than 
that for cobalt carbide formation. 

(4) The subsequent reduction with hydrogen 

of the metal oxide formed in the catalyst-carbiding 
step gives rise to water which is chemisorbed on the 










20 


catalyst surface. With cobalt catalysts, the rate 
of desorption of chemisorbed water is greater than 
with iron catalysts. Thus, in the case of the reaction 
over cobalt, the chemisorbed water is rapidly desorbed 
and appears as a reaction product. However, when 
iron catalysts are used, there is greater opportunity 
for the carbon monoxide in the synthesis gas to 
form carbon dioxide by reaction with the metal-oxide 
areas on the catalyst surface, accounting for the 
appearance of carbon dioxide in the reaction products. 
In considering what is known or assumed of the 
reaction mechanism of the Fischer Tropsch synthesis, 
the synthesis reaction may be explained by the 
methylene carbide theory. Carbide formation would 
seem to be the first step, followed by establishment 
on the catalyst surface of a."steady state" which 
Involves polymerization, reduction, and desorption 
of the methylene and polymethylene groups, the 
extent of the polymerization being determined by 
the rate of desorption. Low conversion of the catalyst 
metal to its carbide or a rapid rate of desorption 
of the methylene groups cause a low concentration of 
methylene groups on the catalyst surface, and 
polymerization is consequently retarded. Under these 




. 











21 


conditions, methane is the main product, and ample 
active centers are provided on the catalyst 
surface for ortho-para hydrogen conversion. The 
high production of methane which is experienced 
when breaking in a new catalyst is explained by 
the necessity for covering the catalyst surface with 
polymethylene groups to slow up the reduction of the 
methylene radical to methane- The accelerated rate 
of desorption of methylene groups at higher temp¬ 
eratures might account for the fact that methane 

production predominates at temperatures above 

o (16) 

240 C. 


SYNTHESIS GAS 


The production of good synthesis gas, that is 
mixtures of carbon monoxide and hydrogen in the 
correct proportions for the most efficient conversion 
to hydrocarbons, is a very important step in the 
Eischer Tropsch process. This synthesis gas must 
be free from sulfur, oxygen and other catalyst 
poisons. With the catalysts now in use, one grain 
of sulfur per 1000 cu. ft. of synthesis gas (0.2 gms. 
per 100 cu. meters) is the maximum, allowable sulfur 
content. Any oxygen present in the synthesis gas 



















. 












































. 


* 





- 







. 













22 


will immediately attack the metal carbide of the 
catalyst surface and destroy the catalyst activity* 
The Fischer Tropsch process will, however, operate 
successfully on gases containing as much as ten to 
twelve percent inerts(carbon dioxide and nitrogen) 

Theoretically any carbonaceous material which 
can be decomposed to hydrogen and carbon monoxide 
can be used in the production of synthesis gas, but 
only coal and natural gas have so far been of 
commercial interest. In Europe, much attention has 
been given to making synthesis gas from coal because 
of its abundance and the relative scarcity of 
natural gas. 

There are four commercial methods for making 
synthesis gas from coal, they are: 

(1) Manufacture of water gas from coke in 
standard water gas sets; 

( 2 ) Manufacture of water gas from low volatile 

coal; 

(3) Manufacture of water gas from coke or coal 
using a blast of oxygen or steam as is done in Winkler 
and Lurgi equipment. 

(4) Conversion of coke oven gas with steam, 
either catalytically or noncatalytically. 








23 


The ideal water-gas reaction is written as 
C •}• H o 0 -> CO + Hr, 

which would indicate that approximately equal amounts 
of hydrogen and carbon monoxide would be made by 
practical application of the method. Commercial 
operation gives quite a wide variation in the hydrogen 
to carbon monoxide ratio and to get the desired ratio 
of 2 to 1, the water gas shift reaction is used, 

CO + Hr>0 --» C0 2 f Hr, 

This reaction requires a catalyst and many 

different ones have been used. They include ferric 

oxide promoted by the oxides of chromium, calcium, 

and magnesium; partially reduced cobalt oxide; 

cobalt catalysts containing about 38 percent of 

copper; magnesia and zinc oxide promoted with 
( 17 ) 

potassium oxide. ’ The carbon dioxide formed in 
the water gas shift reaction may be removed by 
compressing the gas and scrubbing with water* 

Coke oven gas is rich in hydrogen but contains 
little carbon monoxide, considerable methane and 
some unsaturated hydrocarbons. These hydrocarbons 
may be converted to hydrogen and carbon monoxide 





. 























■ 




. 




















i 











* 

. 

' 

' 


- 







* 








. 











24 


either catalytically or noncatalytically with steam. 
This converted coke-oven gas is low in carbon 
monoxide but by mixing it with the correct proportion 
of water gas which is low in hydrogen, a synthesis 
gas of the correct composition may be obtained. 

A suitable synthesis gas may also be obtained by 
blowing the water-gas generator with a mixture of 
steam and coke-oven gas. 

The Winkler equipment for producing water gas 
is a German development which operates continuously 
using a charge of lignite, coal or semi reduced 
coke reduced to a particle size of approximately one- 
quarter inch. This charge is kept in constant 
agitation by a rapid flow of oxygen and steam; or 
air, oxygen and steam. The gas produced using 
oxygen and steam has the following composition: 


co 2 

- 13-20% 

CO 

- 47-3655 

H 2 

- 39-41% 

ch 4 

- 0.6-0.4% 

% 

- 0.4-0.5% 


The composition of the gas using the air oxygen and 
steam blast is of course altered by the nitrogen 






■ . 

. 

, 









25 


of the air, A representative analysis is as 
follows:- 

C0 2 - 15.2# 

CO - 32.9# 

H 2 - 29.7# 

CH 4 - 1.3# 

(2) 

Ng - 20.9# 

The Winkler generator has the characteristics of a 
high gas-making capacity, operates at atmospheric 
pressure and produces a gas low in methane. 

The Lurgi generator operating at a pressure 
of approximately 20 atmospheres produces a gas 
relatively high in methane hut which can readily 
he scrubbed free of CCU and HgS with water under 
pressure. 

The underground gasification of coal, which has 
been largely investigated by the Russians, shows promise 
of being the most economical process for obtaining 
synthesis gas from coal. There are four different 

methods of underground gasification reported by the 

( 17 ) 

Russians, ' 

(1) the "chamber" method; 

(2) the "stream" method; 

(5) the "percolation"method; and 





* • 





I 


. 




. 














■ 










26 


(4) the "crevice” or "borehole" method. 

These processes with the exception of the chamber 
process which is considered obsolete, are each 
adaptable to a particular type of seam depending on 
its inclination and depth. 

The chamber process, although workable, has been 
abandoned in favor of the other three processes 
because of the large amount of underground work it 
requires* 

The stream method.involves driving a gallery 
lengthwise along the coal seam to connect two shafts 
drilled from the surface at opposite ends of the 
gallery. This forms a panel of coal which has an 
air inlet and gas outlet at opposite ends. A fire 
is started at the base of the air inlet shaft and a 
blast of air and steam burns out the coal panel. 

The fire burns progressively upward toward the roof 
of the seam, and the ash with any unburned coal which 
may fall, collects in the space below the fire zone. 
The stream method requires only a small amount of 
underground labor and is particularly suited to 
steeply inclined seams.■ In horizontal or only 
slightly inclined seams the access of air to the coal 










face becomes obstructed by ash and fallen, 
unconsumed coal. A typical analysis of "stream” 
water gas is shown below. 


27 


COo - 1555 

CO - 26$ 

Hg - 53$ 

CH 4 - 0.7$ 

0g - 0.5$ 

Ng - 4.8$ 

The percolation or filtration method is partic¬ 
ularly applicable to horizontal seams and requires no 
underground mining. Vertical holes are drilled into 
the seam in concentric rings spaced 20 to 40 yards 
apart radially. Fires are started at the bottom 
of the adjacent shafts and arr blown down a central 
pipe for combustion, the gas produced is collected 
and passes up the same shaft around the central pipe. 
The heat produced causes the coal to crack and finally 
gas can pass through the seam to the adjacent hole; 

The gas outlet of one hole and the air inlet of the 
other are then sealed and the panel of coal between 
them is gasified. When the coal between these two 
holes has been gasified, one is sealed off and an 







28 


adjacent one brought into use, the panels between 
all the holes eventually being gasified in succession. 

In the crevice method, three parallel shafts, 
about two feet in diameter, are drilled from the 
surface into the coal seam, the centre shaft serving 
as a blast inlet and the others as gas-offtake 
manifolds. These shafts are connected by a series 
of holes about four inches in diameter and five yards 
apart, so laid that they are parallel to each other 
and at right angles to the shaft. The coal surrounding 
each of these holes is gasified by starting a fire 
in the blast inlet shaft at the particular hole and 
carrying out combustion of the "crevice" in both 
directions, from the centre shaft, while the other 
boreholes are sealed, off. The crevices are ignited 
in succession or in small groups'so that an approx¬ 
imately constant rate of gas production is maintained 
and combustion of the coal seam is as complete as 
possible. 

Synthesis gas may be produced from natural gas, 

refinery gas, low temperature carbonization gases, 

Fischer Tropsch residue gases or other gases rich in 

(18 19 20) 

methane by the following processes:- * ’ 

(1) Reaction with steam, according to the 



, 

. 

' 

. ' 

. 

, 

■ 

• •• ■ 

■ 



. 

. 

. 






29 


equation:- 

CH 4 -t- H 2 0 -» 3H 2 + CO (-50.7 K cals) 

(2) Reaction with carbon dioxide, according to 
the equation:- 

CH 4 4 CO g - > 2C0 4 2H 2 (-60 K cals) 

and 

(3) Controlled oxidation with air or oxygen, 
according to the equation:- 

2CH 4 4 0 Z -> 2C0 4 4H S (-7.2 K cals). 

The methane steam reaction produces a gas low 
in carbon monoxide, but which might be adjusted to 
synthesis-gas requirements by blending with gas 
from the reaction of methane with carbon dioxide, 
since the carbon monoxide content of the latter is 
high. The two reactions may be carried out simul¬ 
taneously over a nickel catalyst at a temperature 
o 

of about 1350 F. according to the equation:- 
3CH 4 4 2H 2 0 4 C0 2 ——4C0 f 8H 2 

A number of catalysts have been investigated 

for the methane steam reaction, by far the greater 

number containing nickel, supported and promoted in 
(18 21 22) 

various ways. * 9 1 Among the catalysts suggested 









- 













• r /. 

f ■ 

1 • 





T 







: CC! 


H r ; ■': ’ ... -■ 

. 

■ 


. 












■ 




t •• 

: ;jj 


- 











50 


are:- nickel-alumina-magnesia on active carbon at 
about 1200°F; nickel-thoria-magnesia, and nickel 
iron at about 1470°F. 

Since the reaction of methane with carbon dioxide 
requires a reactant less readily available than the 
methane steam reaction, and is more endothermic than 
that reaction, less attention has been directed 
toward its developments. However it does give a gas 
high in carbon monoxide and therefore offers means of 
increasing the carbon monoxide content of gas from 
the methane steam reaction. 

The controlled oxidation of methane is an 

exothermic reaction that does not require expenditures 

for external heating, and would appear to be more 

economical than the other processes provided 

sufficiently inexpensive oxygen can be obtained. A 

nickel catalyst is commonly used for this reaction 

with thoria or silica for a promoter. The reaction 

o 

has been found to be complete at about 900 C. when 
the above catalysts are used. The controlled oxidation 
of methane to produce synthesis-gas has not as yet 
been used on an industrial scale but the proposed 
plant of Hydrocol Incorporated will use this method 
of synthesis gas production. 















* 














J 




























, 










. 

■ 

. 


. 


'* 


, 




. 

. 

, 


















31 


Regardless of its source, synthesis gas must be 
almost completely free of sulfur and its compounds 
for use in presently-known processes. The removal 
of sulfur is usually accomplished by a multistage 
process. The first step is the removal of hydrogen 
sulfide by passing the gas over moist iron oxide. 

This iron oxide process is quite well known * 1 

and has been widely used in German plants. The 
next step is the removal of organic sulfur compounds, 
which has been accomplished by several processes. 

One of the most widely used is the catalytic 
oxidation of these compounds to hydrogen sulfide, 
which is subsequently removed by passage of the gas 
over moist iron oxide. The oxidation of sulfur 
compounds is carried out by passing the gas over a 
■^ e 2°3 ” Nac>C0 3 catalyst at temperatures ranging from 
350°F. with fresh catalyst to 535°F. with nearly 
exhausted catalyst. A small percentage of oxygen 
in the entering synthesis gas aids greatly in the 
removal of organic sulfur by this process. 1 " 1 

A number of other processes have been proposed 
for the purification of synthesis gas. In one 
multistage process, hydrogen sulfide is removed by 
moist iron oxide; a part of the organic compounds 
are decomposed in the second stage by the action of 








32 


a mixture of sulfurized iron and an alkali metal 
carbonate at 570 - 840°F., the hydrogen sulfide 
being removed by moist iron oxide and in the last 
stage, the partially-disulfurized gas is passed 
over a mixture of iron oxide and alkali metal 
carbonate at a temperature of 300 - 570°F.^ 

Processes involving the oxidation of organic 
sulfur compounds to hydrogen sulfide make possible a 
very large space velocity through sulfur removal 
equipment. Where the hydrogen sulfide content is 
high, it is best to remove the major portion by one 
process, then the remainder by a method, such as the 
iron oxide method, which gives high removal when the 
initial content is quite low. One process for rough 
removal is the ammonia-Thylox process, which is said 
to reduce the hydrogen sulfide in coke-oven gas from 

2500 grains per 1000 cu. ft. to less than 80 grains 

(17) 

per 1000 cu. ft. 

CATALYSTS - 

Many catalysts have been suggested for the Fischer 
Tropsch synthesis. On the whole, however, the main 
constituent of these catalysts is one or more metals 
from the Eighth Group of the Periodic Table (Ni,Co,Fe) 








. 



, 

v 


• 






, 










' 

















■ 












33 


usually in the metallic form. 

The catalytic metals used by Fischer and Tropsch 

in their early experiments were iron and cobalt, the 

former being activated with copper and alkali and the 

latter with zinc oxide. Their early experience using 

nickel catalyts was disappointing and they attributed 

this fact to the known powerful hydrogenating 

influence of nickel, believing that it caused direct 

hydrogenation of the carbon monoxide to methane. 

However, in 1943, they reported that further studies 

showed that a nickel-manganese-alumina catalyst 

( 27 ) 

was clearly superior. v ' 

The admixture with activators and promotors 
is desirable in the case of most of the catalytic 
metals. The added materials may serve one oi* more 
of the following purposes;- 

(1) supply a catalytic effect not possessed 
by the catalytic metal alone; 

(2) activate or promote the catalyst; 

(3) facilitate catalyst preparation, conditioning, 
or regeneration; 

(4) inhibit catalyst poisoning; 

(5) improve the physical nature of the catalyst; 

(6) provide a support for the catalytic metal. 















. 





. 















. 




• 



■ . 


■ 

, 






. 


■ 


' 

; 














; 




:! - . 




, 









34 


The choice of the catalytic metal itself has 
a definite influence on the degree of saturation of 
the products of the synthesis. Cobalt is intermediate 
in hydrogenating power, its replacement by nickel 
leading to the formation of more saturated products 

and its replacement by iron resulting in greater 

... ^ (28) 
yields of olefins. 

The theoretical yield from one cubic meter of 

ideal synthesis gas (2Hp - ICO) is 208 grams. 

However, in actual practice, the synthesis gas always 

contains a considerable quantity of inert materials 

(COp, Ng, CH^ etc.) and for this reason the yield 

will rarely exceed about 180 grams. 

The more active catalysts consist of mixtures of 

cobalt or nickel with activating materials such as 

alumina, thoria, or other difficultly reducible metal 

oxides. These catalysts give fairly high yields (up 

to about 170 grams per cubic meter) at temperatures 
o 

of about 190 C. Recent experiments with iron catalysts 
have shorn that at higher temperatures and pressures 
(240°C. and 150 pounds per square inch) yields may be 
obtained which are comparable in quantity to those 
from cobalt or nickel complex catalysts. 

Ruthenium or ruthenium containing contact catalyst 

















' 



- 









35 


have been patented for the synthesis of solid 
hydrocarbons at temperatures of 150 - 230°C. &nd 
high pressures (over 450 pounds per square inch). 

The ruthenium catalyst is long-lived and gives 
yields of approximately 6.2 pounds of paraffin wax 
and 3.1 pounds of liquid per 1000 cubic feet of 
synthesis gas at 190°C. and 1500 psi. 

Fischer Tropsch catalysts may be classified 
as supported, sintered, alloy-skeleton, suspended 
and fluid catalysts. These will be dealt with 
in turn. 

Supported Catalysts - 

Complex catalysts .containing nickel or cobalt 
as the prime catalytic metal and other'elements and 
compounds as supplemental catalytic agents are 
generally prepared by coprecipitation of the 
chemically active ingredients upon the inert carrier. 
One such method involves the addition of alkali 
carbonates to solutions of the nitrates of the 
desired components in the presence of sufficient 
kieselguhr to serve as a support. The mixture is 
filtered,, washed, dried and reduced with hydrogen,# 

Catalysts consisting of 100 parts nickel.;20 
parts manganese oxide; 4-8 parts thoria, alumina, 














36 


tungstic oxide, or uranium oxide; and 125 parts 
kieselguhr have been found to yield from 0 # 75 - 
1.2 gallons of liquid hydrocarbons per 1000 cubic 
feet of synthesis gas at temperatures of 185 - 210°C. 
and a space velocity of about 150 volumes of 

( 89 ) 

synthesis gas per volume of catalyst per hour* 
Synthetic Oils Limited (formerly Robinson- 
Bindley Processes, Ltd*), in its search for a 
longer-lived catalyst, developed a nickel-manganese- 
alumina catalyst precipitated on kieselguhr. It 
•was further processed to give a porous silica- 
kies elguhr-supported catalyst, 

Kieselguhr-supported mixtures of cobalt and 
thorium oxide are the "standard European catalysts 11 
for the Fischer Tropsch process. Such catalysts 
give high yields of primary product and, in their 
present state of development, possess fairly long 
active lives. The catalyst used exclusively by the 
Germans during the war was of this type. According 
to one German report it was possible in a modern 
synthesis plant to produce 168 grams of primary 
product per cubic meter of synthesis gas, or in 
other words approximately 94 % of the theoretical 
yield of 180 grams. 





















c 



















■ - 

1 








. 










* 

■ 

. 








> 

* 







37 


Several Japanese investigators have studied 
kieselguhr-supported cobalt catalysts, reporting 
quite high yields from compositions consisting of 
5-10$ of copper, 4-12$ of manganese oxide, and 
4-12$ of thoria, alumina, or uranium oxide.^ 

As mentioned, all commercial-scale operations 
in Germany appear to have been conducted over a 
more or less standard type of cobalt-thoria-magnesia- 
kieselguhr catalyst. The catalyst used most 
extensively was one containing 100 parts of Co, 

5 parts Th0 o , 8 parts MgO, and 180-220 parts 
kie s elguhr.^ ^^ 

Magnesia-containing catalysts are said to have 
been in use since 1938, their introduction having 
made possible catalyst lives of up to eight months 
at normal pressure. ^ According to Dr. F, Martin, 
managing director of Ruhrchemie A.G., the magnesia 
was added soley to increase the hardness of the 
resulting catalyst and thus to reduce its tendency 
to disintegrate in the ovens. Martin stated that 
catalyst's containing the full amount of thoria 
produced more paraffin and that the substitution of 
magnesia decreased this production, it being necessary 
to strike a compromise between the relative 









- 

; ■ 












. 








e 






r • 

...» 










38 . 


proportions of thoria and magnesia in order to 
obtain a catalyst giving high production and 
possessing good physical strength. It has also 
been reported from other sources that the incor¬ 
poration of magnesia in the catalyst also contrib¬ 
uted to the ease of initiating the synthesis and to 

( 23 ) 

the depression of methane and carbon formation. 

As previously mentioned, cobalt catalysts give 

lower methane yields and more olefins in the 

product than do nickel catalysts. However, about 

50 percent of the cobalt may be replaced by 

nickel without loss of these advantages. In his 

experiments with precipitated catalysts containing 

equal parts of cobalt and nickel, Tsutsumi obtained 

(29) 

very low yields without the use of promoters. 

His most satisfactory catalyst contained 20 percent 
manganese oxide, E0 percent uranium oxide, and 1E5 
percent kieselguhr (based on the total weight of 
cobalt plus nickel). 

The ready availability of iron and its con¬ 
sequent low cost have long stimulated research on 
its use as a Fischer Tropsch catalyst. However, 
the effect of catalyst costs on the ultimate cost 
of Fischer Tropsch products is said to be relatively 
slight in the case of modem commercial cobalt 














. 


: 

i jjL ;jpf 

; 

■ 

. 

■ 

* 

' 

« 

. 



























39 


( 32 ) 

catalysts, and-perhaps the greatest present 
interest in iron catalysts centres around their 
ability to produce more unsaturated gasoline 
fractions and the possibilities they afford of 
utilizing water gas directly rather than after . 

( 23 ) 

adjustment of the hydrogen-carbon monoxide ratio. 
Alkali-promoted iron-copper catalysts were 

used by Fischer and Tronsch in many of their early 

( 28 ) 

experiments. However, they found these catalysts to 
be markedly inferior to cobalt or nickel catalysts, 
both in product yield and length of life. Copper 
may be added to precipitated or impregnated iron 
catalysts to facilitate the reduction step in their 
preparation and to favor adsorption of the alkali 
salt. 

Catalysts prepared by impregnating asbestos 
with the nitrates of the catalytic metals and 
small amounts of rare earth oxides have been reported 
to give the following yields per 1000 cubic feet of 
synthesis gas: 

(1) Fe - Cu - Ni (4:1: 0.01), 1.8 pounds. 

(2) Fe - Cu - M (4 : 1 : 0.02), 2.8 pounds. 

(3) Fe - Cu - Ni - Ce0 o - Th0 o (4 : 1 : 0.05 : 

0,001 : 0.006), 5 pounds. 









, 


, . 





























40 


Yields of 5.2 and 5.5 pounds per 1000 cubic 
feet of water-gas ( 1 H 0 : 1 CO), respectively 
were obtained with precipitated catalysts containing 
(in the first case) Fe, Cu, kieselguhr and K^CO^ in 
the ratio 4:1:5: 0.08 and (in the second case) 
the same ingredients plus 0.08 part of manganese. 

Sintered Catalysts - 

Besides precipitation, catalysts can be made by 
fusion of the metals. This method of preparation 
is generally applied to iron catalysts. 

Partial sintering of precipitated iron-alumina 
catalysts by reduction at about 845°C. has beer- 
patented by I. G. Farbenindustrie A. G. Such sintered 
iron catalysts may be employed in liquid-medium 
operations as well as in the nomal vapor-phase type 
of operation. These catalysts may also be made 
in pellet form by mixing iron powder with an alhaline 
metal salt solution, compressing and reducing with 
hydrogen. Although single-pass yields are low, a 
satisfactory ultimate yield may be obtained by 
recycling the partially-spent synthesis gas. 

The hydrocarbons synthesized over sintered iron 
catalysts consist largely of branched-chain paraffins, 









« 

. 











. 




* 

; 






■ 





• 





















































. - 


. 









;; 

. 





















41 . 


while those produced on non-sintered-iron 
catalysts contain very little iso-compounds. It 
is considered likely that sintering produces a 
critical spacing of the metal atoms in the iron 
carbide lattice which is conducive to the 

( 22) 

production of iso paraffins. 

Alloy-Skeleton Catalysts - 

The heat-transfer problem involved in carrying 
out the highly exothermic reaction of the Fischer 
Tropsch synthesis has prompted considerable 
investigation of catalysts which permit a more 
rapid distribution of the heat liberated during 
the reaction. Highly porous, catalytically 
active "skeleton” catalysts consisting of nickel 
or cobalt or alloys of both and possessing a 
greater coefficient of heat transfer than 

precipitated catalysts have been developed by 

( 35 ) 

Raney; These catalysts are prepared by alloying 
nickel and cobalt with aluminum or silicon and 
subsequently removing the latter material by 
solution in aqueous caustic. Experiments with 
cobalt-nickel skeleton catalysts have indicated 


that: - 





















; 


























42 . 


(1) the optimum ratio of nickel to cobalt 
is 1 : 1; 

(2) catalysts prepared by alloying with silicon 
possess higher activity than those in 
whose preparation aluminum is used; 

(3) the presence of even small amounts of 
copper or manganese in the catalyst is 
undesirable* 

The activity of skeleton catalysts prepared from 
nickel-aluminum, cobalt-aluminum, and cobalt-silicon 
alloys has been investigated by Rapoport and Polo- 
zhintsevai^^ 

Catalysts of the "alloy-skeleton type" deteriorate 
more rapidly and yield about 20 percent less liquid 
product than precipitated catalysts having the same 
catalytic ingredients. 

Suspended Catalysts - 

The transfer of heat from the catalyst surface 
also may be facilitated by the use of finely divided 
catalyst particles suspended in a liquid medium. Tilhen 
the temperature of any given catalyst particle rises 
to a sufficient level, the excess heat from the 
reaction is converted into heat of vaporization of the 






• r ' ■ /. ■ r' - i 

. 

- 


. 

- 












■ 


. 


■ 








43 . 


liquid. A catalyst consisting of iron, magnesium 
oxide, and zinc oxide suspended in anthracene oil is 
claimed to yield hydrocarbons heavier than gasoline 

at temperatures below 4-30°C. and pressures above 300 

(37) 

psi. The use of a nickel-aluminum-kieselguhr 

catalyst suspended in a heavy sulfur-free oil is said 
to result mainly.in the production of methane. 

There are two main disadvantages of conducting 
the reaction in a liquid medium: 

(1) the difficulty of removing the reaction 
products, and 

(2) the larger space requirements. 

"There the liquid medium is, itself, a fraction of the 
reaction.product, the problem is less difficult than 
in the case where some other liquid is employed. 
Standard Oil Development Company has patented a 
process, designed to facilitate removal of the reaction 
products, in which the reaction is carried out in a 
bubble-cap tower with a catalyst suspension of nickel 
activated with magnesium and aluminum oxides in 
paraffin wax. The yield is said to amount to about one 
gallon of liquid hydrocarbons per 1000 cubic feet of 
synthesis gas. 











44 


Fluid Catalysts - 

The most recent' development in the search for 
a Fischer Tropsch catalyst is the "fluidized" catalyst, 
which consists of very finely divided particles 
suspended in the synthesis-gas stream. This catalyst 
possesses very superior heat transfer characteristics. 

Fluid catalysis had its first large scale 
application in the catalytic cracking process for 
the production of aviation gasoline. The chief 
advantages of this process over the other cracking 
processes are:- 

(1) close temperature control; 

(2) intimate contact "between oil vapor and 
catalyst particle; 

(5) ease of regeneration of catalyst,while 
the chief disadvantages may be classified as: 

(1) erosion; 

(2) temperatures in excess of design due to 
failure of internal insulation; 

(3) plugging and coking; 

(4) mechanical equipment difficulties. 

The experience gained in operation of the many 
commercial-sized Fluid Catalyst Cracking units already 














45 


in operation should provide much of the "know how” 
for the Fischer Tropsch process. 

Using such a catalyst for the Fischer Tropsch, proce 
it is claimed that the exothermic heat of reaction 
may be removed immediately as it is formed along the 
path of the flowing gases in the reaction zone through 
the walls of the reaction zone by circulating a 

cooling medium without the walls of the reaction 

(38) 

zone. 

In U.S, 2, 347, 682, which specifies this type 
of catalyst, it is said that the temperature can be 
kept substantially constant anywhere within the range 
of 110-220°C. by directly mixing relatively cool 
materials with the mixture in the.synthesis zone. 

A very recent patent^ specifies the circulation of 
a solid heat carrier'through the reactor, along with 
the fluidized catalyst. 

Standard Catalytic Company developed a fluid- 
catalyst-type Fischer Tropsch process^ 40 ^using 200- 
400 mesh activated clay having deposited on it iron 
oxides. A minimum of three to four cubic feet of 
fluidizing gas per 100 pounds of catalyst is required. 

The Hydrocarbon Research Inc, has developed an 
economic natural gas-to-gasoline process known as the 
Hydrocol Process, 











46 


.This process uses a fluidized iron catalyst 
(75-80$ finer than 325 mesh) which gives markedly 
improved space-time yields of oil over other types 
of catalyst. The catalyst gives very accurate 
temperature control and is itself utilized as a. 
medium of heat transfer. With this type of catalyst 
conversions better than 90 percent were obtainable, 

INFLUENCE OF OPERATING- CONDITIONS ON THE 
FISCHER TROPSCH SYNTHESIS - 

For each type of Fischer Tropsch catalyst which 
has been developed a special set of operating conditions 
have been found by experimentation, which give the 
most efficient operation for the type of product 
desired. In determining the best operating conditions 
for a catalyst the following variables must be 
considered, 

(1) Synthesis gas composition; 

(2) Catalyst temperature during reduction, 
running in and operation; 

(3) Pressure; 

(4) Contact time or throughput ; 

(5) Particle size and bulk density of the 
catalyst. 













47 


Synthesis Gas - 

The optimum composition of synthesis gas for 

nickel, cobalt and ruthenium catalyst is usually 

considered to be a mixture of hydrogen and carbon 

monoxide in a two to one ratio. For iron catalysts 

a one to one ratio of hydrogen to carbon monoxide 

is suitable for the synthesis producing a more 

unsaturated product with a higher octane number. 

In general for all types of catalyst a low hydrogen 

to carbon monoxide ratio in the synthesis gas 

results in 'the formation of more olefinic product 

(41) 

and the production of carbon dioxide. A high 

hydrogen to carbon monoxide ratio produces a 

saturated product and favors high methane formation. 

The amount of olefins in the reaction product has 

been found to be inversely proportional to the 

(42) 

hydrogen content of the synthesis gas. The 
percentage of olefins decreases in the order - iron, 
cohalt and nickel when these metals are used as 
catalysts, and increases with very short layers of 
catalyst (high space velocities). 

Conflicting data has been published on the effect 
of carbon dioxide as a diluent in the synthesis gas. 











48 


Tsuneoka and Fujimura^ ^ ^investigated the effects of 

nitrogen, methane and carbon dioxide as diluents, 

using a nickel-mamganese-thoria catalyst. They 

found that gaseous mixtures containing less than 

20$ of these gases had no harmful effects on the 

reaction. Carbon-dioxide was found to be more 

effective than either nitrogen or methane in 

reducing the yield. Gradual dilution of an initial 

gas of two parts hydrogen and one part carbon 

monoxide reduces the molecular weight of the products 

( 4 - 4 ) 

produced. Fischer and Pickier 'working with 
various nickel, cobalt and iron catalysts report that 
the presence of carbon dioxide in a carbon monoxide 
hydrogen mixture exert no influence on the yield of 
liquid hydrocarbons. 

Temperature - 

Catal 3 rsts are usually reduced before synthesis 
operation by passing a stream of hydrogen over them 
and raising the temperature gradually to approximately 
400°0, In this reduction it is common practice to 
use a very high hydrogen space velocity. Space 
velocities of five to six hundred are commonly used. 
After reductions the catalysts are usually cooled 





. 















■ 




. • 




' 

ii i 

* 




















■ 











49 


to 150 C. in a slow stream of hydrogen and then run 
in with synthesis gas* After synthesis gas has been 
admitted to the catalyst the temperature is raised 
very slowly, a satisfactory procedure being to hold 
the temperature for two hours, when the contraction 
reaches twenty percent, then again constant for two 
hours at thirty percent, forty percent and so on. 

This procedure has been found to induce oil synthesis 
on any type of active catalyst 

The temperature range over which the synthesis 
of hydrocarbons from hydrogen and carbon monoxide 
occurs is quite narrow. Even for the most active 
catalysts the reaction is very slow below 175°C. and 
above 225°C. the rate of liquid hydrocarbon production 
falls off rapidly and methane formation predom- 
inates. ’ The methane reaction proceeds rapidly 
at higher temperatures, such as 500 to 350°C» 

CO + 3H 2 -> CH 4 i H 2 0 

This reaction is also favored by a high hydrogen 
to carbon monoxide ratio while a low hydrogen to 
carbon monoxide ratio favors the water gas shift 
reaction. 

CO 4 H 2 0 -> C0 2 i H 2 



























. 





J. 







[ J ' - 








■ 





f 










50 . 


The optimum operating temperature with iron 
catalysts is higher than that with nickel or cobalt, 
being about 240°C. However, the range in which 
satisfactory results are obtained is quite small. 

While the possibility of obtaining a given type, of 
product depends to a large extent upon the catalyst 
and pressure employed, it is known that in general, 
the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide produces 
straight chain hydrocarbons at relatively low temp¬ 
eratures, alcohols in the range 300-400°C., iso¬ 
paraffins in the range 400-475°C., and aromatics 
in the range 475-500°C. 

Pressure - 

The effect of pressure on the Fischer Tropsch 

synthesis has been investigated quite fully by Fischer 

(46) 

and his co-workers. In general the production of 

liquid and solid hydrocarbons increases as the pressure 
is increased till a pressure of about fifteen 
atmospheres is reached. The yield then starts to 
fall off.^' 7; The region from five to fifteen 
atmospheres has been called the medium pressure area. 
Synthesis in this region gives higher yields of 
liquid and solid hydrocarbons; and the active life 
of the catalysts are greatest^in this region. 





' 


■ 



. 
















51 


The yield of hydrocarbons decreases rapidly at 
pressures over fifteen atmospheres, probably due 
to the corrosion of active catalyst surface by 
carbonyl formation and by the stronger 
adsorption of oxygenated organic products which 
are produced in larger amounts at the higher 
pressures. 

Contact Time - 

The most recent work available on the effect 

of throughout on the Fischer Tropsch synthesis 

(48) 

is that of Craxford, He has been able to show 

that increasing the throughput will at first raise 
the yield of liquid hydrocarbons from an active 
catalyst and then cause the yield to drop off 
rapidly as the throughput is further increased. 

The plot of yield versus rate has a very sharp 
maximum and any slight variations of rate'will 
decrease the yield greatly. 





52 


It has also been foundthat to maintain 
good yields at higher throughput, higher reaction 
temperatures must be used which also results in 
the production of more methane. If the temperature 
is held constant, the yield drops rapidly with 
increased throughput rate. 

Generally speaking, reducing the space velocity 
has an effect on the products similar to increasing 
the pressure, but with the important difference that 
a low space velocity reduces the output of the 

14 - * • V • -u • -4.(20) 

plant and a high pressure increases it. 

Particle Size & Bulk Density of Catalys t - 

Japanese investigators have made a detailed study 

of the effects of particle size, bulk density of 

catalyst, pretreatment with hydrogen, and the material 

(50 51) 

used for construction of the reaction tube. ° 

Using a nickel-cobalt (1:1) catalyst prepared from 
the alloy nickel-cobalt-silicon (1 : 1 : 2), they 
found that with a space velocity of about 100, the 
optimum particle size was 1 to 4 millimeters. The 
efficiency of the catalyst at constant gas input for 
a given amount of catalyst diminished when the free 
space exceeded or fell below a certain optimum value, 












55 


which varied with the diameter of thj3 tube. If 
the length was shorter than the optimum, the 
average molecular weight of the liquid hydrocarbons 
decreased, and more gaseous hydrocarbons were 
produced. This effect was. presumably due to higher 
local temperatures when the catalyst was packed into 
a smaller space. If the free space exceeded the 
optimum value, a lower yield per pass was obtained 
owing to "channeling” the gas. 

At constant gas input, tube diameter, and bulk 
density (grams of catalyst per cubic centimeter), 
and with varying quantities of catalyst (that is 
varying space velocities), a limiting value was 
reached that depended on other reaction conditions. 

A further increase in the quantity of the nickel- 
cobalt catalyst (decrease in space velocity) did not 
influence the yield of liquid hydrocarbons but increased 
the yield of carbon dioxide and gaseous hydrocarbons. 
With less than the limiting amount of catalyst (that 
is, higher space velocities) the liquid product was 
of lower molecular weight and also contained more 
olefins. 

The above brief study of reaction conditions 
shows 'that synthesis gas composition, reaction 





* 









' 0 

■ 













■ 








■ 

' 












{ 









54 


temperature, pressure and throughput rate all play 
a very important part in determining what the final 
synthesis product will be. By varying these 
conditions the Fischer Tropsch synthesis can be 
made to yield ,a variety of products, which may 
increase the value of the process. 

PRODUCTS - 

The catalytic hydrogenation of carbon monoxide 
can be made to yield a wide range of organic 
compounds, depending upon the choice of reaction 
conditions and catalyst employed. Since the first 
synthesis of methane by Sabatier in 1913, techniques 
have been evolved which makes possible the production 
of aliphatic hydrocarbons, alcohols, and other 
compounds, such as acids, ketones, esters, ethers, 
etc. of almost any chain length, degree of saturation, 
and straight-chain, branched-chain, or cyclic 
structure. 

The primary products of the Fischer Tropsch 
synthesis has been shown to contain largely straight- 
chain paraffinic and olefinic hydrocarbons with only 
very minor amounts of aromatic hydrocarbons, 
naphthehes, and oxygenated organic compounds. 














55 


The following table gives the composition of 
the synthesis product for the single pass atmos¬ 
pheric synthesis. 


TABLE IV 
Composition of Product 

% Olefins 

Constituents % 'by Weight By Volume 


C 3 ” c 4 faction 

8 

55 

0 

Gasoline to 150 C, 

46 

45 

Gasoline 150-200°C. 

14 

25 

Diesel Oil 

22 

10 

Wax from oil 

* 7 

,p. 50°G 

Wax from catalyst 

3 

M.P. 90°C 


The gasoline obtained had an octane rating of 
only 55 but this could be raised to 72 by the 
addition of 0.5 cubic centimeters of tetraethyl 
lead per litre of gasoline. 

Snodgrass and Perrin " J have reported data on 
the German two-stage synthesis over cobalt catalyst. 
This data is shown in Table V. 

o 

The octane rating of the 50 to 140 C. gasoline was 
62; that of the 30 to 110°C. was 67. 











* 








PROPERTIES OF PRODUCTS FROM TWO-STAGE OPERATION 


56 



CD 

u 

CO 

CO 

0 

& 


o 

•H 

£ 

0 

,£ 

P 

IQ 

O 

e 

5- 


0 

0 50 
50 0 


0 

P 

co 

p 

IQ 

£ 

•H 

pH 


P 

to 

0 

£ 

o 

o 

0 

co 


<H 


0 





o 


£ 0 







O 50 





p 


O 0 

CV2 

00 

0 

0 

,£ 


0 P 



0 

02 

fcOH 

CO CO 





•H 

0 






0 

P 






«g 

o 







Eh 

p 0 


in 

LO 


>5 


W 50 


• 

• 




£ 0 

in 

0) 

to 




•H P 


02 

02 




Ph CO 






>0 







£ 

0 

o 





o 

50 

DO 

O 

02 


w 

o 

£ rs 

J 

02 

0 


0' 

0 . 

P ^ 

LO 




•H 

CO CO 

W 




4h 







0 







i—1 







O 

p 

0 


O 




0 

50 * 






£ 

0 0 


1 




•H • 

P o 

O 

in 

02 



pH CO i> 

in 

to 

0 


o 







•H P 






4-i 

•H 



tO 


in 

•H 




cO 

D~ 

CO 

O 

0 



m 

« 

* 

0 

u 



o 

O 

o 

PiU 






CO 







t.0 




1 o 

O 


£ 

0 


1 

LO 

o 


*H 

50 

* 


i—! 

to 


0 

£ 

o 


1 

J 


•H 

0 O 


O 

o 


c Ph 



CO 

o 


pq 





0 






• 







o 



P 



£ 

o 



£ 



C 

o 

« 


0 



•H 

in 

o 


£ 



P 

i—i 

o 


p 



O 


o 

H 

•H 



0 

o 

in 

0 

P 



£ 

p 

0 

& 

0 



PH 




£ 




0 

£ 

£ 

O 




£ 

0 

•H 

O 



o 

•H 

t> 

<£ 





0 

c 

4-i 




1 

O 


0 





0 

0 

£ 




DQ 

0 

•H 

0 




O 

e 

O 

0 






















57 


Much experimentation has been directed toward, 
increasing the percentage of olefins in Fischer 
Tropsch primary products* This work has been 
intended to serve' the double purpose of increasing 
the octane number of the gasoline and of producing 
increased yields of unsaturates which are amenable 
to subsequent conversion operations. For example, 

gas recycle over cobalt catalysts has been found to 

( 53 ) 

yield the following products: 


~ C 4 . .. 8 $ (60-65$ olefins) 

Gasoline ....... 50$ (60-65$ olefins) 

Middle Oil...... 28$ (40-65$ olefins) 

Wax ............ 34$ (small $ olefins) 


C 3 ~ C 4 fraction - 

The - C 4 fraction generally constitutes 

about 15 percent of the crude liquid product obtained 

from the noimal pressure synthesis and about 7$ of 

(54) 

that produced in medium-pressure operation. This 
fraction is of special interest because of the 
prospects it offers for the manufacture of high-octane 
polymer or alkylate gasolines. The Germans did not 
put much emphasis on the production of polymer gasoline 














. 




' : 

. 









58 


or alkylate from this fraction, although some units 

( 19 ) 

had been built. Their chief use of this fraction 

was for alcohols. 

Gasoline Fraction - 

Gasoline from the conventional Fischer Tropsch 
process is low in octane number as a result of its 
straight-chain paraffinic structure. Consequently 
it is essential to provide for the cracking of high- 
hailing products so as to produce a large amount of 

higher-octane gasoline. Investigations by Egloff, 

( 55 ) 

Nelson, and Morrell 'showed that yields of about 
75 to 80 percent by weight of a cracked gasoline 
may be obtained, which,,when mixed with 42 to 30 
percent of the primary gasoline fraction of the 
synthesis*product, had an octane rating of 68 to 
70. Ruhrchemie turned to thermal cracking in order 
to convert the higher boiling fractions into useable 
gasoline. They installed True-Yapor-Phase cracking 

( 5p \ 

units at two of their plants.' ' They chose this 
type of unit because the process favors polymerization 
of light olefins thus increasing both the yield and 
the octane number of the finished gasoline. 

Russian investigators^ 5 ^ have experimented with 









' . ' ■ 

„ 


. 




* 




■ 


. . sn . '■ ■; • ' . <y - ' ' ... 

. 





. 










* 





1 



, 

. 




















59 


aluminum chloride cracking of fractions of the 
Fischer Tropsch products. The octane number of the 
20-50 C. fraction, which contains C 5 f s and Cg's, is 
said to be about 88; that of the 50-100°C. fraction, 
73; and the rating of the entire gasoline cut, 79. 

Since the synthesis gas is made as nearly sulfur 
free as possible and since practically no diolefins 
are formed in the synthesis raw Fischer Tropsch 
gasoline normally requires only an alkaline wash to 
remove organic acids. 

Diesel Oil Fraction - 

The Diesel oil obtained from the Fischer Tropsch 

synthesis has a boiling range of about 200 to 360°C., 

a specific gravity (at 20°C.) of 0.769, a hydrogen 

content of.15.2 percent, a heat of combustion of 

10,470 to 11,300 calories per gram, and a cetane 
(16) 

value of over 100, This material, because of its 
high heat of combustion and high cetane number, is 
suitable for blending with oils of lower ignitability. 
Typical German blends are said to have contained 
40-45 percent of Fischer Tropsch fraction and 55-60 
percent of either a petroleum gasoil or a fraction 
produced by distillation or hydrogenation of coal. 








60 


Table VI compares the compositions of a Fischer 
Tropsch fraction, a tar oil fraction (from, coal 
distillation), a blend of the two, and a typical 
petroleum gasoil. 

It is interesting to note that the diesel oil 
to be produced at the proposed Brownsville, Texas 
plant of Carthage Hydrocol, Inc. will have a gravity 
of about 58°A.P.I., a cetane number of 45-50, and a 
pour point below 0°F. ^^ 

Wax Fraction - 

The Fischer Tropsch product remaining after 
removal of the diesel oil and lighter fractions, 
consists of waxes of various melting points and 
molecular weights. A hard wax is also recovered from 
the catalyst by extraction. The wax yield and type 
of wax obtained is dependent upon the reaction 
conditions and the catalyst employed in the synthesis. 
Higher pressures favor wax production, and the use of 
ruthenium catalysts results in large yield of waxes 
which possess exceptionally high average molecular 
weights. The waxes produced using conventional cobalt 

catalysts have a melting point range from 48° - 115°G. 

(52) 

and molecular weights as high as 2000. 






' 






V 

■ 








■ 








1 














. 



















COMPARISON OF DIESEL FUELS 


61 . 














ux* 

1 

H 












0 

•H 

o- 

o 






o 




1 — 1 

O 

LO 

ft 






o 




o 

0 

CO 

i—1 

H 4 

02 

lO 

LO 

o 

to 

to 

rH 

O 

p 

$ 

# 

0 

CT> 

02 

02 

O 

LO. 

«s 

o 

«H 

LO 

ft o 

o 

t>H 

rH 

1 

LO 

• 

• 

00 

« 

4 

© 

ft 



ft 




o 

o 

rH 

o 

O 



ft 


•H 











0 


^ O 











ft 

lO 

o d 











d 

tO 

i— 11 — i 






O 





0 

CO 

H 0 

CO 

H 4 

O 

H 4 

o 

O 

o 

o 

O 


Pi 

• 

0 d 

in 

1 

O 

o 

o 

to 

to 

LO 

to 


Eh 

o 

>h d 

rH 


ID 

o 

f—1 

*N 

o 

O 


0 



Pi 




© 

4 

CO 


• 


P 

r-t 



Eh 




o 

o 

i—! 

o 

o 


ft 













K 













•ft 

ft 












ft 

0 


0 











ft 

03 

g £ 
P O 4 











d 

to 











0 

CO 

o d 

00 


O 


o 


to 

EN 

O 


p 

% 

P ft 

LO 

I 

O 

1 


1 

H 4 

CO 

to 


ft 

o 

PQ O 

rH 


LO 




•* 

4 



d 







O 


o 

o 



d> 











P ft 

o 

M 










d »H 

to 

o 






O 




^ O 

o 

d 

LO 

02 

O 

to 

o 

LO 






« 

ft 

to 

to 

o 

02 

CO 

CO 

to 

CO 

o 



1—1 

PQ 

CO 


LO 

4 

* 

1P1 


• 

02 








O 

o 

o 

. 02 

H 4 











H 



P ft! 












0 

o 












ft! 

0 

o 

P P 










o 

ft 

to 

0 d 






O 




0 

O 

CN 

ft 0 

o 

<1 

O 

to. 

o 

O 

o 

o 

«o 

•H 

P 

• 

ft »d 

03 

1 

02 

o 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

ft Eh 

o 

^ o 

H 


H 4 


4 

*» 

• 

% 








o 

o 

CO 

o 

o 











rH 

« 













ft 













rH 













\ 








© 

ft 





ft 


^R 

i 





O 



*SR 


ft 









♦ 





•s 








ft 

<v 


PQ 


ft 




t>5 


f*ft 


O 

d 



c 




ft 


1 

ft 



o 


«s 

'SR 

LSI 




•H 


• 


o 


0 

d 




t> 


-- 

ft 

M 

p 



fs 

0 

p 



d 



C 

© 

d 


rH 

ft 

FQ 

0 



Pi 


ft 

*> 

ft 

o 


d 

rH 

ft 



O 


d 

ft 

d 


|> 

d 

d 






•H 

d 

H 

d 

'SR 


ft 

•H 

H 



o 


O 

•H 


o 


ft 

ft 


ft 



•H 


ft 

C 

tjO 

0 


d 

0 

0 



ft 



ft 

d 

ft 

P 

0 


i —i 

0 



•H 

P 

ft! 


•H 

d 

d 

ft 


ft 

d 



o 

O 

0 

P 

rH 

P 

ft 


ft 

d 

d 



0 

rH 

d 

d 

•H 

d 

rH 

te; 

p 

ft 

ft 



ft 

O 

i —! 

o 

x o 

c 

d 

O 

d 

o 

0 



CO 

o 

ft 

ft 

PQ 

o 

m 

ft 

ft 

fti 

o 















I 





} 
























62 


With ruthenium catalysts, as much as 66 percent of 

the total product may consist of solid paraffins. 

The waxes can he separated into soft paraffin, slab 

paraffin, and hard paraffin. The Germans converted 

most of the softer waxes to fatty acids which were 

(53 ) 

used in the production of soaps and edible fats. 

The hard wax was sold for use in ceresin. 

Residual Gas - 

The residual gas from the Fischer Tropsch 
synthesis consists mainly of methane, unconverted 
synthesis gas, carbon dioxide, nitrogen and. also 
contains small amounts of ethane and ethylene. The 
relative proportions of these individual gases vary 
considerably with the type of operation and the 
reaction conditions. The fact that from 10-15 percent 
of the synthesis gas is converted to methane in the 
processmakes it advisable to utilize the methane 
thus produced for as thermally useful a purpose as 
is possible. The gas works of the city of Leipzig, 
Germany, was installing a Fischer Tropsch plant with 
the idea in mind of using the residual gas from the 
process to mix with coke-oven gas and to use the 
mixture as a source of heat for the city.^ 58 ^ 
































% 







.. 













. 

■ 











63. 

The resultant city gas had a heating value of 
about 450 B.T.U. per cubic foot. 

Lubricant s - 

The primary product of the Fischer Tropsch 
synthesis does not contain any lubricating oil 
fractions but it does contain large amounts of olefins, 
which can be readily polymerized to yield good 
lubricating oil. Lubricants have been produced in 
general from Fischer Tropsch products by one or 
more of the following types of synthesis: 

(1) polymerization of the lower olefins, 
olefins in the middle oil fractions, 
olefins produced by the cracking of 
Fischer Tropsch wax, or olefins produced 
by the halogenation of paraffins and 
subsequent dehalogenation; 

(2) alkylation of - aromatics with long-chain 
Fischer Tropsch olefins; 

(3) chlorination of Fischer Tropsch wax or 
heavy oils, followed by direct conden¬ 
sation or the alkylation of aromatics 

• with the long-chain chlorides; 

(4} treatment of heavy fractions with a silent 
electrical discharge. 







. 

































- 
























64 


Of these the direct catalytic polymerization of the 
olefins produced in the synthesis has received most 
attention. 

Fischer Tropsch lubricating oils were greatly 
improved in Germany during the war. The best stock 
for lubricating oil was reportedly obtained by 

o 

cracking primary products boiling between 220 - 320 G. 

or wax with, a melting point below 30°C. Lubricating 

oil yields of 55 percent were obtained from the 

cracked product and had a viscosity of about 325 

o 

Saybolt Universal Seconds at 50 C. 

( 59 ) 

Atwell and Schroeder have described a 
synthetic lubricating oil plant at Homberg. Fischer 
Tropsch middle oil was chlorinated, then reacted 
with naphthalene in the presence of a Fischer 
Tropsch naphtha, fraction and a. small amount of 
either metallic aluminum or aluminum chloride 
catalyst. The product gave, on distillation, 
spindle oil and turbine oil in the overhead and 
cylinder stock as bottoms. 

Imperial Chemical Industries, Ltd., has 
several patents covering the synthesis of 
lubricating oil from the Fischer Tropsch product 
by chlorination of the high boiling fraction and 
















. 











. 












- 









* 





























' 

. 





* ' 

















65 


of paraffin wax followed by condensation with 
aromatic hydrocarbons using aluminum chloride as 
catalyst. 

The I.G. Farbenindustrie A.G. has patented a 

process for lubricating oil production, in which a 

fraction boiling between 170 and 250°C. is subjected 

to a high-frequency silent electrical discharge at, 

(62) 

for example, 7000 volts and 1000 cycles. 

The Fischer Tropsch plant at Harnes, France, 
contained a pilot plant which prepared lubricants 
by the polymerization of a Fischer Tropsch gasoline 
containing 50 percent olefins. The gasoline was 
produced by lowering the noimal hydrogen to carbon 
monoxide ratio from 2 : 1 to 1 : 1 and by raising 

the reaction temperature. The quality of the oils 

. - (60) 
obtained was not very good. 

Although the latest German data may not have 
answered all the questions in regard to the quality 
of Fischer Tropsch based lubricants, it may be said, 
nevertheless, that satisfactory lubricants can be 
produced by several different methods from the 
Fischer Tropsch primary products produced by normal 
Fischer Tropsch processes. 










, .< 


J 

, 

















. 


.. 






, 









. 

. 















' 





66 


BY-PRODUCTS - 

The Fischer Tropsch process yields primary 
products which serve as starting materials for 
chemical synthesis. In general, the methods of 
chemical synthesis used in converting Fischer 
Tropsch products into other substances are.much the 
same as those used for the preparation of chemicals 
from petroleum. The actual products, however, 
differ markedly, for the Germans concentrated 
upon the synthesis of products which were usually 
of natural origin and were not available in Germany 
in sufficient quantities. 

Fatty Acids - 

Since 1936 there has been a rapid development, 
particularly in Germany, of the art of production 
of fatty acids by the oxidation of the paraffin 
wax produced in the Fischer Tropsch synthesis, 

Storch reports^that, while the oxidation of 
paraffins is strongly exothermic, the process can be 
controlled to yield chiefly monocarbonylic acids. 
Operating conditions are 140 to 160°G., one cubic 
meter of air per kilogram of ?jax, and the presence 
of catalysts such as manganese and other metal salts 












. 

; 

- 




' 






















- 


- 

- " i f •, 


























67 


of fatty acids. 

One OPB reportdescribes the operation of one 
of the German plants producing fatty acids. This 
plant had a capacity of 40,000 tons per year. The 
process consisted of the air oxidation of Fischer 
Tropsch paraffin to in an aqueous potassium per¬ 
manganate solution. Upon completion of the oxidation, 
a sequence of washing, neutralizing, saponifying, 
heating, distilling, and acid hydrolysis steps, 
followed by vacuum distillation, gives fatty acids 
ranging from ~ C 9/ , , The acids are 

recovered from the effluent gases by cooling and 
absorption in water. The C 5 - C^q acids, obtained 
as the first product of the vacuum distillation, 
are further distilled into C 5 - C^, 0^ - Cg, and 
Cg - fractions. The O^q - fraction, also 
separated by vacuum distillation, is used directly 
in the manufacture of soaps and edible fats. The 
c 18 “ c 24 ac ^ s are a 3- so removed by vacuum distill¬ 
ation and have been used in greases, as softening 
agents for leather and as lubricants for plastic 
molding. 

Edible Fats - 

Large quantities of edible fats have been produced 




• , 



5 - ' • 

' . 
















. 








- 

■ 




































■ 









68 


in Germany by the saponification with glycerine of 
selected Fischer Tropsch fatty acids. These fats 
contain acids of both odd and even numbers of 
carbon atoms. About 150 tons of these edible fats 
were produced monthly at Witten.^ 


10 


C fatty acids 

18 


Soaps and Detergents - 

Soaps were produced in very large quantities 
from Fischer Tropsch fatty acids but even with 
only 30 percent Fischer Tropsch soap in the final 
product, the characteristic Fischer Tropsch odor 
was still noticeable. The C. 
were used in soap manufacture, the proce'ss being 
very similar to the standard methods of making 
soap from natural fatty acids. 

With regard to synthetic detergents, large 

quantities of sulfonic esters were produced from the 

long-chain alcohols which were prepared from 

Fischer Tropsch olefins. One German synthetic 

detergent plant was using Fischer Tropsch gasoil 
o 


of 230 - 273 G. boiling range as the starting 
material.^The gasoil was first hydrogenated and 
then treated with sulfur dioxide and chlorine in the 
presence of ultra-violet light. The product 








. 

-- 
























« 











• . 

* 














69 


contained 30 percent unreacted oil and about 70 
percent of sulfonyl chlorides. Quantities of this 
sulfonyl chloride soap substitute were prepared 
in the form of the sodium alkyl sulfonate for use ' 
in the preparation of polyvinyl chloride emulsions. 

It has been reported that this detergent was of 

/ g g \ 

inferior quality. 

A great deal of work was done on emulsifiers 
by the Germans. These emulsifiers had great metal 
affinity and contained a rust-preventing polor 
group and so were used almost entirely as cutting 
oils and drawing compounds.^ • 

Greases - 

Greases were also produced in appreciable 
quantities from soaps of oxidized paraffins and from 
either synthetic or natural oils. I’he C^g- C OA fatty 
acids from the oxidation of Fischer Tropsch paraffin 
wax have found application in greases as sodium, 
calcium and lithium soaps. The zinc, magnesium, 
and calcium soaps have also been used as lubricants 
for plastic molding. 

Alcohols - 

Several methods have been developed in Germany 










































- 








■ 























70 


for the production of alcohols in connection with 
the Fischer Tropsch process. The plant at Moers, 
Germany absorbed olefins in sulfuric acid and 
after separation hydrolyzed the product for the 
direct production of alcohol. This was used . 

particularly for the preparation of propyl and butyl 
alcohols. Another process for the production of 
alcohol which was described as in a laboratory 
state involved a direct synthesis from water and 
olefins. A catalyst consisting of tungsten oxide 
supported on silica gel was used. 

The ”0X0" Process - 

In addition to those alcohols produced by the 
various conventional methods the Germans were 
preparing alcohols in a Huhrchemie plant by the 
”0X0” process. This process involves the. treatment 
with carbon monoxide and hydrogen of such olefins 

o 

as a Fischer Tropsch C ll- °17 fraction at 135 - 150 C. 
and 150 - 200 atmospheres pressure over a cobalt 
containing regular Fischer Tropsch synthesis catalyst, 

followed by reduction of the resulting aldehydes at 

o (67) 

180 C. under 150 atmospheres over similar catalysts. 

The primary use of the alcohols produced by the 0X0 

process was for the manufacture of sulfonic ester 















71 . 


detergents. It is stated that this process can be 
used for the production of alcohols from °2 t0 °20’ 
although it is largely applied in the range to 



Iso-Synthesis Reaction - 

The synthesis of iso-paraffins has been 

accomplished only on a laboratory scale but is of 

primary interest in offering means for producing fuel 

of a good octane rating by the Fischer Tropsch 

process. The process consists of reacting synthesis 

gas (1 H s : 1.2 CO) over catalyst consisting of 

zinc oxide, aluminum oxide, thorium oxide, or mix- 

o 

tures. of the three at temperatures of about 400 C. 

(7) 

and pressures of about 500 atmospheres. The C A and 
fractions of the reaction product generally 
contain over 90 percent of isocompounds* 

Aromatization Reaction - 

Extensive experimentation has been carried out 
in the laboratories for the synthesis of aromatics 
in the range from 475° to 500°C. at elevated 
pressures. A variety of catalysts consisting of 
chromium, molybdenum, and thorium oxides have been 
tried. The yield of liquid products was very low, 





















































72 


but it did contain about 50 percent aromatics, the 
remainder being largely naphthenes, 

Partly because the ordinary synthesis yields 
reaction products in which fuel-range hydrocarbons 
predominate, and partly because national programs 
for'self-sufficiency in petroleum have dictated such 
a course, widespread interest in the Fischer Tropsch 
process has centred around its ability to produce 
gasoline, diesel fuel, and lubricants. However, 
the synthetic chemical possibilities inherent in 
the process give it a significance much greater 
than that which it would possess if it produced 
only substitutes for petroleum. Thus, future 
developments may find the Fischer Tropsch process 
being conducted primarily for one or more of the 
following purposes: 

(1) to produce maximum quantities of 
petroleum substitutes, with synthetic 
chemicals as by-products; 

(2) to yield large quantities of both 
petroleum substitutes and synthetic 
chemicals; 

(3) to produce mainly specialty synthetic 




73. 

chemicals, with fuels and lubricants 
in the role of by-products. 

The economic forces of supply and demand, in addition 
to the effect of changing technology, will dictate 
the future course of development. 

ECONOMICS - 

The future development of the Fischer Tropsch 
process in North America depends on many complex 
variables, German operations have shown that the 
Fischer Tropsch synthesis is capable of producing 
many or all of the many present day petroleum products 
in full-scale industrial operations. The German 
industry has, however, been developed under very 
exceptional conditions. This development was 
carried out under government subsidy and the 
products were not required to compete with such 
low priced petroleum products as are produced in 
North America. Whether or not the Fischer Tropsch 
synthesis will be extensively applied in this country, 
depends as much on economic factors as it does on 
technical progress. Research and development work 
on the Fischer Tropsch synthesis are justified for 
two main reasons: 












■ 



0 






























74 


(1) domestic security; 

(3) 

(2) potential profitability. 

The Second World War has shown that any future 
war might put such a strain on our petroleum 
reserves that we might become vulnerable because 
of a deficiency in petroleum fuels. Many inves¬ 
tigators feel that the cost of adequate preparation 
for war is an inexpensive insurance policy against 
war and if war is unavoidable a vital investment 
has been made. 

The potential profitability of the Fischer 
Tropsch process depends on the exhaustibility of 
our own petroleum resources and the possibility of 
using imported products. As previously pointed out, 
there is no cause for serious concern about a 
petroleum shortage in the next twenty-five to 
fifty years, but increasing petroleum prices are . 
likely to occur due to increasing exploration costs 
per barrel of crude oil discovered in this country, 
and this may make it possible to introduce synthetic 
gasoline profitably. On the other hand, foreign 
crudes may restrict these price advances for some 
time since the Western Hemisphere is far worse off 
than- the rest of the world as far as petroleum 




75 . 


reserves are concerned. 

The Fischer Tropsch products will also have to 
compete with other synthetic fuels which are likely 
to he derived from oil shale and tar sands and from 
coal by carbonization and hydrogenation. 

Oil shales are rock from which petroleum like 
oils may be derived by heating. This oil c^n be 
treated by standard refinery methods to yield a 
satisfactory motor fuel. Shale oil is thus the 
simplest,most obvious and most easily usable sub¬ 
stitute for natural petroleum. It has not come Into 
use because the added cost of separating the oil 
from the shale has made the resulting fuel too costly 
but the natural economic results following a 
diminishing petroleum supply, or future technical 
development may make shale oil a common fuel. The 
United States has large oil shale deposits which 
constitute a reserve of five times the present 
petroleum reserves. 

Oils may also be obtained from tar sands and an 
economical process of deriving them will make possible 
the utilization of the estimated 250 billion barrels 
of oil in the Canadian tar sands. 

Motor fuel may be made from coal by carbonization 












* 









< 










. 

' 


















76 


and hydrogenation as well as by the Fischer 
Tropsch synthesis. In the carbonization of coal 
to produce coke, liquid hydrocarbons are produced 
which can be used as such or refined to produce a 
satisfactory motor fuel. These hydrocarbons are 
normally obtained in small quantities but low 
temperature carbonization of the coal gives 
considerably better yields. 

The hydrogenation of coal to produce liquid 
fuels, called the Bergius process, has been widely 
investigated and used in Germany and England, By 
treating coal with hydrogen at one hundred 
atmospheres at 350-400°C.., 85$ of the organic content 
of the coal is converted to oils and gas of good 
quality. 

Many estimates have been made regarding the 
cost of synthetic gasoline produced by the Fischer 
Tropsch synthesis using natural gas or coal as 
the initial raw material. The competitive position 
of natural gas with respect to coal as a raw 
material for the Fischer Tropsch type process in 
the United States depends upon the relative 
economics, efficiencies of utilization and over¬ 
air reserves of natural gas and coal available. 









77 


Costs for gasoline as low as five cents per 

gallon have appeared in the literature, based on 

ten percent return on investment and assuming 

certain favorable local conditions. There is 

general agreement that gasoline from dry natural 

gas as a starting material is cheaper to produce 

than when coal is used as the raw material. The 

raw material cost alone of coal per barrel of 

gasoline would probably average somewhat greater 

than the cost of natural gas. With natural gas 

at five cents per thousand cubic feet its cost 

per barrel of gasoline produced (10,450 cu. ft. 

per barrel) is approximately $0.52. To compare 

favorably with this cost, the price of coal per 

ton would have to be about $0.77 on the basis of 

1360 lbs. of coal per barrel of gasoline 

produced. With natural gas at ten cents per 

1000 cu. ft. the equivalent price of coal would 

be $1.54 per ton. However, on the basis of 

conservative published estimates, the synthesis 

process utilizing natural gas will not be able 

to compete with present refinery methods utilizing 

crude petroleum until the price of crude reaches 

( 2 ) 

about $1.75 to $2.00 per barrel. 




















■ 


_ 

* 


■ 






- 








’ 








78. 

Although conversion of natural gas may he 
important from the standpoint of augmenting raw 
materials for liquid fuel manufacture at costs 
not far from present costs, it cannot he 
considered an ultimate solution to the question. 

In short, utilization of natural gas for hydro¬ 
carbon synthesis represents an "intermediate" 
hut important process and as such has a greater 
immediate interest than coal. 





79 


APPARATUS 

A flow diagram of the apparatus is shown in 
Figure 1. The different parts of the equipment 
have been numbered as follows: 

(1) Water seal type gasholder with a capacity 
of 10 cubic feet for make-up gas. 

(2) Two - 220 volt multiple electric furnaces 
containing a nickel catalyst at 1000°C. 

This catalyst is prepared by soaking 
porcelain chips (retained between 8 and 
10 mesh screens) in a saturated solution 
of nickel nitrate for 24 hours. The 
chips which are now saturated with nickel 
nitrate are heated in a nickel crucible 
and HOg is driven off. The chips (coated 
with nickel oxide) are charged to the 
furnace and the oxide is reduced by hydrogen 

' at 1000°0. 

(5) Caustic scrubbers using a solution of 360 
grams of potassium hydroxide made up to 
a litre with water. 

(4) Water seal type gasholder with a capacity 
of 15 cubic feet for synthesis gas. 












Figure X* FLOW DIAGRAM OF TESTING UNIT 

























































































































(5) 

( 6 ) 


80 


Single acting compressor, 

A standard compressed air receiver for 
high pressure synthesis gas storage. 

The tank has a diameter of 15 inches, 
a height of 5 feet, and a capacity of • 

6 cubic feet, 

(7) A copper-zinc oxide purifier, 2 inches 
in diameter and 24 inches long, 

(8) An alumina drier, 2 inches in diameter 
and 24 inches long, 

(9) An automatically controlled needle valve. 

(10) An oil seal type gasholder with a capacity 
of two cubic feet which maintains a 
constant pressure on the synthesis gas 
fed to the converters, 

(11) Reaction chamber of the converter contain¬ 
ing the catalyst column. 

'(12) Heating jacket containing electrical 

heating coil and heating fluid (tetralin). 

(15) Water-cooled reflux condenser. 

(14) Catch-pot for catching any of the heating 
fluid which distils over. 

(15) Class catch-pot for collecting the synthesis 
products. 




» 














' 

































‘ 















* ■ 

. 


' 







81 


(16) Copper coil and glass catch-pot 
immersed in an ice bath. This is used 
to condense some of the low boiling 
components. 

(17) Charcoal adsorbers, lj inches in diameter 
and 36 inches long. These are used to 
collect the more volatile products, 

(18) Continuous gravity type gas sampler 
containing 10$ sodium sulfate and 10$ 
sulfuric acid as the confining fluid, 

(19) A precision wet test meter for measuring 
the volume of residue gas, 

(20) Furnace containing metallic copper at 

o 

250 - 300 0. for purifying hydrogen used 
for reduction, reactivation, etc. 

(21) Activated charcoal scrubber for further 
purification of the hydrogen. 

The electrical circuit for the testing unit 
is shown in Figure 2. The various parts of the 
circuit are numbered as follows:- 

(A) Merriam 3-contact manometer used for 
flow control in high pressure work. 

(F) 1/50 H,P. reduction gear motor, induction 

ty;pe, delivering 29 r.p.m. on N the output shaft. 




























Figure 'Z - (a) Electric .1 circuit for flow control, 
(b) electrical heating circuit. 













































































/ 4 





82 


This reversing motor opens and closes the valve 
admitting synthesis gas to the testing unit. 

(C) 3 gang, 6 pole rotary switch feeding 

the motor circuit. Only three poles are used, each 
alternate pole being open. In two of these three 
switch positions, the motor is operated manually 
to either open or close the valve. In the third 
position the motor is operated by automatic control. 

(D) Reversing relay. 

(2) Reversing relay. 

The relays D and E and the manometer A are used for 
automatic flow control. These reversing relays are 
connected such that the circuit through one actuates 
the field of the other. Thus when one is opened, 
the other is necessarily closed and. short circuits 
are prevented. A fuse further protects the motor 
and circuit. 

(F) Microswitch. This microswitch is operated 
by the flow control valve and can be hooked into either 
of two circuits. In one circuit it can be made to ring 
an alarm bell H when the valve Is fully opened or 
closed. The motor must then be shut off manually. 

In the second circuit it is operated by the valve and 




















* 




■ 














• 















































• 














- 









, 






. 

* 




















83 


shuts off the motor itself instead of ringing the 
alarm bell. 

(G) 7j watt diamond lamp which is operated 
when the circuit is complete. 

(O) Microswitch. 

(P) Microswitch. 

(Q,) Microswitch. 

Microswitches 0, P and Q, are used in place of 
the manometer A when the unit is operated at 
atmospheric pressure. There operation is discussed 
a later section. 

The heating circuit (b) is used to control 
the catalyst temperature. 

(K) 20 ohm. resistance coil supplying heat 
to liquid in the heating jacket. 

(L) Slide wire rheostat which'is operated 
manually to control the heat input to the jacket. 

(M) Thermal switch which operates an alarm 
bell when the vapour from the heating jacket is 
not condensed completely in the condenser, 

(N) 7-|- watt Diamond lamp which gives a visual 
check on the heating circuit. 

A brief discussion of the general flow diagram 
will afford an overall picture of the whole process. 












- 




* 



























84 


Methane from a high pressure storage tank is 
mixed with oxygen in a ratio of 2 - methane to 1 - 
oxygen and passed into gasholder (1). The mixed 
gases are passed at a controlled rate over the 
nickel catalyst in the electric furnace (2). Here 
the conversion into synthesis gas occurs providing 
a carbon monoxide-hydrogen mixture containing 2 - CO 
to 1 - H p. Impurities (HpS and mercaptans) are 
removed from the synthesis gas by the caustic 
scrubbers (3) and the purified gas passes into 
gasholder (4). This gas is compressed to 80 pounds 
per square inch by the compressor (5) and is stored 
in the high pressure storage tank (6), Before going 
to the converters, the synthesis gas passes through 
the purifiers (7, 8), through the automatically 
controlled needle-valve (9) and into the constant 
pressure regulator (10)* 

The gasometer (10) gives a constant pressure 
across a flowmeter thus giving constant flow. This 
pressure is controlled by a series of weights on the 
gasometer. When the unit is In operation, gas is 
removed from the holder and is replaced by gas from 
the high pressure storage tank. The valve (9) is 
operated by the position of the gasometer by means of 

























- 














' 

























85 . 


an electrical circuit. This electrical circuit 
controlling the valve is a modification of the one 
described by Donald and Q,uon.^ 0 ^ lith reference to 
Figure 2, the three micro-switches 0, P, and Q, have 
been added to the circuit. These switches take .the 
place of the mercury manometer which is still part 
of the unit, however, and can be used for high 
pressure testing. The reversing•motor B operates a 
rising stem type needle valve which admits gas ‘to the 
tank. The motor circuit can be completed by closing 
micro-switches P and q or by opening F and closing 0. 
"Then P and q are closed, the valve will open and when 
F is opened and 0 is closed’the valve will close. 

Then the tank drops to a certain level switches P 
and Q, are closed and the valve opens admitting gas 
to the tank. The rise of the valve stem has, in the 
meantime opened micro-switch F and in doing so has 
completed this circuit. The incoming gas raises the 
tank until the switches P and q are opened. This 
shuts off the motor but leaves the valve partially 
open. The circuit containing P and q is now broken 
but the circuit containing F and 0 is still partially 
completed because micro-switch F was opened by the 






. 

■ 

■ 

- 










86 


rise of the valve stem. The tank continues to rise 
and when it has reached a certain level it closes 
switch 0. This completes the motor circuit 
containing F and 0 and the valve begins to close. 
When the valve reaches the closed position,switch 
F is closed thus breaking the motor circuit. As 
gas is used and the tank falls, switch 0 is opened. 
This completely breaks the motor circuit. When 
the tank reaches its lower limit, switches P and Q, 
are again closed, completing the motor circuit, 
and the cycle is repeated. The gasometer gave very 
good service, maintaining very steady flows to the 
units and operating on as low as 20 pounds pressure 
in the high pressure tank. 

The gas passes from the pressure regulator into 
a header common to all the units and then into the 
reaction chamber of the converter (11) containing 
a column of catalyst. The catalyst bed (approx¬ 
imately 16 inches in length) is supported inside 
a 1/2 inch iron pipe. The catalyst temperature 

is held constant by a liquid boiling at constant 

. f 1° V 

pressure m a jacket surrounding the reactor v ; 

This outer jacket forms part of a closed system • 













87 


which also includes the water cooled reflux 
condenser (13) and the catch-pot (14). The 
temperature of the boiling liquid is changed by 
varying the pressure of an inert gas (methane) 
in this system* 

The liquid and solid products of the synthesis 
are collected in two pots (15,16) while the gaseous 
products are adsorbed in the charcoal scrubbers 
(17). The volume of the residue gases is measured, 
by'a Precision Wet Test Meter (19). Samples of 
the off gases are taken by the continuous gas 
sampler (18), 

For purposes of reduction and reactivation, 
of the catalyst, and for the maintenance of a 
reducing atmosphere over the catalyst during TT shut- 
downs", a hydrogen supply is included in the flow 
sheet. Hydrogen from a high pressure storage 
cylinder is passed over metallic copper at 250 - 
300°C. in the furnace (20) to remove any oxygen and 
through the charcoal scrubber (21) to remove any 
high molecular weight gases. 

For high pressure work automatic flow control 
is obtained by means of a Merriam 3-contact manometer 



- 


- 


, 













. 


, 








' 







88 


rather than by the gasometer (10). The gas then 
flows from the high pressure storage tank to the 
header, through the manometer and into the reaction 
chamber of the converter. Also for high pressure 
work the glass catch-pots (15,16) are replaced by 
metal pots. Pressure is maintained on the units 
by a Cash back-pressure control valve located 
between the catch-pots and the charcoal scrubbers. 

PROCEDURE AND RESULTS 

During the period May, 1946 to April, 1947, 
eight catalysts were tested-. 

The testing of catalysts number 1, 2, 3, 4, 

U.S. Bureau of Mines 89H, and a catalyst (number 9), 
prepared by 1. D. LaZerte, S. Loshaek and’ D. Scott 
was carried out with a synthesis gas having the 
following average composition:- 

C0 2 - 2.61 

H p - 61.20 (0g content not recorded) 

CO - 28.60 
Inerts 7*59 

Catalyst number 6 and the two samples of catalyst 
number^ 7 were tested with a synthesis gas of the 
following average composition:- 








. 

•; . 

• . ' - 
























, 

, 

- 











- 






. 







































89 


C0 o - 4.6 

Cj 

0 2 - 0.38 

H 0 - 56.5 

C+j 

CO - 24.9 

Inerts 13.32 

Analysis of the synthesis gas before and 
after the Conner zinc oxide scrubber indicates 
that the scrubber has a detrimental effect on 
the gas composition. The above analyses give the 
composition of the gas after the copper zinc oxide 
scrubber. Analysis of the gas before this scrubber 
shows a gas with an average composition of:- 


COg _ 0.61# 

0 2 - 0.30 

H 2 - 63.85 

CO - 30.80 

Inerts - 4.44 


The authors recommend that In future testing 
this scrubber be removed. One test has been run 
with the scrubber by-passed and very satisfactory 
yields have been obtained. The scrubber does not 
reduce the oxygen content of the gas as intended 












90 . 


and this oxygen has not apparently decreased the 
activity of the catalysts. 

ANALYTICAL PROCEDURE - 

The followi.ng tests were carried out on the 
product obtained: 

(1) Distillation; 

(2) Refractive Index; 

(3) Aniline point; 

(4) Ceric nitrate test for alcohols; 

(5) 2, 4 dinitrophenylhydrazine test for 
■ aldehydes and ketones; 

(6) Densities. 

Distillation of the hydrocarbon fraction was 

carried out following A.S.T.M. specifications. 

A 40 c.c. sample was used in the distillation with 

temperature readings being taken for every 5 c.c. T s 

of product distilled. The distillations were 

carried out till a temperature of approximately 
o 

270 C. was reached. Above this temperature waxes 
solidified in the condenser. 

The refractive index of the product was 
determined using the Abbe refractometer, 









;N' 

















91 


The aniline points were ruh following A.S.T.M. 

Specifications. A.S.T.M. Aniline Point Thermometers 

were not available and a hand stirrer was used 

instead of the motor driven type recommended* 

Ceric nitrate tests for alcohols were carried 

out following the procedure outlined by Shriner 
(74) 

and Fuson. 

2, 4 dinitrophenylhydrazine tests for 
aldehydes and ketones were also carried out following 
the Shriner and Fuson procedure. 

The density of the various fractions of the. 
product were determined using the tfestphal Balance 
at 25°C. 

CATALYSTS - 

Catalyst #1. - 

This catalyst was promoted by thorium; has the 
composition by weight of 82$ CoO, 18$ ThO^ and is 
supported by Filter Cell carrier in weight equal 

to the weight of the oxides. The catalyst was made 

(71) 

by the Bureau of Mines method, ground to pass a 
48 mesh screen and then pelleted with five percent 
graphite. 

This catalyst ?ras reduced by the procedure 









* ■ w.. . 

* 






, 



















, 



















recommended by the United States Bureau of Mines. 
Hydrogen at a space velocity of 20-25/hr. (based 
on the converter volume when empty) was passed 
over the catalyst while the catalyst temperature 
was raised gradually over a period of twenty 
hours to 360°C. - 380°C. The temperature was 
held in this range for twenty-four hours and then 
gradually reduced at a rate of fifteen degrees 
an hour to 140°C. - 150°C. 

The reduced catalyst was then conditioned, by 
passing synthesis gas over it at a space velocity 
of one hundred and the temperature was raised 
slowly from 140°C. - 150°C. to the operating 
temperature of 175°0. - 195°C. over a period of 
approximately twenty-four hours. Synthesis was 
then started and twelve test runs were made 
on the catalyst covering a period of 1021*25 hours. 
The individual tests were conducted over a six 
day period in the following manner. After each 
test the catalysts were given a low temperature* 
activation with hydrogen at a temperature approx¬ 
imately twenty.degrees above the operating temp¬ 
erature. After the activation the temperature was 
left at the activation level, the hydrogen flow 








95 


was reduced to a minimum, and the catalyst was left 

in this condition over the weekend. At the start of 

the test on Monday morning the temperature was lowered 

gradually to approximately twenty degrees below the 

operating temperature, the hydrogen shut off and . 

synthesis gas admitted at the proper rate of flow. 

The temperature was then raised slowly to the 

operating temperature over a period of approximately 

six hours. After synthesis had started, the 

temperature was raised very gradually during the test 

to maintain a good contraction. At the end of the 

test the catalyst was again given a low temperature 

activation and left under hydrogen until the next 

test was started. At the end of the seventh test 

after 685.75 hours of synthesis the activity of the 

catalyst had fallen off to such an extent that a 

high temperature rereduction was necessary. The 

rereduction was carried out by passing hydrogen over 

the catalyst at a space velocity of 350 to 400 

while the temperature was raised gradually to 570°C, 
o 

- 400 C., held here for three hours and then reduced 
o o 

slowly to 140 0. - 150 C. under a slow stream of 
hydrogen.gas. The-catalyst was then conditioned as 
before and synthesis started again. 













94 . 


The next four tests were made at a reduced 
space velocity. The literature indicates in many 
places that increased yields are obtained when lower 
space velocities are used. On these tests cutting 
the space velocity in half had no apparent effect 
on the yield. The rereduction increased the 
activity of the catalyst to some extent as can be 
seen from Table VII, 


TABLE VII 

ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST NO, 1. 


Run 

No, of 
Hrs, 

Av. 

Temp. 

°0. 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

fo 

Snace 

Vel. 

Yield 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1. 

95.50 

195 

77.1 

197.0 

49.1 

2. 

100.S5 

198 

76.7 

194.0 

54.3 

3, 

110.00 

184 

71,S 

81.6 

44.2 

4. 

84.00 

191 

72,5 

116.0 

37.3 

5. 

95.00 

191 

60.9 

95.0 

34.4 

6. 

101.00 

189 

44,3 

94.2 

4.28 

7. 

104.00 

17 S 

S3.4 

106.6 

8,60 

8, 

R E R E D 

U C T I 0 

N 



9. 

74.50 

154 

- 

58.1 

41.50 

10. 

109.00 

175 

36.0 

68.8 

- 

11. 

59.00 

171 

40.1 

68.3 

12.70 

IS. 

89.00 

174 

34.6 

70.5 

- 


After the 

rereduction of the ca 

talyst, 

the 

activity dropped 

off very 

rapidly and 

at the 

end of 





















95 . 

test No. 12 the catalyst was taken off stream. 

The analysis of the product from Catalyst 
No. 1 is shown in the following tables:- 


Distillation of 



Fraction of Product 


O j. 

Temperature C . Volume % 

122 0 

165 12.5 

189 25 

209 37.5 

233 50 

256 62.5 

above 280 70 

no distillate. 


Volume percent distilling below 96°C. ~ 4$ 


Density of Hydrocarbon fraction ..... 0,7631 

Density of Aqueous fraction ......... 1.0056 

Aniline point ..... 87° 

Refractive Index.. 1.4257 

Ceric Nitrate test ....very weak 

2, 4 Dinitrophenylhydrazine ......... very weak 








































































































































































































































































































































































































































96 


Average analysis of Residue Gas 


co 2 

7.75 

H 2 

- 37.00 

CO 

- 10.45 

G 2 H 6 

- 24.30 

ch 4 

8.60 


- 15.40 


Catalyst #9, - 

Tests were made on a catalyst prepared in 1945 "by 

J. D. LaZerte, S. Loshaek, and D. S. Scott. This 

catalyst was made by the United States Bureau of Mines 
(71) 

Procedure 'and contained Co, ThO p and kieselguhr 
(Filter Cell) in the ratio 82 : 18 : 100. After 
"being ground to pass a 48 mesh screen and "being 
pelleted with five percent graphite the catalyst 
was charged to the test unit. 

The catalyst was reduced "by the United States 
Bureau of Mines procedure in the same manner as 
catalyst number one. The reduction was also carried 
out in the same manner as that used for catalyst 
number one. Twelve tests were made on this 
catalyst over a period, of 1039.75 hours. The 
results of these tests are shown in Table VIII. 











97 . 


TAB L E VIII 


ACTIVITY TEST 


ON CATALYST #9. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av. 

Tgmp. 

C . 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

% 

Space 

Yel. 

Yield 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1 . 

48.5 

166 

45.9 

177 

, , 

o 

95.5 

192 

74.0 

19 2 

56.4 

3. 

100.25 

197 

71.9 

186 

65.0 

4. 

84.0 

190 

66.4 

108 

78.7 

5. 

95.0 

196 

67.6 

91 

58.6 

6. 

119.0 

199 

53.2 

99.9 

27.0 

7. 

104.0 

176 

27.7 

•99.0 

17.1 

8. 

74.5 

162 

- 

53.6 

33.6 

9. 

62.0 

169 

- 

77.0 

11.1 

10. 

109.0 

177 

47.0 

82.9 

19.4 

11. 

59.0 

175 

52.6 

80.0 

28.6 

12. 

89.0 

176 

46.4 

77.0 



At the end of the seventh test the. catalyst was 
rereduced to try and increase its activity. The 
rereduction apparently did revivify the catalyst to 
some extent but the activity quickly dropped off 
again and the catalyst was withdrawn from the test 
unit after the twelfth test. * 

The analysis of the product from this catalyst 
is shown in the following tables. 






















98 


Distillation of Hydrocarbon Fractio n of Product 


Temperature °C. 

Volume fo 

140 

0 

178 

12.5 

202 

25.0 

228 

37.5 

251 

50.0 

280 

57.5 

Distillation of Aqueous Fraction of Product 

Volume percent distilling below 96 

°c. = z% 

Density of Hydrocarbon Fraction .. 

. 0.7665 

Density of Aqueous Fraction ...... 


Aniline point ....... 

..... 88 

Refractive Index ... 


Ceric nitrate test 


2, 4 dinitrbrhenylyhydrazine . 


Average Composition of Res: 

idual Gas 


CO 


2 

Ho 


CO 


4.75 

- 43.40 

- 13.40 


CH 4 - 21.10 

GgHg - 4.48 


N ? - 11.80 





































































































































































































































































































































































































































































99 


United States Bureau of Mines 
Catalyst No* 89H, _ 

This catalyst obtained from the United States 

Bureau of Mines has the composition Co : ThOg : MgO : 

Kieselguhr - 100 : 6 : 12 : 200 parts by weight. 

This sample was reduced, conditioned and treated in 

the same manner as catalyst number 1. 

The test results are shown in Table IK, 


TABLE _IK 

ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #89H. 


Run 

No, of 
Hrs, 

Ay, 

Temp. 

°c. 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

Snace 

• Vel* 

Yield 
Liquid 
Hydrocarbon: 
Gms/Cu.M* ‘ 

1. 

110 

180 

84.4 

81*2 

59.8 

2, 

119 

180 

85*6 

97.2 

71.9 

3, 

95 

191 

86*3 

89*6 

66,5 

4, 

119 

195 

54*5 

91*0 

15.6 

5, 

104 

175 

55.6 

97*4 

22.5 

R E R E D 

EH 

o 

•p 

: o n 



6, 

74*5 

171 

- 

54.4 

17*8 

7. 

62 

• 170 

- 

66*0 

0.0 

8. 

109 

176 

o 

o 

in 

63*3 

20*9 

RSRED 

• U C T I 

: ON 



9. 

59 

179 

46*5 

71.6 

0*0 

10, 

89 

177 

48,5 

90.5 

0,0 

■j 

l total of ten tests were made on this 

catalyst 

coveri 

.ng a period of 940,5 hours. 

The first 

three 

tests 

indicated a fair 

ly act!ye c 

atalyst, the yields 
































100 


obtained beinp very close to those obtained by 
the United States Bureau of Mines. After the third 
test however the activity dropped off considerably 
and rereduction and reduced flow rates failed to 
increase the yield at all. 

The analysis of the product from this catalyst 
is shown in the'following pages. 


Distillation of•Hydrocarbon Fraction of Product 


Temperature 



Volume j o 


Wax above 


127 

0 

161 

12.5 

180 

25.0 

197 

37.5 

217 

50.0 

241 

62.5 

280 



Distillation of Aqueous Fraction of Product 

Volume percent distilling below 96°C. - 2*3456 
Density of Hydrocarbon Fraction ..... 0,7580 

Density of Aqueous Fraction .. 1.0576 

Aniline point ... 84.0 

Refractive Index .................... 1.4258 






























































































































































































































































































































































































































101 


Ceric Nitrate..... weak 

2, 4 Dinitrophenylhydrazine ....... weak 


Average Comuosition of Residual Cas 


C°2 

4.75 

Ho 

- 43.40 

Cj 

CO 

o 

• 

to 

i —i 

i 

°2 H 6 

4.48 

ch 4 

- 21.10 

N 2 

- 11.80 


A second run was made on this catalyst hut 
it was contaminated with oxygen and no production 
figures were obtained. 


Catalyst #2. - 

Catalyst number two, having a composition of 
36$ Co, 2$ Th, 4$ Mg and 58$ Filter Cell by weight, 

was made by the procedure of the United States Bureau 

(71) 

of Mines with slight variations in the temperatures 
used. All solutions used were brought to the boiling 
point, mixed at this temperature, stirred for half - 
an hour, and then washed at 80°C. till free of 
nitrate ion. A.fter drying,the catalyst was pelleted 
with five percent graphite and charged to the unit 
for testing. 
































- 


- 

' 







- 

. 

’■ 

- 







_ 

. 





. 







102 . 


Catalyst number two was reduced, conditioned, 
and tested in the same way as catalyst number one. 
Six tests were made on this catalyst covering a 
period of 542.8 hours. The first four tests showed 
that the catalyst was slightly active. Rereduction 
in the manner previously described for catalyst 
number one, failed to increase the activity of the 
catalyst as can be seen in Table X and it was 
removed from the unit after the final two tests had 
been run. 

TABLE X 


ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #2. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av. 

Temp, 

°C. 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

% 

Space 

Vel. 

Yield 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1. 

98.3 

187 

44 

92.2 

~T 

9 

^ • 

88 

195 

36 

93.7 

16.2 

3. 

116 

195 

39 

83.7 

- 

4. 

104 

185 

20.2 

93.5 

14.6 

R 

5. 

E R E D U 
74.5 

C T I 
162 

0 N 

55.0 


6 . 

62 

171 


71.6 



No analysis was possible on the small amount of 
product obtained from the catalyst by this test. 





















103 


Average Composition of Residual Gas 


CO 


v 2 

Ho 


9.46 


38.87 


CO 


12.48 



29.33 


6.49 


6.64 


Catalyst #3 . - 

Catalyst number three was made of Co; ThO^ and 
Kieselguhr in the ratio 36.5 : 6.57 : 36.5, a filter 
cell carrier being used. The catalyst was prepared 
in the following manner. Cobalt nitrate and thorium 
nitrate were dissolved in 2000 ccs. of distilled 
water at 25°C. and the filter cell added with 
constant agitation while the temperature was kept 
constant. The potassium carbonate used to precipitate 
the cobalt and thoria on the filter cell, was 
dissolved in 600 ccs. of distilled water at 25°C. and 
mixed with the solution of the nitrates at 25°C. 

The potassium carbonate was added rapidly with constant 
stirring and the solution diluted to 6000 ccs. with 
distilled w r ater at 25°C. After agitation for three 

































. 




» 


. 

, 
















* 











104 


minutes at 25 °C. the temperature was raised to 
o 

75 C. and thai stirred for 10 minutes at this 

temperature. The catalyst was then washed free of 

nitrate ion by decanting the supernatant liquid 

o 

and adding more water at 75 C. When free of 
nitrate ion the catalyst was filtered off, dried 
at room temperature for 24 hours and then dried 
at 150°C. for another 24 hrs. The catalyst was 
then ground to pass a 48 mesh screen, pelleted with 
5 °/o graphite and charged to the test unit. 

Catalyst number three was reduced, conditoned 
and tested in the same way as was catalyst number 
one. As can be seen from Table XI, six tests were 
made on this catalyst. The catalyst proved to be 
quite inactive, although it was tested over the 
entire synthesis temperature range. Rereduction 
of the catalyst and reduced rates of flow failed to 
increase the catalyst activity. 

No analysis was possible on the small amount 
of product obtained by these tests. 












H C2 tO LO to 


105 


TABLE XI 


ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #3. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av. 

Temp. 

°C. 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

fo 

Space 

Vel. 

Yield 

Liouid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1. 

98.3 

183 

44.5 

115 

6.90 

o 

^ # 

88.0 

195 

37.1 

102 

8.32 

3. 

116.0 

191 

48.6 

111 

- 

4. 

104.0 

178 

23.7 

112 

3.23 

R 

E R E D 

U C T I 0 

N 



5. 

74.5 

166 

- 

64.3 

- 

6 . 

62.0 

173 

- 

79.7 

- 


Average Composition of Residual Gas 

C0 2 

- 9.09 

H 2 

- 40.50 

GO 

- 14.97 

ck 4 

- 25.05 

C 2 H 6 

- 4.37 

n 2 

- 6.92 

Catalyst #4. - 


Catalyst number four contained Co; ThOg and 

Super Cell in the ratio 100 : 

18 : 100. This catalyst 






























106 


was made by the procedure of the United States 

(71) 

Bureau of Mines; ground to pass a 48 mesh screen 
and then pelleted with five percent graphite. 

Catalyst number four was reduced with hydrogen 

at a space velocity of 6000 in the temperature range 
o o 

380 C. - 400 C. The catalyst temperature was raised 
rapidly to the reduction range while a slow stream 
of hydrogen was passed over it. When the correct 
temperature was reached, the hydrogen flow” was 
increased to a space velocity of 6000 and the 
temperature held constant for three hours. The 
hydrogen flow was then reduced to a minimum and the 
temperature lowered rapidly to the synthesis range 
of 175°C, - 200°C. Synthesis gas was then admitted 
to the converter at a space velocity of 61,5 
(based on the converter volume when empty) and 
synthesis was started. 

As can be seen from Table XII this catalyst was 
not very successful. Only two runs were made on it 
after which the catalyst became contaminated with 
oxygen and had to be discarded. 

No analysis was done on.the product of this 
catalyst. 









107 . 


TABLE XII 

ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #4* 


Hun 

No. of 

Av, 

Contrac- 

Space 

Yield 


Hrs. 

Temp, tion, 

°c. % 

Vel. 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 
Gras /Cu.M. 

1. 

59. 

177 

61.5 

2.96 

2 . 

89 

178 

50.5 

71.4 

- 


Average Composition of Residual Ga s 


ca 

o 

o 

1.60 

h 2 - 

54.10 

CO 

28.45 

ch 4 - 

7.51 

C 2 H 6 “ 

1.48 

N 2 " 

6.36 


Catlyst #6 . - 

Catalyst number six was prepared by the United 
States Bureau of Mines procedure^containing Co, 
Th0 ?J MgO and kieselguhr (Super Cell) in the weight 















108 


ratio 100 : 6 : 12 : 200. The super cell and 
magnesia were both passed through a U.S. No. 70, 65 
mesh screen and mixed dry before being used in the 
United States Bureau of Mines procedure. After 
drying the catalyst was crushed and the fraction 
retained between United States Standard Sieves No. 8 
and No. 20, was charged to the test unit. 

This catalyst was reduced by the Hall method 
which consists of passing a stream of hydrogen down 
over the catalyst at a rate of approximately 560 
litres per hour for a period of 2 hours at a temp¬ 
erate of 380 to 400°C. At the end of the two hour 
period the catalyst was allowed to cool to 150°0. 

in a slow stream of hydrogen and maintained under 

(72) 

these conditions until synthesis was commenced. 

The catalyst was conditioned by admitting 
synthesis gas to the reduced catalyst at 150°C. and 
raising the temperature to the synthesis range very 
gradually over a period of twelve hours. During 
synthesis the catalyst temperature was controlled to 
give a gas contraction through the unit of approx¬ 
imately sixty percent. The gas flow was adjusted 
to give a gas catalyst contact time of 0.00882 a 
hours per gram of cobalt where Tt a" is the fraction of 













, 


















* 






. 

: 

' 


















- 






















109 


the cross-sectional area of the converter actually 
occupied by the catalyst. This contact time was 
computed from data obtained from a paper by S. R. 
Craxford. 

The catalyst has been tested for a period of 269 
hours. The results obtained are shown in Table XIII. 


TABLE XIII 


ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #6. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av. 

Temo. 

°C. 

.Contrac¬ 
tion, 

% 

* 

Space Yield 

Vel. Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1- 

106 

181 

61.8 

0.632 

83.5 

2. 

67 

188 

66.6 

0.647 

116.0 

3. 

96 

185 

60.7 

0.649 

62.3 

* A 

space velocity 

of one is equal to a 

gas flow 


of one litre per gram of cobalt in the catalyst. 


Analysis of the product from catalyst number six 


is shown in the following tables 







. 

* 


















































110 


Distillation of Hydrocarbon Fr 

action of Product 

Temperature °C. 

Volume $ 

58 

0 

110 

12.5 

158 

25.0 

187 

37.5 

212 

50.0 

237 

62.5 

281 

72.5 


Distillation of Aqueous Fraction of Product 


Volume percent distilling below 96°0. = 0.6$ 

Density of Hydrocarbon Fraction . 0.7420 

Density of Aqueous Fraction .. 0.9987 

Aniline point ...... 79.5 

Refractive index .... 1.4196 

Ceric nitrate test . trace 

2, 4 Dinitrophenylhydrazine .. positive 


Average Composition of Residual Gas 

C0 2 - 9.09. 

0g - 0.86 


54.10 









































































































































































































































































































































































































































































Ill 


CO - 

28.45 

CH 4 - 

7.51 

C 2 H 6 " 

1.48 

n 2 - 

7.00 


Catalyst #7. - 

Catalyst number seven was prepared by the method 
(72) 

of Hall and contained Co, Th0 o , MgQ, and kieselguhr 

in the weight proportions 100 : 6 : 12 : 200. This 

catalyst was crushed after drying and the portion 

retained between United States Standard Sieves 

No'. 8 and No. 20, was charged to one test unit. 

The remainder of the catalyst was passed through a 

48 mesh screen, pelleted with 5$ graphite and 

charged to another unit (catalyst 8). 

The catalysts were then reduced and conditioned 
( 72 ) 

by the Hall method and tested in the usual 
manner. Both the pelleted and unpelleted catalysts 
were tested for a period of 1074 hours. > The results 
of these tests are shown in Tables XXV and XV. 

Por the first seven tests these catalysts were 
tested with synthesis gas flowing at a rate of one 
litre per gram of cobalt. After the seventh test the 












112 . 


TABLE XIV 


ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST //7. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av # 

Temp. 

°C . 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

* 

Space 

Vel. 

Yield 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbon 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1. 

63 

173 

56.3 

1.05 

45.8 

2* 

117 

169 

67.1 

1.09 

38.3 

3. 

39 

178 

52.2 

1.03 

76.1 

A 

# 

79 

176 

41.4 

1.00 

55.0 

5. 

90 

178 

57.5 

0.97 

SI. 2 

6. 

117 

185 

53.3 

1.01 

50.8 

7. 

117 

183 

38.1 

1.02 

46.6 

8. 

114 

177 

46.8 

0.43 

80.0 

9. 

70 

174 

53.0 

0.51 

59.7 

10. 

106 

181 

60.7 

0.43 

75.5 

11. 

67 

193 

65.6 

0.435 

106.0 

12. 

96 

194 

56.2 

0.454 

57.2 


flow was adjusted to give a contact time of 0.00882 a 
hours per gram of cobalt as was done for catalyst 
number six. The reduced flow, which is believed to 
be the optimum, gave no appreciable increase in 
yields but the presence of other variables makes it 
difficult to determine the exact effect of the 
reduced flow. 

A rereduction was carried in the usual manner 



















113 


TABLE XV 


ACTIVITY TEST ON CATALYST #8. 


Run 

No. of 
Hrs. 

Av. 

Temp. 

°C. 

Contrac¬ 

tion, 

* 

Snace 

Vel. 

Yield 

Liquid 

Hydrocarbons 

Gms/Cu.M. 

1. 

63 

173 

52.6 

1.05 

48.1 

2 . 

117 

175 

49.4 

1.01 

35.3 

3. 

39 

169 

42.3 

1.01 

72.0 

4. 

79 

167 

24.2 

0.995 

34.4 

5. 

90 

170 

47.6 

0.995 

50.2 

6. 

117 

178 

47.3 

0.978 

62.5 

7. 

117 

183 

37.5 

1.040 

58.2 

8. 

114 

174 

82.3 

0.280 

58.2 

9. 

70 

167 

84.5 

0.260 

55.3 

10. 

106 

182 

56.1 

0.250 

39.2 

11. 

67 

194 

62.6 

0.450 

62.3 

12. 

96 

188 

58.2 

0.450 

105.0 


on both samples of catalyst after test number nine. 
Both samples of catalyst appear to have been activ- 
ated considerably by this rereduction. 

The analysis of the product from these samples 
of catalyst number seven are shown in the following 
tables. 












. 













































114 


Analysis of Produ c t of Catalyst #7 . - 

Distil lation of H ydro carbon Frac ti on o f P roduct 

Volume c /o 

0 

12.5 
25.0 

37.5 
50.0 

62.5 
75.0 

Distillation of Aqueous Fraction of Product 


Volume percent distilling below 96°0. - 2% 

Density of Hydrocarbon fraction . 0.744 

Density of aqueous fraction .......... 1.0050 

Aniline point . 77 

Refractive Index . 1.4171 

Ceric nitrate test .. trace 

2, 4 dinitrophenylhydrazine .. positive 


Temnerature°C. 

71 

111 

143 

168 

185 

218 

252 

315 





















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































115 


Analysis of Product of Catalyst ;/8 . 
Distillation of Hydroc a rbon Fraction of Product 
Temperat ure^ °C . Volume % 

62 0 
105 12.5 

142 25 

168 37.5 

193 50 

219 62.5 

251 75 

273 80 

Wax distilled above 273 

Distillation of Aqueous Fraction of Product 

Volume percent distilling below 96°C. - 4 °Jo 

Density of hydrocarbon fraction . 0.7415 

Density of aqueous fraction ... 1.0053 

Aniline point .. 77 

Refractive Index ... 1.4178 

Oeric nitrate test ....trace 

2, 4 dinitrophenylhydrazine test .weak 

























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































116 


Average Composition of Residual C-as 



Catalyst #8 

Catalyst #7 

C° 2 - 

9.44 

7.98 

°2 - 

0.65 

0.93 

H 2 - 

37.90 

41.80 

CO 

15.00 

18.48 

C 2 H 6 " 

0.89 

0.30 

1 

w 

o 

28.50 

25.91 

N 2 " 

7.67 

6.63 











117 


DISCUSSION 

In reducing the catalysts two methods of 

( 71 ) 

operation were used. The U.S. Bureau of Mines 
procedure which requires approximately fifty- 

(70 \ 

seven hours and the Hall method' 'requiring 
approximately two hours. Results obtained indicate 
that no advantage was gained by the longer 
reduction. The shorter reduction period Yras 
easier to operate and gave equally good results. 

Rereduction of the catalysts in most cases 
gave little reactivation. This would seem to 
indicate that the -catalysts were permanently 
poisoned by oxygen or sulfur. 

The distillation curves of the hydrocarbon 
product show that there is a very small fraction of 
the product in the gasoline range. The charcoal 
adsorbers were put in the system before catalyst 
§ix and seven were tested. A comparison of the 
distillation curves for the product formed on 
these catalysts and those obtained for the product 
of the other catalysts, shows that the fraction 
of the product boiling between sixty and one hundred 








, 

- 

' 









118 


and twenty degrees was previously lost in the 
residue gas. From a consideration of the dis¬ 
tillation curves, it can be seen that approximately 
fifteen percent of the product has been retained 
by the charcoal scrubbers. The distillation curves 
also indicate that some pentanes, butanes and 
lower hydrocarbons are still being lost in the 
residue gas. 

The densities of the various products are all 
very much the same. Two of the catalysts produced 
compounds which were solid waxes at room temp¬ 
erature. All the other products were liquid at 
room temperature. 

The ceric nitrate test for alcohols and the 
2, 4 dinitrophenylhydrazine test for aldehydes 
and ketones, although positive in all cases were 
very weak indicating only small amounts of 
alcohols, aldehydes and ketones present. The 
odor of the product also indicates the presences 
of some oxygenated compounds. 

Aniline point determinations and the refractive 
indices indicate that for all products some 
unsaturated compounds were present. 




119 


SUMMARY 

The literature on the synthesis of hydrocarbons 
from carbon monoxide and hydrogen is extensive. 

In this thesis only the more recent contributions 
have been emphasized. From the tests carried out 
on the various catalysts it is seen that the 
catalysts used in the synthesis are very temp¬ 
erature sensitive and great care must be exercised 
in controlling the operating conditions to insure 
efficient catalyst operation. The important step 
in the procedure appears to be the conditioning 
step, both when "running in" a new catalyst and 
when starting up after a lower temperature 
reactivation. The unit should be run at a 
constant contraction of 60 percent. Under the 
conditions giving the 60 percent contraction, the 
units appear to operate at maximum efficiency. 

A suitable method for catalyst testing at 
atmospheric pressure has been evolved which gives 
yields that compare favorably with those of other 
investigators. The highest yield was obtained with 
a catalyst consisting of cobalt, thoria, magnesia 
and kieselguhr in the weight ratio 100 : 6 : 12 : 200. 






This catalyst produced 116 grains of synthesis 
products per cubic meter of synthesis gas. 

It appears possible that with the use of the 
charcoal adsorbers, to remove the more volatile 
products, high pressure operations would give- 
yields comparable to others reported in the 
literature. 

A larger unit for synthesis gas production 
is necessary to allow more efficient operation of 
the units. At present the capacity of the synthesis 
gas furnaces limits the operation to three units 
at a time, leaving at least three shut down at 
all times. 





121 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


1. Davis, Dr. S. tT Alberta f s New Resource, 

Synthetic Gasoline", Unpublished report. 

2. Oberfell, G. G., Mining and Metallurgy, March, 

1946, p. 165. 

3. Weil, B. H., Lane, I. C., Petroleum Refiner, 

Vol. 25 No. 11, Nov. 46. 

4. Underwood, A. I. V., Ind. & Eng. Chem. 

32, No. 4, 449 (1940) 

5. Fischer, F., Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen 

Gesselschaft, 71A, 56 (1938). 

6. Hagg, G. , Z. Physik. Chem., B12 , 33 (1931). 

7. Storch, Ind. & Eng. Chem. 37_, No. 4, 340 (1945). 

8. Fischer, F., Brennstoff Chemie 1G, 1 (1935): 

Petroleum Refiner 23, No. 2, 112 (1944). 

9. Herrington, E. F, G., and Woodward, L. A. 

Trans. Faraday Soc. 35, 958 (1959). 


10. 

Komar ewsky, 7 

if. I. and Riesz, C. H., 

Petroleum 


Refiner 

23, No. 11, 91 (1944). 


11. 

Craxford, S. 

R., Trans. Faraday Soc 

. 


35, 946 

(1939). 


12. 

Craxford, S. 

R., and Rideal, E. K., 

I. Chem. Soc. 


(London) 

1939, 1604 


13. 

Storch, H. H, 

., The Crucible 31, No. 

2, 52 (1946). 

14. 

Craxford, S. 

R., Trans. Faraday Soc. 

42, 576 


(1946). 




15. Matsumara, S., Tarams, K. & Kodama, S., 

J. Soc. Chem. Ind. (Janan), 43, Sunpl. 
Binding, 181B (1940) 










■ 





























122 


16. Storch, H. H., Synthesis of Hydrocarbons from 

Water Gas, Chant. 39 of Chemistry of 
Coal Carbonization (H. H. Lowry), John 
Wiley and Sons. Inc. (New York), 1945. 

17. Lane, John C., The Synthine Process, Petroleum 

Refiner, Yol. 25^, No. 8 August 1946. 

18. Berthelot, C., Ginie Civil 115, 461 (1939). 

19. Hall, C. C. and Powell, A. R. Office of 

Publication Board Report No. 286, Dept, 
of Commerce, Washington, D,C. 

20. Spencer, W. D., Petroleum, £, No. 6, 90 (1944) 

21. Berthelot, C., Chemie and Industry, 45, 551 

(1941). 

22. Heinemann H. , Petroleum Refiner 23, No. I 

117 (1944). 

23. Atwell, H. V., Powel, A. R. and Storch, H. H., 

Technical Oil Mission Report No. 5, 

July 19, 1945; Office of Publication 
Board. Report No. 2051, Dept, of 
C ommerc e, Washington D. C . 

24. Baugham, D. H. and Bennett, J. G., Fuel 19, 

95 (1940). 

25. Roelen, 0., Brennstoff-Chemie 12, 305 (1931). 

26. Roelen and W. Feisst, Gr. 651, 462 (1937). 

27. Fischer, P., Roelen, 0. and Feist, W., 

Petroleum Refiner 22, 429-35 (194-3). 

28. Fischer, F., Petroleum Refiner 23, No. 2, 

112 (1944). 

29. Tsutsumi, S., J. Fuel Soc. of Japan, 

16, 55, (1937). 

30. Bridgwater, R. M., Petroleum, 8^, No. 6, 

109 (1945). 







123 


31. Atwell, H. V. and Schroeder, W. C., 

Technical Oil Mission Renort No, 8, May 
15, 1945. 

32. Schroeder, W. C., Oil & Gas Journal, 44, No. 

29, 112 (1945). 

33. Ghosh, J. G. and Sen. S., J. Indian Chen, 

Soc. 12, 53 (1935). 

34. Fischer, F., and Buffleb, H. Brennstoff- 

Chemie, 21, 285 (1940). 

35. Raney, M., J. Aid. Chem. Soc. 54, 4116 (1932) 

36. Rapoport, I, B., and Polozhintseva E., Khim. 

Tverdogo Topliva, £, 64 (1938). 

37. Brit. 449, 274 (1936), to I. G. Farbenindustrie 

A.G. 

38. U.3. 2, 266, 161 (1941), D. L. Campbell and 

F. T. Barr to Standard Oil Development Co. 

39. U.S. 2, 393, 909 (1946), E. A. Johnson to 

Standard Oil Co. (Indiana). 

40. U.S. 2, 360, 787 (1944), E. V. Murphree, 

C. W. Tyson, D. H. Campbell and H, Z. 
Martin to Standard Catalytic Co. 

41. Watanabe S., Morikawa, K.. and Igawa S., 

J. Chem. Soc, (Janan) 38; Suppl. 

Binding (1935). 

42. Murata, Y., and Tsuneoko, S., Sci. Papers. 

Inst. Phys. Chem. Research (Tokyo), 

34, 99 (1937). 

45, Tsuneoka, S., and Fujimura, K., J. Soc. 

Chem. Ind. Japan 3.7. Suppl. Binding, 
704-11 (1934). 

44. Fischer, F., and Pichler, H., Brennstoff- 
Chem. 14, 306-10 (1933). 






i 









* t :i’ 




124 . 


45* Tsuneoka, S., and Murata, Y., J. Soc. 

Chem. Ind. Japan 40, Suppl. Binding 
478-84 (1937). 

46. Fischer, F. and Kiister, H., Brennstoff- 

Chem. , 14, 3-8 (1933). 

47. Ibid. 20, 41-61 (1939). 

48. Craxford, S. R., Trans. Far. Soc. 42 part 8. 

(1946). 

49. Fischer, F., and Pichler H., Brennstoff- 

Chemie 20, 221 (1939). 

50. Tsuneoka, S., J. Soc. Chem. Ind. Japan, 

57 , suppl. Binding, 738-44 (1934). 

51. Tsuneoka, S., and Kuroda, R., ibid., 

33, 333-8 (1937). 

52. Snodgrass, C. S., and Perrin, M., J. Inst. 

Pet. Tech. 24, 289 (1938). 

53. Cotton, E., National Petroleum News, 

Technical Section 38, No. 23, R-425 
(1946). 

54. Oberfell, G. G., National Petroleum News, 

Technical Section 38, No. 1, R-46 
(1946). 

55. Egloff, G., Nelson, E. S. and Morrell, J.C. 

Ind. Eng. Chem. 29_, 555 (1937) 

56. Borisov, P.O., and Eventova, M. S., Khim, 

Referat. Zuhr., 1940, No. 6, 110. 

57. Keith, P.C., Oil & Gas Journal 45, No, 6 

102 (1946). 

58. Horne, ¥. A. and Jones, J, P., Office of 

Publication,Board Report No. 294, 
Department of Commerce, Washington D.C. 

59. Atwell, H. V., and Schroder, W. C., Office 

of Publication, Board Report No. 293, 
Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C. 










125 


60. Aldrich, R. C., Office of Publication Board 

Report No. 365, Department of Commerce, 
Washington, D.C. 

61. Lowes, A. P. and Imnerial Chemical Industries 

Ltd., Brit. Pat. 493, 715 (1938). 

62. A. G. Farbenindustrie, A.O., Brit. Pat. 485, 

478 (1938). 

63. Storch, H. H. and Fieldner, A. C., 

Mechanical Engineering 6JL, 605 (1939). 

64. Baldeschwieler, E. L., Office of Publication 

Board Report, No. 225, Department of 
Commerce, Washington, D.C. 

65. Calcott, W. S., Office of Publication Board 

Report No. 187, Department of Commerce, 
Washington, D.C. 

66. Murray . R. L., Chemical Industries 58, No. 5 

788 (1946). 

67. Weir, H. M. , Technical Advisory Committee 

Report A1 - ML-1, July 3 o', 1945. 

68. Haensel, V., Office of Publication Board 

Report No. 284, Department of Commerce, 
Washington, D.C. 

69. Lazerte, J. D., Loshaek, S., and Scott, D. S., 

The Fischer Tropsch Synthesis of 
Hydrocarbons, unpublished thesis, 
Deuartment of Chemistry, University 
of*Alberta (1946). 

70. Donald, J. H. and Quon, D., The Fischer 

Tropsch Synthesis, unpublished thesis, 
Department of Chemistry, University of 
Alberta (1945). 

71. Private communication - Fischer Tropsch 

catalysts. Bureau of Mines Preparations 

72. Hall, C. C. and Smith,S. L. - Journal of the 





. 

* 


. 






































, 












, 

, 

* 








* 



;r w :T v ' 



-* ' 


’ 

i 

* 





126 . 


Society of Chemical Industry, 

Vol 65, May 1946. 

75. Craxford, S. R., Trans, of the Faraday Soc. 
Vol. XLII, Aug. 1946, p. 576. 

74. Shriner and Fuson - The Systematic 

Identification of Organic Compounds, 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc. p. 52, p. 62, 
1940. 










' 









t 

t 


\ 

. 





















