For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 



















©X ilBBlIS 

mMBsnaw 

aUBmilMB 










TOTALITARIANISM 


in 

GERMAN POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY 


Department of Philosophy 
University of Alberta 
Edmonton 


Thesis 

Arnold Guebert 


1943 





Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/totalitarianismiOOgueb 


Introduction 


When tne first Great War ended the average person in the al¬ 
lied countries was quite sure tnat it was a victory for the liberal 
tradition. He felt with Woodrow Wilson that ’the world had been 
made safe for democracy.* And indeed, the crown did topple from 
the head of many a monarch, and representative governments were set 
up in countries where democracy was unknown before. It seemed but 
a matter of time until authoritarianism and absolutism would vanish 
from the earth. The tendency toward liberalism was thought to be 
inevitable. 

Yet within & few brief years these fond hopes were dashed to 
the ground. Russia was a dictatorship even before the struggle 
came to an end. By 1924 Italy, Poland, Turkey, and a host of 
smaller countries had abandoned democracjr or even the semblance of 
it. China% attempt to establish a republic along American lines 
failed utterly. In Japan the supreme power fell into tne hands of 
a small military clique. And when in 1933 the German Republic 
ppssed out of existence and Hitler assumed absolute power in tne 
Third Reich, liberals quite generally felt their cause had receiv¬ 
ed a body blow. 

There are many causes of these political upheavals in various 
parts of the world, which, however, cannot be discussed here. In 
this study the German situation claims our attention. 













* 

. - 








- 


. 














■J 














. 




- 2 - 


Many people of our day believe tnat the revolution in Germany 
and the rise of Hiterlism are the result of the mistakes of the Ver¬ 
sailles Treaty. They are sure that if the statesmen at the peace 
conference had been wise enough to conclude a just and reasonable 
treaty Germany would nave been able to get back on her feet in a 
few years and democratic institutions would have become so firmly 
established that dictatorship would not have gained a foothold. In 
other words they are of the opinion thab all the trouble was due to 
temporary economic distress. It was hard times, they say, that al¬ 
most forced the people to turn away from democracy and look to the 
dictator for a solution of their problems. 

Other persons explain the situation on the basis of psychology. 
They think tne establishment of Naziism was above all due to the 
magnetic personality of tne ’Fuenrer*. By his showmanship, his fas¬ 
cinating oratory, and adroit use of propaganda hitler was able to 
make the people believe he was the Moses who would lead tnem out of 
the wilderness. Thus ne gained millions of fanatical followers and 
finally secured such unprecedented prestige and power, as has not 
been known since tne days of the deified Roman emperors. 

To the thoughtful student of politics, however, these explana¬ 
tions are too simple* While it is true tnat economic distress and 
the personality of the Fuenrer have played an important part in 
establishing National-Socialism on a permanent basis, it is equally 
































. 








. * 







'. . -I . 


. ■ 


■ 












. 




• 











- 3 - 

true that Hitler would not have succeeded in the measure tnat he did 
if the way had not b9en prepared by a political tradition and a poli¬ 
tical philosophy that long antedates his rise to power* This tradi¬ 
tion and this philosophy have now quite universally been given the 
striking name of totalitarianism 5 . Because the term is of recent 
origin people have thought, and many still think, that Hitler and 
nis confrere Mussolini are creators of a new political philosophy. 

But tnis notion is entirely fallacious. All tnat these colorful 
dictators have done is to popularize an older ideology and to in¬ 
spire millions of their countrymen to accept it with an entnusiasm 
tne borders on the fanatics l. 

Before we proceed to trace the philosophic roots of totalitar¬ 
ianism in German thought, however, it will be well to set forth 
clearly just what the word really means. The term is on the lips 
of nearly everyone today, but aside from the fact that it is some¬ 
thing radically different from our democratic traditions most people 
have only a hazy idea of its implications. 

In an interesting little brochure on the subject tne philoso¬ 
pher R. B. Perry of Harnrard states that ”of all tne catchwords of 
the day totalitarianism is the most difficult to define because as 
all such words its meaning is largely emotional and its has no 
history and no orthodoxy.” He feels, therefore, that ”the best 
that can be hoped for is to disentangle, define and trace certain 




o 

. T 

* t 

■ 













, , 

. 
























. 









- 4 - 


ideas which in their joint import on the contemporary mind have 
given a blurred meaning to the epithet.” (The Roots of Totalitar¬ 
ianism, p. 20) We may agree tohat the term is difficult to define, 
but it is hardly true, that the term has no history and no ortho¬ 
doxy. Perry himself really contradicts his opening statement w hen 

he proceeds to point out wnat the sources of totalitarianism are. 
Totalitarianism does have a history and a very long one at that. 

Pitirim Sorokin in his monumental work "Social and Cultural 

Dynamics” defines totalitarianism from the viewpoint of the ex¬ 
tensity of the social interactions of individuals. The sum total 
of all the activities and psychial experiences which make up tne 
whole life process of a given person may be considered to be 100% 
or a circle. If all of these activities and experiences are con¬ 
ditioned by the interaction with another party or with a group, 
then tne interaction may be said to be complete. No sector of tne 
circle is exempt. "The person cannot do anything without influenc¬ 
ing and being influenced by the interacting party. Interaction 
covers all the fields of nis existence and experiences. Tne ex¬ 
tensity of tne interaction is complete, unlimited, universa!,-- 
totalitarian.” (ibid., p. 7.) 

We might accept this definition as far as it goess but since 
there is in real life no instance where the interaction is 100% 
it might be argued that real totalitarianism does not exist. Then, 








. 
































- 5 - 


too, it could be applied to any condition or relationship in the 
life of the individual. Thus Christianity, for example, or in fact 
any religion, -which permeates the very being of a person, influenc¬ 
ing his every action, may be said to be totalitarian. Even the case 
of a slave -whose every activity is controlled by his master might be 
cited as an instance. 

However, that is not the way the word is usually understood to¬ 
day. Everyone wno uses the term refers to the relationship of the 
individual toihe state and invariably thinks of Naaiism, Fascism, 
and Communism. To apply the term to all kinds of relationships 
easily leads to confusion. In our present study, therefore, we 
shall always use the term in a restricted sense, referring to what 
might be more properly called state or national totalitarianism or 
1 etatism’• 

Sorokin himself comes much nearer this commonly accepted mean¬ 
ing when he says that totalitarianism implies that "a given group 
and its government control and regulate all the behavior of its 
members, leaving nothing to their choice or to the regulation of 
other groups.” (ibid., p. 184.) 

In this sense, then, totalitarianism refers to the doctrine 
tnat the state is supreme in all spheres of life. The individual’s 
very existence Is wrapped up in the state so that his life nas mean¬ 
ing only in so far as and because he is a citizen. His loyalty to 










. • ■ 
















« 

. 










. 




. 















■ 


















• • 
























6 


the body politic has prior claim to any other; in fact, for him 
there can be nothing higher than the interests of tne state* Under 
tnese circumstances it is idle to speak of the rights of the in¬ 
dividual upon -which the government could not infringe* There is no 
reserve in -which he is protected against the encroachment of poli¬ 
tical officialdom* 

In his book, ’’The Doctrine of Fascism,” Mussolini presents this 
ideology in these words: 

”The foundation of Fascism is the conception of the state, 
its character, its duty, and its aim* Fascism conceives of the 
state as an absolute, in comparison with which all individuals 
or groups"are”relative, only to be conceived of in their rela¬ 
tion to the state* 

’The state, as conceived of and as created by Fascism, is 
a spiritual and moral fact in itself, since its political, 
juridicial, and economic organization of the nation is a con¬ 
crete thing; and such an organization must be in its origin 
and development a manifestation of the spirit* The state is 
tne guarantor of security both internal and external, as it 
has grown up through the centuries in language, in customs, 
and in faith.” 

(Quoted in Hill & State, Backgrounds of European 
Governments, p* 451-452.) 

And Hitler repeatedly speaks of the ’’Hingabe des persoenlichen 
Daseins, des eigenen Lebens fuer die Gemeinschaft.” That is to say, 
bhere must be a to :ai surrender on the part of the individual. ”A11 
talents and capacitities,” the Nazi leader continues, ”must be plac¬ 
ed at the service of the community, and the ego subordinated, if 
leed be, sacrified to-the welfare of the state.” (Mein Kampf, p. 326 
















. 

. 










- 7 - 

and 327.) The totalitarian creed is aptly summed up in a pnrase of 
Viussolini, "Ail is in the state and for the state; notning outa.de 
the state, nothing against the state.” 

It is obvious that this is the direct opposite of the liberal 
doctrine that political activity is only one aspect of human life, 
and that there are otners equally important, A totalitarian con¬ 
siders such a conception rank heresy. To him "the state and its 
iccompaniment, political activity, is the be-all and end-all of hu- 
nan existence. The state includes but transcends all lesser pnases 
af human life, so that such things as economics, or philosophy, or 
art are only subordinate aspects of tne attributes and functions of 
bne state.” (McGovern, From Luther to Hitler, p. 16.) 

From tnis it will be seen tnat totalitarianism involves much 
nore tnan a political doctrine or a theory of government. It implies 
a. view of life, a ’Weltanschauung*, as Germans are w@nt t o call it. 
tor that reason it is not synomymous with absolutism, though the two 
usually go together. Many a dictator, though claiming the right of 
Life and death over his people, was not concerned about the thought 
ind inner life of the subject as long as he obeyed orders. A despot 
Like Frederick the Great could say; "In meinem Staat kann jeder 
lach seiner eigenen ’fa^on* selig werden.” And even Louis XIV who 
supposedly boasted; "L’ etat cest moi," acknowledged a higher au¬ 
thority than that of nis own government. Totalitarianism cannot do 



















, 

. 

■ 





- 












. 




i, 




. 








































































- 8 - 


this and remain totalitarian. It contends tnat tnere is nothing 
greater or higher than the tribe or the ’Volk’ or the state. Loyal¬ 
ty to the state is all-embracing. None other dare be placed over 
it or even along side it. Nationalism is raised to the status of a 
religion and thus even the things that are God's are given unto 
'Caesar', for in every field, even in the field of morals and re¬ 
ligion, the state speaks with the voice of God, it really is God. 

In his "Church, Community, and State” Dr. Oldnam admirably de¬ 
scribes totalitarian^atate in these words: 

"The totalitarian state is a state which lays claim to 
man in the totality of his being; which refuses to recognize 
the independence in their own sphere of religion, culture, edu¬ 
cation, and the family; which seeks to impose on all its citi¬ 
zens a particular philosophy of life; and which sets out to 
create by means of all the agencies of public information and 
education a particular type of man in accordance with its own 
understanding of the meaning and end of man's existence. A 
state which advances such claims declares itself to be not only 
a state but also a church." 

(Quoted in "Christianity and World Order ” by tne 
Bishop of Chichester, p. 68.) 

As already indicated, there is notning really new in the doc¬ 
trine of the all-competent, all-embracing state. As a matter of 
fact, it is as old as numan nistory itself. Again and again down 
through the ages tribalism, folkism, ar statism (there is no differ¬ 
ence between tnese so far as tne totalitarian element is concerned) 
have become so dominant as to rule out practically all individual¬ 
ism. In calling attention to this fact Sorokin lists the following 

















































, 



















. 
















9 


as belonging to tne totalitarian type: 

"Totalitarian were the state systems of ancient Egypt, 
especially in some periods like the Ptolemaic Egypt; the state 
system of ancient Peru, under tne Incas; tnat of ancient Mexi¬ 
co; of ancient China, especially.iri(jbhe eleventn cen¬ 

tury; tnat of Japan under tne Tokugava shogunate; the state 
network of relationships of ancient Sparta, Lipara, and some 
other Greek states; of ancient Rome, especially after Diocle- 
ticfci; of ancient Byzantium; tne state of the Taborites in 
Bonemia of tne fifteenth century; several state systems of 
ancient India; then many short-lived state systems in revolu¬ 
tionary periods in the Islamic, the Persian Empire and in the 
European Middle Ages 

The author then adds the following comment: 

"The situation was factually not very different in all the 
essentials (except the phraseology) from that in contemporary 
totalitarian state systems of Soviet Russia, Fascist Italy, or 

Itfazi Germany.The network was so closely woven that an 

individual could hardly take any step witnout touching tne 
state system and bringing it into action*" 

(Social and Cultural Dynamics, Vol* III, p. 186-187.) 
But not only nas totalitarianism manifested itself in the ob¬ 
ject ive^ concrete development of states, of their governments, their 
administration of law, and tneir international relations,—but also 
in the sphere of political speculation, i.e* in the subjective deve¬ 
lopment of ideas concerning the state as an abstraction* Already 
at the very beginning of the history of political thought, i.e* at 
the time of the ancient Greeks, we find the idea stressed that 
politics embraces ail numan activity. Plato himself (though it should 
not be forgotten that nis interest is primarily ethical and idealis¬ 
tic) gives us one of the most brilliant expositions of the theory 







, 

' 

- 

. . , . 












. 




. . 




■ 





, 

t 



. J 



- . , 



. 





. . . 




, 

. 

* ' 

— 






- 10 


that the community or society should completely dominate the life of 
the private citizen* And for classical Greek thinkers in general 
"man and the state were bound together in a living social whole; 
neither could have interests contrary to the other* Tne state was 
conceived to be a living personality, absorbing in its life all in¬ 
dividual personalities; and political existence was considered to be 
the highest form of life.” (Gettell, History of Policial Thought, 
p• 39•) 

These and similar ideas were reiterated somewhat later in the 
days of tne Roman Empire and also throughout the Middle Ages. In 
fact, the Roman Catholic Church was in essence totalitarian, for it 
took over from the Roman Empire the theory of absolute and universal 
jurisdiction over the affairs of man and its head claimed to be the 
sole source of legitimate power on earth* At the dawn of the modern 
era we find Machiavelli (1469-1527) stressing tne important© of tne 
state and claiming there was no law binding upon it, tnat it was a 
law unto itself. A hundred years later Hobbes expounded his theory 
of the "great Leviatnan" in which there is absolute unity and un¬ 
questioned obedience, all human associations being mere "worms in 
the entrails of Leviathan^* And even that arch-radical of the 
eighteenth century, Jean J* Rousseau, could not conceive of the 
state except in terms of totalitarianism, of a "total surrender." 

We cannot here trace the long and distinguished genealogy of 


















-li¬ 


the totalitarian tradition in the writings of tne various political 
pniiosophers. But a word should be said about Rousseau; for it *ra 3 
he tnat exerted tne greatest influence upon the development of po¬ 
litical thought in Germany. 

Rousseau, like Hobbes and Locke before him, started out with 
the idea of a pre-political state of nature. Due to economic in¬ 
equality, he says, it became necessary to establish civil society. 
This Was accomplished by a social contract, for only by agreement 
and ccnsent could authority be justified and liberty be retained, 
since "ma^n is bom free.” Each individual in entering the con¬ 
tract gives up nis natural rights to the community as a whole. In 

this way a body politic with a life and will of its own is forned. 
Yet tne individual does not lose his freedom by joining the state. 

His will is merged into the general will of the whole. And since 

this ’general will’ "merely by wnat it is, is always right” it is 
invariably the ’real will’ of the individual. For that reason a 
person who is compelled by the whole body to obey the general will 
is really "forced to be free." (Social Contract, p. 16 ff.) 

This idea of will as the ultimate element in politics was de¬ 
veloped by the German idealists of the latter part of the eighteenth 
and tne early pent of the nineteenth century into a glofification 
of the national state along totalitarian lines. And later thinkers 
based tneir thories to a large extent on tne earlier idealists. 
















. 


. ■ ' 

. 

. 



■ 


. 


. 































11 
























- 12 


In this brief study it will not be possible to deal with all 
the German thinkers who might come into consideration* We nave 
therefore limited ourselves to those who are most representative of 
totalitarian thought and who at the same time exercised the greatest 
influence upon later generations,--namely Fichte, Hegel, Treitschke, 
and Niet^sch^e. These, we believe, are the real spiritual forbears 
of the German ideologists of bur day* Of* the four, Fichte and Hegel 
are undoubtedly the most important and will therefore receive tne 
most consideration* 


Johann Gottlieb Fichte 

—H:iT6T“T8i4i— 

Fichte is without doubt one of tne most contentious figures in 
the history of German political philosophy* Thinkers of the most 
divergent views quote him in support of their theories. "It is 
amusing,” says Helmuth Johnsen, "to see how Fichte is pronounced 
now a democrat, and then a socialist* One group extols him as a 
cosmopolite, anotner as the most ardent patriot. On one hand 
he is proclaimed a pacifist, praising with Kant eternal peacej on 
the other he is a nationalist, pronouncing with Machiavelli that 
wasr is an ethical duty. One group invokes him as spokesman for the 
League of Nations, the other sees in him a prophet of the German 
national state of the future." (Das Staatsideal J* G. Fichtes, p. 
7. Quoted in Engelbrecht 1 3 Johann Gottlieb Fichte, p. 9.) 












r v f. ;' 7 








■ *: 








■ 


■ 


. 






. 


H • v 



















. 




■ 




. 

■ 




3 . 


. 


. 












> 

.7. 





13 ft 


The reason for this divergence of opinion is that all these 
elements are actually to be found in Fichte's writings; for we find 
a decided development in his political thought. In his earlier 
years, during the revolutionary era, he is an outspoken revolution¬ 
ist, and very hostile to the state. His pamphlets, "Zurueckforderung 
der Denkfreiheit" and "Beitraege zur Berichtigung der Ur*beile” are 
a ringing appeal for the freedom of the individual and a protest 
against the concentration of power in the hands of the ruler. The 
state is something against which we must be on our guard. Some 
one has called this the 'night watchman theory* of the state. Little 
wonder, then, that Fichte was accused of Jacobism. 

Somewhat later, however, we note a great change. Fichte now 
considers the state a friend. It is the means through which the 
ideals of man can be achieved, and without which he cannot attain 
his true end. It grants the individual everything which he ought 
to possess for his own best interests and for the community as a 
whole. Tnus Fichte, particularly in nis later years, became an ex¬ 
treme nationalist. The German nation assumes such proportions in 
his thought that he mud; be classed with the thorough-going totali¬ 
tarian. 

To understand Fichte it will be necessary that we outline at 
least briefly his fundamental philosophy. Fichte started out as a 
Spinozian determinist, but about 1790 he read Kant and from that 










. 







- 14 - 


time on he was a disciple of the great Koenigsberg thinker. It was 
doctrine of freedom particularly that appealed to Fichte. The 
"Critique of Pure Reason" opened up the way to tne philosophic ac¬ 
ceptance of free spirit. That is just what Ficthe wanted. The de¬ 
terminism and fatalism of Spinoza had never satisfied him. 

However, Fichte did not accept Kantianism an toto . He object¬ 
ed especially to Kant’s dualism. Like Spinoza he felt that ‘ail 

S h uuldL 

human experience and activity, all science and all knowledge A be re¬ 
duced to a "fundamental principle which shall be one, self-evident, 
absolute, exhaustive, all-comprehending, and all-explaining." 
(Fuller, History of Philosophy, p. 369.) In fact, Fichte believed 
the real goal of philosophy was to find that principle. He, there¬ 
fore, discards Kant’s objective, supersensual ’think-in-itself* and 
considers the Good, active Reason, pure Will, Free Spirit as the 
true Reality. This all-embracing principle Fichte calls the ’J^oral 
Ego’. The Moral Ego produces "its own experience out of itself, 
and progressively organizes its experience in accordance with neces¬ 
sities imposed by its essentially moral and purposive nature." 
(Fuller, 369.) This conception, Fichte feels, is the only one that 
can explain consciousness, and is therefore a necessary postulate 
of all thinking and of all existing. "The moral will," he says, 

"is the only reality." 

However, this postulation of its own existence implies that 

























- 15 - 


there must be something that is not the *ego*, in other words a 
•non-ego’ must be assumed. The postulate •I think* implies that 
there is something I have thought about which is other than rnyself. 
The subject must have an object; hence there must be an outer world* 
Free spirit thus sets up this outer world without which there would 
be ho field of moral endeavor. Treitschke explains this point in 
these words; 

"Because the purpose of our spirit can be realized only 
in practical action, and practical action requires a stage, 
therefore, and only for this reason, spirit is forced to pro¬ 
ject an outer world out of itself (aus sicn herauszuschauen) 
and consider it a real world.” 

(Treitschke, Auserwaehlte' Schriften, p. 246.) 

The outer world is, so to say, the limit which the Ego sets itself 
in order to overcome it* In this way it realizes itself; and tnat 
is true freedom, for true freedom consists in this that the ego 
creates itself and realizes itself* 

However, tne non-ego, the external world, in turn consists of 
a multitude of egos, which are personalities apart from mine. Ul¬ 
timately, of course, all these egos are manifestations of tne Ab¬ 
solute Ego, which thinks itself, is both subject and object. True 
freedom is not, therefore, realized in the individual , the empirical 
ego, but in society* In society man makes the laws which govern 
his conduct. He obeys tnese laws, not because he is forced to do 
so by some power outside himself but because they are tne laws of 












T 






- 
































. 












3 .' © n 




















- 16 - 


his own being, his own essentially mcral nature. The state, as 
society organized, is then an expression of moral freedom. 

And that leads to the proper concept of duty, which is another 
of Fichte’s fundamental principles. In contrast with Kant he gives 
this idea a social turn. Only as man understands his duty in so¬ 
ciety can society come into being and fulfill its purpose which is 
the achBV’ement of freedom. And only when the individual thus ful¬ 
fills his duty in human society can he speak of real freedom. Ficn- 
te, therefore, discards Rousseau’s idea of natural freedom or free¬ 
dom in a state of nature. Freedom is possible only through the law 
of tne state. The law of the state does not, therefore, limit a 
person*s freedom, or take it away, it guarantees it; in fact, that 
is the whole purpose of the state. 

It will be seen from this that while Fichte started with the 
emphasis oh freedom he ended up with tne empnasis on authority and 
the supreme importance of the national state. To tnis was added a 
mystic belief in the divine mission of the German people as the best 
and most enlightened of them all. Thus Fichte came to champion an 
extreme type of national egotism and what amounts to a deification 
of his own people. Gentz says of him: M So grosz and tief und stolz 
hat fast noch niemand von der deutschen Nation gesprochen.” (Quoted 
in Treitschke, p. 264.) This glorification of his own people is 
carried to such lengths tnat tne German nation is identified with 







17 - 


everything that is good, and the foreign countries with everytning 
that is had. 

Since we are dealing omly with Fichte’s totalitarianism we may 
very well leave aside his earlier theory and dwell chiefly on nis 
later nationalist and socialist concepts of the state* 

Before we do this, however, it may be well to remark that un¬ 
like Hegel Fichte distinguishes between the people or the nation 
(das Volk) and the state. The f Volk’ comes first. The state is 
the means through which the ’Volk’ realizes its aspirations and 
fulfills its mission. However, this distinction is not of great 
importance practically. The state is really the people organized, 
and a people that is not organized will hardly accomplish very 
mucfc. In other words while a ’Volk’ may exist trithout tne state 
it certainly will not be a very vital one. Treitschke points out 
that Fichte himself saw this and finally came to the realization 
that the state was the ’embodiment of nationality*. (Verkoerperung 
des Volkstums.) (ibid., p. 268.) Thus the distinction is one with¬ 
out a real difference. 

Fichte’s totalitarianism becomes evident already in his "$rund- 
zuege des gegenwaertigen 2eitaiters," which appeared as early as 
1804. There the place of man in society comes up for dicussion and 
Fichte contends that man mpst not be considered as an individual. 







18 - 


but only as a unit within the -whole ., He tells us that "it is the 
greatest error and the real basis for all other errors which are be¬ 
fuddling this age, when an individual imagines tnat he can exist, 
live, think, ana act for himself, and when he believes that ne him¬ 
self, his own person, is the object of his thought, since he is but 
a single unit in the general and necessary thought." (Werke, VII, 
p. 37 and 38.) And in tne following lecture we are told 

"Whoever thinks of himself as a person, and desires a 
life and an existence, and any kind of enjoyment of self out¬ 
side the group (Gattung) and for the group, ne is indeed a 
mean, small, and at the same time miserable person, no matter 
now well he may conceal his deformity with all kinds of good 
works." (ibid., p. 35.) 

♦Gattung’ is variously described as the ’opposite of individu¬ 
ality, the One, the Organic Whole, the thing thefc alone exists, the 
idea.’ Hence Fichte claims that the individual as such really has 
no existence. 

"Looking at the think as it is in truth we find that the 
individual does not exist; that he cannot count for anything, 
‘but must - disappear completely; and the group alone exists and 
it alone must be considered as existent." (Ibid., p. 37-38.) 

A little later this argument is strengthened by basing it upon 

ethical and religious grounds: 

"Reasonable life consists in this that tne individual for¬ 
gets himself in the group, ties his life to tne life of all and 
sacrifices nimself for the whole; unreasonable life is thifc 
tnat the individual thinks of nothing but himself, loves no¬ 
thing but himself and in relation to nimself, and seeks nothirg 
but his own well-being. And if that which is reasonable is 
evil, then tnere is but one virtue; to forget oneself as an in- 








. 








, 


' 



! • 









< * 









t 














. 








- 19 


dividual; and only one vice; to think of oneself." (Werke, 

VII, 35.) 

’’Nothing individual can live in itself and for itself, but 
everything lives in the whole.” (ibid., 63.) 

This is totalitarianism pure and simple. Such doctrine invari¬ 
ably leads to extreme nationalism and a glorification of one*s own 
group or nation. That this is true we see from the "Patriotic Dia¬ 
logues” which appeared in the years 1806 and 1807. The dialog is 
carried on between A and B, in which B sets forth the views of Fich¬ 
te, while A represents a patriotic Prussian. After a lengthy dis¬ 
cussion on ’patriotism* and * cosmopolitanism* B finally explains the 
relation between the two by saying; 

"Cosmopolitanism is the will that the purpose cf life and 
of many be attained in all mankind. Patriotism is the will that 
this purpose be attained first of all in that nation of which 
we are members, and the wish that this light may radiate from 
this nation ever all mankind." (Nachg. Werke, Vol. Ill, p. 

228 ff.) 

That is to say cosmopolitanism and real patriotism are identi¬ 
cal, for both are aiming at the same thing, namely to attain the pur¬ 
pose of mankind (Zweck des Daseins des Menechengeschlechts). Local 
patriotism, therefore, or *Scho&len-patriotismus* is to be dis¬ 
couraged and all, also the loyal Prussian, are to seek a unified 
monarchy and the development of a national character. B finally 
sums up the whole matter in these words: 

"Let us summarize. The patriot wishes tnat the purpose cf 
mankind be reached first of all in that nation of which he ia 
















■ 















n • 

1 


• - 

. , , . 


, 












‘ 






- 20 


a member. In our day this purpose can only be furthered by 
philosophy (Wissenshaft). Therefore philosopny and its widest 
possible dissemination in our day must be the immediate pur¬ 
pose of mankind, and no other purpose caa or should be fixed 
for it." (Nachg. Werke, Vol± III, p. 253.) 

And no vr we are told wnat part tne German must play in achieving 
this great purpose of mankind, he has a special duty in this respect 
for he alone is properly qualified to carry out this mission since 
science and philosophy nave originated among the Germans and only a 
German can rightly understand *Wissenschaft'. 

"Tne German patriot wishes that this purpose be attained 
first of ail among the Germans and that from tnem it spread 
to the rest of mankind* The German can desire this, for in 
his midst pnilosophy nas had its origin and it is developed 
in nis language. It may be~ assumed that in that nation which 
has had tne wisdom to conceive philosophy tnere should also 
rest tne ability to understand it. Only the (german can desire 
this, for only ne, tiftmgh the possession of philosophy and the 
possibility given thereby to understand it, can comprehend that 
this is the immediate purpose of m&fakind. This purpose is the 
only possible patriotic goal. Only the German can, in theln- 
terest of his nation include all mankind. Since the instinct 
of Reason nas become extinct and tne era of Egotism has begun, 
every other nafcion*s patriotism is selfish, narrow, hostile 
to the rest of mankind.” (italics our own.) (ibid., 234.) 

B tnen proceeds to outline tne principles of true philosophy. 

He informs A that the state must not be looked upon as an ordinary 
human devise which just happened to develop as time went on. Nor 
is it due to a special act of God. From tne standpoint of philo¬ 
sophy it is to be viewed as a product of Reason, and government is 
an art derived from Reason. When A. objects that ail this is very 
difficult to understand and beyond tne comprehension of about 99 par 


















< - ' 

. 








' 









. 












. 










- 

. 

. ' 

. 

. 



















- 
























- 21 


cent of the people B insists that they can be taught if only the 
rignt method of education is used* And he finally winds up by de¬ 
claring that unless the German people realize their responsibility 
and “take over tne government of tne world through philosophy" the 
whole culture of the present day will utterly disappear. 

However, it is particularly in the "Reden an die Deutsche 
Nation" tnat the totalitarianism of Fichte comes tdjfche fore. There 
has been some argument as to whether the ’Reden* give us the real 
Fichte, yet there can be nardly any doubt about it. Even a man like 
Treitschke says they are his "noblest work", for tney nave "that one 
great advantage, that in them a man, unique and priceless, has por¬ 
trayed his fnmost being." (Auserwaenlte Schriften, p. 260.) Cer¬ 
tain it is that these "i^dresses" are the one book invariably con¬ 
nected with Fichte’s name and that they nave exerted a profound in¬ 
fluence upon the German people. Not without reason does Fichte’s 
own son insist that the ’Roden* nave been "the political book of de¬ 
votion of the Germans." 

What strikes one in reading this work is Fichte’s boundless en- 
thusaism for all things German. The German people emerge as the 
purest, the most homogeneous, the most vital of all nations. The 
’Reden’ are, as Fuller says, a grand peroration on tne theme "Deutsch¬ 
land ueber alles." 













22 


Fichte begins by emphasizing tne uniqueness of the Germans "which 
is due to language* A language, he tells us, is not something ac¬ 
cidental (etwas Willkuerliches), not dependent n on arbitrary de¬ 
cisions and agreements." (l/Verke, VII, p* 314.) It is developed ac¬ 
cording to a fundamental law, and so it is not really man that 
speaks, but human nature witnin him, which thus announces itself to 
others of his kind. Hence one should say: "Language is unique and 
unavoidably necessary." (ibid., p. 315.) It is the expression of 
the soul of a people and therefore something living and vital. 

"Since language is not an arbitrary means of communication, 
but breaks forth out of the life of understanding as an immedi¬ 
ate force of nature, a language continuously developed according 
to this law has also th3 power of immediately affecting and 

stimulating life.The words of such a language in ail its 

parts are life and create life." (ibid., p. 318.) 

But Fichte does not mean to give the impression that all lang¬ 
uages belong in this class. Such a vital and vitalizing language 
only the Germans possess. That distinguishes them not only from 
other peoples and races but also from other Teutonic tribes. He 
says: 


"The difference arose at the moment of the separation of 
the common stock and consists in this, that the German speaks 
a language which has been alive ever since it first issued from 
the force of nature, whereas the other Teutonic races speak a 
language which has movement on the surface only but is dead at 
the root*" (ibid., p. 325.) 

For this reason the Germans can understand the foreigner, and 
that even better than the foreigner understands himself, but a 








. . 

. 

• .. 








, 




23 - 


foreigner can never understand the German. 

However, there are other and more vital consequences of this 
superiority of language. At the end of the fourth address, Fichte 
sums these up under four heads: 

”1) Where the people has a living language, mental culture in¬ 
fluences life; where tne contrary is the case, mental cul¬ 
ture and life go their way independently of each other. 

”2) For the same reason, a people of the fomraer kind is really 
and truly in earnest about all mental cufcirure and wishes 
it to influence life; whereas a people of the latter 

kind looks upon mental culture rather as an ingenious fame 
and has no wish to make it anything more. 

”3) From Ho. 2 it follows that the former has honest diligence 
and earnestness in all things, and takes pains; whereas 
the latter is easygoing and guided by its happy nature. 

”4) From all this together it follows that in a nation of the 
former kind the mass of the people is capable of education, 
and the educators of such a nation test their discoveries 
on the people and wish to influence it; whereas in a nation 
of the latter kind the educated classes separate themselves 
from the people and regard it as nothing more tnan a blind 
instrument of their plans.” (Ibid. p. 327.) 

What Fichte evidently means to say is that where there is an 
original language the *Gesitesbildung’, the mental culture, affects 
and really takes hold of the life of the people. Such a people 
takes life more seriously and gives evidence of a diligence and an 
earnestness entirely lacking in other countries which have no 
ofijinal language. Only Germans are, therefore, capable of real 
culture. And what this culture is Fichte explains in the follow¬ 
ing address: 





. 


. 





















' 





: 

• 





- 






. 


' 








t » 


• 1 








. 





- 24 - 


"When we speak nere of life and of the influence exerted 
upon it by mental culture, we mutt be understood to mean origi¬ 
nal life (das urspruengliohe Leben) in its flow from the source 
of all spiritual life, from God, and development of human re¬ 
lationship according to tneir archetype, and, therefore, the 
creation of a new life, such as nas never hitherto existed," 
(Ibid., p. 329.) 

In tnis *Geistesbildung*, Fichte says later, philosophy plays 
the chief role, for througn it man is brought nigh to the image of 
God. All this is possible with the Germans; other peoples, poor 
soujs, will have to get along witnout this# for they have no ori¬ 
ginal language. They are, in consequence of this, also lacking 
in tne proper earnestness and diligence. Tney have *Geist*, mind 
or spirit, but not that untranslatable thing called *Geinuet T . Hence 
their masses cannot be educated. In this respect the Germans have 
the advantage. They are possessed of that deptn of feeling and 
that serious application to duty -which enables them to accept re¬ 
sponsibility and be sincere about their mission. 

According to Fichte, history also bears out his contention, 
particularly the nistory of tne Reformation. Why did this great 
religious movement take place in Germany? Because of the impact 
of religion on that German man Luther*. He became the Reformer 
not because of any special enlightenment from God but because ne 
was a German, a man with l Gemuet". And that tne German people ac¬ 
cepted Luther*s gospel and could be aroused and entnused to a de¬ 
sire for the salvation of the soul is another proof of this unique 









, 


, 

- 


. 

» 

« 





. 

' 








. « 

I 

















25 


and "fundamental cnaracteristic of the Germans"# (,Grundzug der 
Deutsheen#) 

Their depth and seriousness also enable tne Germans to tnink 
freely and independently, i.e. philosophically. They can search 
for the supersensate (das Uebersinnliche) in human reason and so 
create true philosophy. Thus true pnilosophy is German philosophy . 
Foreigners are too frivolous and too shallow to be capable of real 
philosophic tnought. 

That Fichte is guilty of a mystical glorification of his own 
people is all too evident. A despicable megiliamania can be the only A 
of such teachings# 

In a later address, the seventh, these ideas are applied to 
politics. The real nature of the state and of government can be 
understood only through philosophy. And since only Germans know 
what real philosophy is, only Germans can adequately understand 
tne state. Foreigners always look upon tne state as a huge machine 
which forces the individual to fit in or grinds him to pieces. 

Life in society in thus reduced to mechanic and artificial action. 
(Kuentliches Druck-und F.aederwerk.) Among Germans we don*t find 
this. Says Fichte: 

"Altogetner different is genuine German statecraft. 
(Staatskunst.) It, too seeks fixity, surety, and independence 
of blind and halting nature, and in tnis it is quite in agree¬ 
ment with foreign countries. But, unlike these, it does not 
seek a fixed and certain thing, as the first element, wnich 












■ . 




• * * 




























- 26 - 


will confirm tne spirit as the second element; on the contrary, 
it seeks from the very beginning, and as the very first and 
only element, a firm and sure spirit. This is for German state 
craft tne ever driving urge which has life in itself and which 
regulates and continues to keep in motion the life of society.” 
(Ibid., p. 366.) 

Tnus ’spirit”, ’Geist' is the main thing, and hence it follows 
that the state has a much higher duty than merely to protect its 
citizens and secure tneir eartnly well-being. Its chief task, yes 
one might say almost its only task is education. Also in his ”Frag 
ments” Fichte stresses this point, "above all the most general and 
the most enduring purpose is education of the people unto a recog¬ 
nition of justice or the right," "education unto a recognition of 
the moral purpose.” (Wrke, VII, p. 576 and 574.) The state must 
create its own citizens as the Greeks did. It must arouse in them 
an understanding of the true nature and the true aim of the state 
so that they will freely accept its ordinances and willingly sub¬ 
mit to its laws and regulations. Thus education, if it is the 
right kind, will result in a 'complete'remaking of mankind* (eine 
gaenzliche Umschaffung des Menschgescnlecnts). All this will be 
accomplished, says Fichte, when the individual is led away from 
the world of sense (die Sinnenwelt) to the world of spirit (die 
Welt des Geistes). And what this implies we see from the follow¬ 
ing: 

"That spirit which is to be produced implies the higher 










27 - 


love of fatherland, the conception of its earthly life es eter¬ 
nal and of the fatherland as the support of that eternity. If 
it is produced in the Germans, it will include love of the 
German fatherland as one of its essential elements, and from 
that love there spring of themselves the courageous defender 
of his country and the peaceful and honest citizen. Such an 
education, indeed, achieves even more than that immediate ob¬ 
ject; the whole man is inwardly perfected and completed in 
every part, and outwardly equipped with perfect fitness for all 
his purposes in time and eternity. With our recovery as a na¬ 
tion ^3*$ fatherland the spiritual nature has inseparably con¬ 
nected our complete cure from all the evils that oppress us.” 
(Ibid., p. 400-401.) 

According to Fichte, then, man must be completely made over by 
the state. But in order to achieve this goal the old traditional 
form of education must be abandoned. An altogetner new type is 
necessary, and the kind that measures up to requirements is that 
of Pestalozzi; for Pestalozzi seeks to train not only the mind but 
the whole man. 

It is almost self-evident that this new education, which is 
not only a national education but also an education unto nationali sm, 
must be entirely under the control of the state. It cannot be left 
to the church as heretofore; for the church neglects the national 
interests since it focusses its attention on the after-life, a hea¬ 
ven above this earth. And whoever looks to such a heaven, says 
Fichte, has no true fatnerland here below. (Werke, VII, p. 383.) 
Likewise education cannot be left to the parents o!f* tne home. Such 
training would be too haphazard and desultory. It also could not 
be general. Education is, therefore, essentially tne business of 














, (. 

. 

. 







. 



- 28 


the state* 

To the objection that there may be some -who cannot be brought 
into line even by this better type of education, Fichte has an an¬ 
swer. He says in that case the state must use force, for the in¬ 
dividual does not live unto himself, as already pointed out* he 
is like a member of the body, a unit within the whole, and as mi ch 
he must play his part* If he has not learned this of himself he 
must be forced to do so for the state is also ’Zwangsstaat*, tne 
compelling state* As such its power is absolute and anyone who 
refused to obey must be coerced* 

In doing this the state is completely justified. Because of 
its higher purpose it has the ’rights of majesty* (Majestaetsrecht) 
and may, like a God., not only comp^e^but even risk the lower life 
to save the higher. (II. Address, Ibid., p. 429.) And wnat is 
more, to force tne individual to follow justice is to force him to 
obey his own enlightened will and be truly free. ”Den Rechtsge- 
setze unterworfen sein, heis z t: unterworfen sein der £*genen Ein- 
sicht.” (ibid*, p. 574*) This means that moral obligation and 
freedom are the same thing. A little further on Fichte insists 
that M he should be absolute lord (Zwingherr) who in his time and 
among his people stands at the very top. Everyone must admit that 
in obeying this lord he is really obeying himself.” (ibid., p. 
576.) And then he adds this very significant statement: ”Eeie we 












•• 








. 


















- 

















. 

' 





, 

- 

. 






















* * * 










» 




« 



















- 29 - 


demand the all-embracing unity of the state per se, and the ab¬ 
sorption (das Aufgenen) of all in the state. Since I am one of 
those who have helped along in tnis, I ougnt to know what is 
meant. 1 ’ (ibid., p. 576.) 

It is not difficult to see what an application of these ideas 
leads to in practical life. The individual nas just so much free¬ 
dom as the government allows him. He cannot lay claim to any in¬ 
alienable rights. The statte not only controls his entire educa¬ 
tion but its officials also decide at all times what is just and 
right. The only course for the average citizen is unquestioning 
obedience. Tnus Fichte’s freedom, in the last analysis, is the 
kind of freedom Hitler is always promising his people. They may 
do anything they wish as long as it is in accordance with his will. 

In justice to Fichte it should be added tnat he was sure force 
would be necessary in the case of only a very few. Once the new 
education was introduced the great majority would be animated by 
’Geist’ and would "rise to a free intelligence and willing obe¬ 
dience under general lav/." (Fragments, Werke VII, p. 575.) They 
would come to understand that "unlimited independence" consists 
"in the recognition of one’s own limitations which are consciously 
established by one’s own will." (ibid., p. 535.) 

Of course all tnis again is possible only with Germans, for 
they, and they only, are the genuine and the original folk, f D&s 





. 




















, 

' 

' 











. 


■ 






• - 







30 - 


Urvolk*, * das Volk schlechtweg*. (Reden, Werke VII, p. 374.) As 
the ’Urvolk* they alone can be taught and can understand what real¬ 
ly constitutes a people. 

”It must be obvious at once that only the Germans—the 
original man, who has not become dead in an arbitrary organi¬ 
sation—really has a people, and is entitled to count on one.” 
(Ibid., p. 378.) 


However, there is another consideration if all these fond hopes 
are to be realized, says Fichte. Germany will never assume her 
rightful place if she is not secure politically; therefore Germans 
must look to their borders. And the real borders of the nation 
are not those arbitrary geographical lines but the inner borders, 
those of language and culture. 

”The first, original, and truly natural boundaries of 
States are beyond doubt their internal boundaries. Those who 
speak the same language are joined to each other by a multi¬ 
tude of invisible bonds by nature herself, long before any 
human art begins; they understand each other and can continue 
to make themselves understood more and more clearly; they be¬ 
long together and are by nature one and an inseparable totality” 
(Ibid., p. 460.) 

This is the same thougiit expressed by the poet Ernst Moritz 
Arndt in the well knovm lines; 

”Was ist des Deutschen Vaterland? 

So neiantfendlich mir das Land! 

Soweit die deutscne Zunge klingt 
Und Gott im HiifaiLel Lieder singt. 

Das soil es sein! 

Das, wackrer Deutscher, neane dein!” 

According to this Germans belong to Germany wherever they are, and. 



' 





. 


1 








■ 




... 

- 


















« 






. - 

' , • , 











































31 


by implication, the territory tney inhabit should also be a part 
of the Reich. 

Because Germans just naturally belong together, they should ne¬ 
ver attempt to absorb a , Volk f of another race or language. That 
can never be of benefit. A people true to its nature may conquer 
a neignboring territory but it must drive out the foreign race or 
make tnem slaves; otherwise it will lose the cnaracteristic of the 
f Volk schlechtweg* and work towards its own disintegration. 

Tnis of course smacks of Nazi racialism, though Fichte stressed 
language rat er than bodily structure and blood. He felt that if 
people spoke German and considered German their mother tongue tney 
sfciould be looked upon as members of the German national state. And 
yet Fichte made one important exception. The Jews, he dedared, 
could never really be German. Sven if a Jew spoke the language 
there was always something obnoxious about him. Fichte claimed 
he had never found a Jew who had any sense of justice, humanity, 
or truth. Therefore, the only thing to do with this degenerate 
people was to deport tnem outrignt or to make life so miserable 
for tnem as to force them to leave of their o to accord. In view 
of modern development tnis anti-Semitism of Fichte is certainly 
significant. (Beitraege, p. 149 ff.) 

Closely allied with tne foregoing is nis economic nationalism. 




. 











- 








. 

. ' 


















. 






















32 - 


The state mist be "closed commercially", says Fichte# This idea 
he had developed already in an earlier work, entitled "Der geschlos- 
sene Handelstaat" where his economic doctrine is set forth at sone 
length. 

Following Rousseau Fichte says thatman gets his place in life 
and his sphere of activity by an economic contract, and that the 
state’s duty is to secure the enforcement of the contract. But 
note what part the state plays in the economic field. It divides 
all workers into three classes: producers, artisans, and merchants. 
The individual hasn’t very much to say about this, particularly af¬ 
ter he nas once been classified. He just has to stay put or the 
whole scheme will break down. 

The difficult problem of finance is summarially dealt with by 
the government. Fichte would have the state fix tne value of all 
things and tneir price on the market but not in terms of silver arid 
gold but on the basis of a bushel of grain. To Tfrnat end the state 
creates a purely national money (Landgeld) which is used by the 
people within the state. A World money (Weltgeld) would also be 
necessary, but this would not be in circulation and wouldbe com¬ 
pletely controlled by the state. 

But to make the whole sheme work a third operation is required, 
namely the isolation of the state commeril@te.ily from the rest of the 
world. In this way the German people might become wholly indepen- 



. 








« 






' ■ r 





- 


























. 











33 - 


dent of foreign commerce and economically selfsufficient. Fichte 
believed that Germany contained within her own boundaries every¬ 
thing needed to maintain a proper standard of living. If the econo¬ 
mic resources were properly developed there would be no need to 
trade with the outside world and the greatest happiness for the 
people would ensue. They could live in peace and security, little 
disturbed by excessive taxation, crime waves, and wars. What is 
more, Hie people would be more firmly attached to their fatherland, 
a real national character would be developed and a high sense of 
national honor engendered in the hearts of the masses. 

Undoubtedly the ideas and methods which were prevalent at that 
time affected Fichte’s thought, as Engelbrecht points out; but who 
will say that he was not influenced also by Plato who held similar 
views witn regard to the state’s duty in the economic field? 

Lassalle writing about thirty years later was speaking irj the Fich- 
tean vein when he said: ”We must widen our notion cf the state so 
as to believe that the state is tne institution in T/hich the whole 
virtue of humanity should be realized.” (Theory of the State, 
cited in Engelbrecht, p. 82.) Fichte, like all totalitarians, is 
bent upon the complete nationalization of all economic activity 
with a view toward ultimate self sufficiency of the national state. 
And so we see that also Hitlerian ’autarchy’ is not a product of 
the twentieth century. 










■ ' 








. '■ v r ' . . ■: ' 

. 

, 










■ 




r 

* 




. 


i 











, 




.... 






















34 - 


However, Fichte's totalitarianism stands out still more clearly 
•when we examine his teachings concerning patriotism and religion 
and the relationship between the two* 

Since only the Germans are a real ’Volk* they alone know what 
patriotism is. Other peoples may spek about it but they never have 
and never can experience true love for the nation. "Only the Ger¬ 
man is capable of real and rational love for his nation." (Werke, 
VII, p. 378.) 

It was this spirit that animated the old Germanic tribes ■'when 
they were threatened by the Romans, says Fichte. Without being 
aware of it they were fighting in the front- ranks of civilization. 
If the Romans had subjugated the Germans the development of mankind 
would nave taken a different, and ajnot too happy turn. Hot only 
the Germans, therefore, are indebted to the old Teutons for all they 
are and have, but the whole modern world owes its very existence to 
their spirit and love for the nation. 

A similar love must animate Germans today, and that both people 
and government. In fact, patriotism must rule the state. Fichte 
answers the question: "What spirit is it that may place itself at 
the helm of the state?" with these words: 

"Hot the spirit of the peaceful citizen’s love for the 
constitution and the laws, but the devouring flame of higher 
patriotism, which embraces the nation as the vesture of the 
e tehhal ,~Tor which tne nob Si-minded man joyfully sacrifices’ 
himselT, and tne ignoble man, who only exists for the sake of 


















■ 


■ . f 





« 




. 














/ • 


















* 






. 






. 


















•• %?■ 


























35 - 


other, must sacrifice himself.” (italics our own) (ibid., p. 

487.) 

YJhat Fichte demands is not the common' garden variety of pa¬ 
triotism but a patriotism of a higher type, one which "embraces the 
nation as the vesture of the eternal." The true German looks upon 
his nation asfoivine. He views it "in the image of eternity." 

(Unter dem Bilde der Swigkeit, und zwar der siclibaren u nd versinn- 
lieliten Ewigkeit.)’ (ibid., p. 383.) His attitude toward the 
fatherland is therefore one of awe and reverence. 

Thus we see that Fichte’s patriotism breathes a religious 
spirit. Indeed, if the question is asked: lhat is the relation 
between patriotism and religion the answer must be, tnat for Fich¬ 
te there is no real difierence. His ’Vaterlandsliebe’ is his re¬ 
ligion. The nation is not only divine it is also the organ through 
which the eternal spirit reveals itself and which makes possible 
the fulfillment of the highest ideals and aspirations of man. 

Fichte’s argument runs something like this. True religion 
does not consist above all in a looking forward to and seeking af¬ 
ter the bliss of eternal life in the hereafter or in the obedience 
and submission to the will of God. That was the case with the 
apostles and tne first Christians, but that was the exception. The 
natural condition and the rule of the universe is that man seeks 
his heaven here upon earth, that he longs to have some of the eter¬ 
nal flow into his every day life here and now. He wants to trans- 



















- 36 - 


plant the immutable into the temporal, and that in such a way that 
mortal eye can see it. Every noble-minded person desires to live 
on in his children ahd children’s children , a nd thus have his life, 
renewed and enobled, continue long after he has passed from the 
scene. (Ibid., 379-380.) In other words Fichte discards a 1 Jen- 
seits - Religion 1 for a ’Diesseits-Religion.* He says: 

"What man of noble mind (Edeldenkender) is there who does 
not want to scatter, by action or thought, a grain or seed for 
the unending progress in perfection of his peace, to flin| 
something new and unprecendent into time, that it may remain 
there and become the inexhaustible source of new creations? 

Does he not wish to pay for his place on this earth and the 
short span of time allotted to him with something that even 
here below will endure forever, so that he, the individual, 
although unnamed in history (for the thirst for posthumous 
fame is contemptible vanity}, may yet in his own consciousness 
and his own faith leave behind him unmistakable memories that 
he, too, has existed on the earth." (Ibid., p. 380.) 

According to tne thoughts and the needs of these ’Edeldenken- 
den’, a kind of spiritual nobility, the world is to be arranged, 
for on their account the world still continues to exist. Others 
are there merely for their sake and must submit to them. 

And now Fichte tells us, that the only basis of the hope and 
faith of the noble-minded is the existence of the nation. His on¬ 
ly guarantee that he will live on after his death is an order of 
things which he considers eternal in itself and also capable of 
taking up into itself the eternal. This ’order 1 is explained in 

the following very significant paragraphs: 

"Such an order of things, however, is the special spiritual 





37 


nature of human environment which, al thought incomprehensible 
(note the mysticism, A. G.) nevertheless exists, and from which 
he himself, with all his thoughts and deeds and witn his belief 
in their eternity, has proceeded—the people, from which he is 
descended and among which he formed and grew up to be what he 
now is.” (ibid,, p. 381.) 

This same idea is further expressed in these words: 

’’The noble-minded man f s belief in the eternal continuance 
of his influence even on this earth is thus founded on the hope 
of the eternal continuance of the people from which he nas de¬ 
veloped, and on the characteristic of that people as indicated 
in the hidden law of which we have spoken, without admixutre 
of, or corruption by, any alien element which does not belong 
to the totality ofthe functions of that law. This character¬ 
istic is the eternal thing to wnich he entrusts the eternity 
of himself and of his continuing influence, tne eternal order 
of things in which he places his portion of eternity, he must 
will its continuance, for it alone is to him tne means by which 
the short span of his life here below is extended into contin¬ 
uous life here below.” (ibid., p. 382.) 

According to this man is not only the creation of his environ¬ 
ment and the product of his nation but his very life, all his hopes 
for time and eternity, are wrapped up in the existence of -the ’Volk 1 
This is further expressed in Fichte*s definition of a people: 

”Das ganze der in Gesellsnaft mit einander fortlebenden 
und sich aus sich seibst immerfort natuerlich und geistig er- 
zeugenden Menschen, das insgesamt unter einem gewissen be son¬ 
de ren Gesetze der Entwickelung des Goettlichen aus inm steht.” 
(Ibid., p. 381.) 

That is to say, a people is not a group of individuals who hap¬ 
pen to be living together under one governmental roof, but above 
all a totality of human beings who reproduce themselves bodily and 
spiritually, and who are subject to a certain special law of the 
development of the godly out of itself. According to this law all 










38 - 


future revelations of the divine will appear and take shape in the 
people, (l.c.) This law also produces the national character. 
’’That law determines entirely and completes what has been called 
the national character of a people, that law of the development of 
the original and divine.” If the individual citizen tnus regards 
his nation, the godly will appear in him also and he can rejoice 
in the fact that he is God*s vessel and that througn Mm the Divine 
flows into the world. Having come to this realization he will not 
only serve the fatherland but he ready to give his life for it. 

”Um die Nation zu retten, musz er sogar sterben wollen, damit diese 
lebe, und er in ihr lebe das einzige Leben, das er von je gemocht 
hat." (Ibid., 383.) In fact, it is only because he regards the 
nation as divine and as the guarantee of his own eternal life that 
he can be brought to sacrifice himself for it. ’’Die Verheiszung 
eines Lebens auch hienieden ueber die Dauer des Lebens hienieden 
hinaus,—allein diese ist es, die bis zum Tode fuers Vaterland 
begeistern kann.’’ (Ibid., p. 387.) 

It is evident therefore tnat in Fichte*s mind religion and 
patriotism are inextricably bound up. There are some who contend 
that he did not go as far in his deification of the fatherland as 
do the totalitarians of our day, but the quotations above belie 
this statement. And if there were any doubt left about the matter 
it would be removed by a perusal of a little known but significant 




' 








' 

. 






. 

. 


u 




















, 






1 1 >: : 




* 










39 - 


work which appeared in the same year as the "Reden." The writing 
in question is one of the "Political Fragments" and is entitled 
"Republik der Deutschen zu Anfang des 22. Jahrhunderts." Fichte 
here assumes tne role of the prophet and purports to tell us wnat 
Germany will be like a few centuries hence, persumably when this 
"flame of higher patriotism* has engulfed the people. Here is the 
picture ne draws. 

After Germany had through the treachery of her princes dis¬ 
appeared for a time she arose again to great strength and glory 
with a new constitution, built on the idea of infinite development 
through education. The lawgivers were not satisfied, however, to 
promulgate civil, criminal and political laws only; they also out¬ 
lined a "Religionsbekenntnis der Deutschen." And now follows a 

6-1 

description of what the church and its confessions w&arelike in the 
new Germany. 

The law-givers at first found the three main confessions of 
Christianity still in existence. They considered it necessary to 
add a fourth and to raise this to the general civic religion (all- 
gemeinde buergerlicne Religion) which would accompany the acts of 
state and sanction them (die Staatsverhanalungen begleiten und 
sanktionieren). (ibid., 534.) All the freely cultured would ad¬ 
here to the new religion. These learned people mignt still acknow¬ 
ledge Christ as a great teacher but as for his doctrine, anyone 









■ ' ■ ' • V S ; 




■ ■' 




. 


. 







si*-' • •*■■■. ■ '; 










. 












■ 

. 












■ 












. 








,. . . - ,• , , 











- 40 


could take it or leave it, or he might interpret it in terms of 
the new religion. Dyed-in-the-wool conservatives mignt adnere to 
tne old confession and continue the old form of worship, Persum- 
ably, this will not be for long* The older people will die and soon 
all citizens will join the national church. But even in this tran¬ 
sition period all will be held to observe the civic religious cere¬ 
monies (die buergerlichen religioezen VerhaidLungen) which are out¬ 
lined by the state officials alongside the older forms* And on 
one thing the lawgivers must insist. Since upon the religion of 
love &lso the love of the fellow-citizen is based, no one will be 
permitted to lay claim to a salvation from which other citizens are 
excluded, 

"The lawgivers, who had in mind to found also a genaral 
love of the ferllow-citizen upon a religion of love, insisted, 
that everyone who hoped for another and blessed life would 
have to recognize everyone of his fellow-citizesn as capable 
of that same salvation, and that no doctrine contrary to this 
thesis could be tolerated; they made tne public recognition 
of this thesis a condition of citizenship; they put it into 
the public baptismal form; they expected the teachers of all 
confessions to teach this explicitly," 

That simply means that it would be against the law to preach 
the traditional doctrines of Christianity, No one would be per¬ 
mitted to say to a fellow-German: "He that believeth not shall be 
damned," (Luke 16: 16.) A feHow-German must be looked upon as 
belonging to the elect of God no matter what he believes. And the 
reason for that is stated in the following words: 









- 41 


Whoever claims to know that a blessed hereafter awaits him 
and his fellow-believers from which otners who are also his 
fellow-citizens are excluded, obviously considers nimself and 
the members of his group better than tne latter; and, no matter 
what he may contend, it is impossible and he is not to be be¬ 
lieved, if he says, that he can honor and love and be willing 
to serve those, from whom he believes he will be entirely sepa¬ 
rated in the after-life, as much as those with whom he expects 
to spend the -whole of eternity." (Ibid., p. 536.) 

The lawgivers must insist on this because any other conception 
would destroy the spiritual unity of the ^olk 1 which could no long¬ 
er remain a totality* (ein Ganzes). What is actually implied, c£ 
course, is that the bond of citizenship is closer than any other 
tie, but also that the state will tell its citizens exactly what 
they are to believe. This is further evidenced,by the articles of 
the new confession which are to guide the national church. 

These articles are few and brief. In hie first place there must 
be a belief in freedom and absolute indep endence (unmaschraenkte 
Selbststaendigkeit). A dependence upon a divine revelation as 
authoritative is evidence of a slave mind. The Germans dare not 
nave their freedom or intelligence limited by any higher autnority. 

Another, and in fact the chief doctrine of these"general Chris¬ 
tians* is that they have their being, for time and eternity, in 
God. Fichte expresses it this ways 

Religion is the knowledge of our being solely in God, 
and our abiding continuance in Him, and the assurance that 
He reveals Himself to us immediately. ( Ibid.,p.537.) 

Since the Bible is generally considered tne * national 

book* instruction is to be based upon it but the teacners of the 






. 














- 42 - 


people may interpret it in the light of the new Christianity, 

The church edifice is a beautiful building in a large open 
place surrounded by walls. In thes e walls are long rows of niches 
designed to hold the burial urns containing the ashes of the dead, 
for in the new Reich regular burial will be substituted by crema¬ 
tion, The highest and most honored place is reserved for those 
who have died on the field of battle; the second row for those who 
through Msdom have counseled the nation; the third for them, who, 
as fathers and mothers, have reared children for the fatherland. 
Down below, in the lowest row, is a place for the ones who nave 
rendered practically no service to their country and therefore are 
not even named, 

Sunday is retained as the day of worship. At an early hour 
the bell tolls and all the people of the parish gather in front of 
the church. No one who is well may be absent from the services. 

At a given signal the doors are thrown open and all enter the 
church under the strains of appropriate music. The minister is 
already at the altar. As soon as the people are seated the large 
curtain at the altar is drawn aside and cannons, muskets, and other 
weapons come into view. Tnen the justice of the peace appears and 
unfurls the £lag. 

The first act of worship is the interment of the dead which 
takes place according to the rank indicated above. As a sign that 










‘ 









43 - 


t]ie congregation has forgiven the deceased all his faults and 
shortcomings a blank sheet of paper is burned while the following 
words are spoken: 

’’If the earthly hull (irdishce Huelle) has at times 
hindered the rise of the heavenly will, tnis has now been 
laid aside; may this be blotted out of our remembrance as 
well as that of all mortals.” (ibid., p. 542.) 

After this solemn ceremony, a second, the receiving of tne 
newborn infants, takes place. There is no baptism, however; the 
name of God is not even mentioned. The mother or some other woman 
steps before the congregation and holds the child high so that all 
can see it. Then a sheet of paper is produced and the name en¬ 
rolled upon it. "While this is going on the minister, speaks these 
words of consecration (die Einweihungs-forme1) : 

”We name you Maria Meyer in .... (repeated by the 
congregation) as a sign that we, and through us the entire 
Fatherland of the German nation, recognise you as being cap¬ 
able of Reasnn (repeated by the congregation), as one who is 
partaker in all rights of our citizenship (repeated by the 
congregation), as co-heir of eternal life, which also we hope 
for (repeated by the congregation).” (ibid., p, 544-545). 

When all children have been received the pastor turns to the 

whole group and says: 

’’Live, grow and prosper! May the page in the record 
begun for you be the history of a moral life! May you join 
others in love which shall bind together all in the group 
in which you labor, and may brave sons and daughters take 
vour place when you are taken from us!” (Congregation joins 
in this.) (Ibid., p. 545.) 

Such is Fichte^ conception of the ideal religion and the 





- 44 - 


ideal church. We may agree with Engolbrocht that "this astonishing 
fragment stands alone in Fichte f s work," but we cannot agree with 
him -when he a dds that "there is nothing in the author* s previous 
thought to prepare us for it." Engelbrecht forgets that 'triumph¬ 
ant nationalism* as he calls it, inevitably leads to an identifica¬ 
tion of love for tho fatherland with religion. The nation assumes 
such importance in the life and thought of the individual that 
everything else pales into insignificance by comparison. Indeed, 
if the nation or the state is divine and the organ of God*s reve¬ 
lation to man, then it is quite natural that everyone must stand 
in awe of it, and a nationalistic religion with a worship in accor¬ 
dance with the principles of nationalism is the logical result. The 
'astonishing fragment* is, therefore, quite in line with the major 
political thought of Fichte, especially during his later years. And 
Dr. Arthur Frey of Switzerland does him no injustice when he says 
that Fichte is the real "father of Rosenberg's 'Myth of the Twen¬ 
tieth Century*•" (The Ordeal of the German Church, p. 53.) 

Whatever be the merit of other elements in Fichte, therefore, 
(and there are other elements) it cannot be denied that he is one 
of the prophets and founders of German nationalism and that he pre¬ 
pared the way for the advent of Naziism. Long before Hitler's rise 
to power *Fichte-Bunde* were organized especially in the university 
centers of Germany and formed the rendevous of extreme nationalists* 











- 45 - 

There is also good reason why Fichte is/bill one of the most popu¬ 
lar writers in Nazi circles, R. B. Pe ry is right when he says 
th t "Nationalism, popularized by the French Revolution, and con¬ 
secrated by the idealistic patriotism of Fichte, claimed precedence 
in every field of human endeavor." (Phil. Roots of Totalitarianism, 
p# 27.) And Fichteanism received a mighty strengthening at the 
hands of an even greater thinker.George Wilhelm Hegel. 


Georg® Wilhelm Hegel 

—CrTTtri' l'ssn- 

It has been said that Hegel’s system is much less personal 
than that of any other philosopher, that his head rather than his 
heart is what appears throughout both his life and his writings. 
Undoubtedly this is true, for Hegel was restrained and unemotional, 
a rather prosaic type of man, abhorring all "Schwaermerei". He in¬ 
sisted that thought or reason must govern all, and that if we have 
discovered the laws of logic we will have discovered the law of 
all existence. This explains the repugnance he felt for the teach¬ 
ing of Fichte and the later Schelling. "Pure reason, not the will, 
was his hero, and his hero’s adventures are adventures in thought, 
rather than voilition." (Fuller, History of Philosophy, p. 403.) 

Hegel’s totalitarianism is, therefore, quite different from 
that of his older contemporary. While Fichte’s is derived above 







■ 









» I 









■ • ’ 

. ■ 

. 


! 








- 46 - 


all from his enthusiastic nationalism He el developes the "purely 
intellectual modes and processes through which the idea of the 
state must take shape." For him the state is an expression on the 
social plane of the Idea. Hence his whole political philosophy is 
in a much more vital sense an integral part of his general philos¬ 
ophy. In this respect his thought parallels that of Plato and 
Aristotle rather than that of Kant and Fichte. It will, therefore, 
be necessary to devote a little time to his fundamental ideas. 

Hegel like Fichte and Schelling rebelled against Kant’s dual¬ 
ism and the objective *thing-in-itself’, which underlies all ex¬ 
perience. He also broke with the latter two, however, who, though 
repudiating Kant, still retained some kind of Absolute which could 
not be explained, and in Hegel’s view turned out to be a purely 
negative quantity, "the night in which all crows are black." Hegel 
demanded teal organic unity in which Reality is not opposed to ap¬ 
pearance but rather explains it, in which the Absolute is not be¬ 
yond experience but accounts for the many sided existence we wit¬ 
ness round about us. "Multiplicity and variety, opposition, anta¬ 
gonism are all subservient to some nigher principle in which they 
are ultimately identified and to whose being—which is an activity 
of reconciling and fusing them—they are necessary." (Fuller,p.404.) 

This principle according to Hegel’s "Phaenomenonolgie des 
Geistes" is a Process. The Real, the Absolute, is not a Substance 







47 - 


as Spinoza and also Schelling had maintained, nor an Ego as Fichte 
taught, but an on-going World-Process* It is not a supor-personality 
or Ego which thinks the world and thus creates it. This thinking, 
this creating or generating, is the Absolute itself. Just as an 
individual is his own life or his career, so everything that has 
ever happened, is happening now, or will happen in the ftture, is 
the career, the life, the very being of tne Absolute. This deve¬ 
lopment goes on and on without regard to space or time according 
to a plan which is inherent in its evolution. 

Differently stated we may say it is the Absolute Idea realiz¬ 
ing itself or living out what it from time immemorial intended to 
be. The process involves self-consciousness and self-knowledge. 

Thus we may say ’’the Absolute Existence which realizes and makes 
explicit the Absolute Idea, must be conceived as a process of 
evolving self-consciousness culminating in complete self-knov/ledge 
or comprenension of the Idea which its development sets forth.” 
(Fuller, p. 407.) There is then no distinction between the subject 
and object. The Absoluce is its own object. Thinking and being 
are one. The Absolute is an Idea or Plan becoming conscious of 
itself. This Hegel finally calls ’’Geist” or Spirit. The Spirit 
is its own matter and own form. There is no actual distinction 
between the self-realizing activity of the Idea and the Idea itself. 

In analysing the self-realizing process of Spirit we may dis- 














‘i ~ o' 


- 3 











- 48 


tinguish three stages, the subjective, the objective, and the abso¬ 
lute spirit. Subjective spirit refers to the consciousness of the 
self. 1'1/hen self-consciousness becomes the social consciousness we 
have the transition from subjective to objective spirit; for common 
objects, common interest, and common activities are the Spirit realiz¬ 
ing itself objectively. Spirit now thinks in terms of society or the 
race rather than that of the individual. The influence of objective 
spirit makes the individual a rational being. In society man frees 
himself from his blind selfishness, his subjectiveness, and identi¬ 
fies himself with the universal. He thus becomes a moral being and 
hence free in the true sense. 

In absolute spirit the complete union or synthesis of all dif¬ 
ferences and distinctions takes place. Thevhole world-process with 
its apparent oppositions and contradictions, is fused into one all 
embracing, harmonizing and coherent reality, the self-conscious life 
of the Absolute. 

This conception implies furthermore that the law and goal of the 
Absolute World-Process is not external to itself, something imposed 
from without. If it were, then the process would not be the Abso¬ 
lute, this other principle would be. Hegel says, the law and goal 
which governs the movement are immanent in the Absolute, in fact, 
are the Absolute itself. Now the law which governs both human 
thought and unconsciousness nature is reason, and the goal of 
all is likewise reason, namely self-conseiousV ease#. He el puts 




















, 

. 

’ 

* 







. 



















- 49 


it this way: 

"World-history—is self-caused and self-realized reason, 
and its actualized existence in spirit is knowledge. Hence, 
its development issuing solely out of tne conception of its 
freedom is a necessary development of the elements of reason. 

It is, therefore, an unfolding of the spirit*s self-conscious¬ 
ness and freedom. It is tne exnibition and actualization of 
the Universal Spirit.” (Ph. d. R., p. 342.) 

It is in this sense that we must understand Hegel’s oft re¬ 
peated statement: ”Tne Real is the Rational, and the Rational is 
the Real." 

On the basis of this fundamental thought of the every-moving, 
ever-evolving World-Process, which Fuller calls "a dance of life— 
a spontaneous act of rhythmic self-expression," Hegel interprets 
all the operations of physical nature, of human history, of the 
state, of art, of religion, and of philosophy. In this study we 
are interested chiefly in his doctrine concerning human history 
and the state. The two main works that must be considered here 
are his "Philosophie des Rechts" and "Philosophie der Geschichte." 

In developing his philosophy of the state Hegel emphasizes 
in the very beginning that he wishes to exnibit the state as think¬ 
able, to develop the purely intellectual modes and processes through 
which the Idea of the state is realized. He says, therefore, "the 
idea of the state is not concerned with the historical origin of 
either the state in general or of any particular state with its 
special rights and characters." "Philosophic investigation deals 










50 - 


with only the inner side of all this, the thought conception (ge- 

dachter Begriff)." (Ph. of R. p. 241.) At first this might be 

taken to mean that Hegel is speaking of the ideal state, but tnat 

is not the case as we shall see later. 

Hegel’s doctrine of the state is contained chiefly in the 
third section of tne "Philosophy of Right." There, in a lengtny 
discussion, he tells us again and again what he conceives tne state 
to be. Thus we read 

"The state is the realized ethical idea or ethical spirit. 
It is tne will which manifests itself, makes itself clear and 
visible, substantiates itself. It is the will which thinks 
and knows itself, and carries out what it knows, and in so 
far as it knows." (p. 240.) 

r "The state, which is the realized substantive will, hav¬ 
ing its reality in the particular self-sonsciousness raised 
to the plane of the' universal, is absolutely rational." "It 
is the objective spirit." (p. 240.) 

"The state is an embodiment of reason." (p. 242.) 

"The state as a completed reality is the ethical whole 
and the actualization of freedom. It is the absolute purpose 
of reason that freedom should be actualized. The state is the 
spirit, which abides in the world and there realizes itself 
consciously." (p. 244-245) 

Similar statements we find in the introduction tothis same 


work: 

"This treatise, in so far as it contains a political 
science, is nothing more tnan an attempt to conceive of and 
present the state as it itself rational!,’ (p. XXVIII.) 

"The state is the ethical world, Yjhich is in fact reason 
potently and permanently actualized in self-consciousness." 

(. XIX.) 










51 


And also in the introduction to his ’’Philosophy of History” 
Hegel says: 

"The state is thus the embodiment of rational freedom, 
realizing fend recognizing itself in an objective form.—The 
state is the idea of spirit in the external manifestation of 
human will and its freedom." (p. 49.) 

All tnis will be largely unintelligible unless we view it in 
the light of Hegel’s general philosopnic- thought. Tflfe must recall 
that for Hegel the Absolute is the eternal world-process, or tne 
whole history of the universe. This all-embracing movement is 
nothing else than the Idea or Bpirit realizing itself or becoming 
conscious of itself. Now in this process there are various stages 
or levels. In nature we have the manifestation of the Idea on the 
physical plane. In human consciousness the self-realization reach 
es a higher level, for the spirit becomes conscious of its free¬ 
dom. Eut this is only subjective, for it is the exercise of the 
individual will or conscience. The subjective must pass into or 
be synthesized with the objective, and this takes place in society 
or the social order. This social order is not a hodge-podge of 
individuals thrown to-gether and ever at variance with one another 
but an organic living whole. And the highest, the most complete 
and perfectly developed form of the social order is the state, 
which absorbs and synthesizes ail other human institutions. 

Thus we may say that the state is a manifestation of tne 
Spirit. "It is the spirit which abides in the world and there 















: 

■ 

' 




















’ J ■ 


' 

' < r '• ■ • •• 

. 






.. 

■ 






» ’ • : 

. 









*■ o **/ •• 


realizes itself consciously.” (ibid., p. 2:4.) It is "reason, 
pote\$hly and permanently actualizod" because only in society can 
man live the life of reason. 

Again we may say that the state is the "actualization of ob¬ 
jective freedom" or the "reality of freedom"; for in defining 
freedom we must not start from individual self-consciousness but 
from the essence (Wesen) of self-consciousness which realizes it¬ 
self as sovereign might, in "which individuals are only moments." 
(Carriett, Morals and Folitics, p. 106.) 

It is a little more difficult to understand how the state can 
be conceived of as "objective will." Here we must keep in mind 
that with Hegel thought and will are identical, and that there is 
no such thing as thought per se or will per se. "They are not two 
separate faculties. The will is a special way of thinking; it is 
thought translating itself into reality; it is the impulse of 
thought to give itself reality." (Dh. of Right, p. 11.) Hegel’s 
"concept (Begriff) is a causa sui, a logically self-deterai ihg 
force." (Sterritt, The Ethics of Hegel, p. 28.) Hegel never tires 
of inveighing against the vice of abstraction. He does not say 
with Kant "the Good is what ought to be but "the Good is." And 
so he cannot think of the will (the universal, not the individual 
will) as existing for itself in a kind of vacuum, but as really 
accomplishing something, as being objective, as being realized ra- 









- 53 - 


tionally. H© finds the will throbbing in the social organism of 
humanity. For that reason he says the state, as tne highest form 
of the social order, is ^objective' will* or the ’will objectified’. 
And because the will is not determined by something ou .side itself 
it is free. For we must not forget that will is thought translating 
itself into existence, or setting before itself an object with which 
it is really identified. In other words Hegel identifies the will 
with the system or the totality of its object and thus he can speak 
of the will as willing itself. ’’The free will wills the free will.” 
That is the same as saying that "the state is the embodiment of 
concrete freedom." (Ph. of Right, p. 248.) 

From all this it will be seen that the staue is for Hegel not 
just an ordinary human institution. It is something far above that; 
it id divine. And indeed Hegel uses just such lofty terms, in 
describing the state. Ponder, for example, pronouncements such as 
the following: 

"The state is the march of God in the world," (Es ist 
der Gang Gottes, das der Staat ist.) "We must contemplate 
the idea, this actual God." (Ph. of Right, p. 247.) 

"The state is the divine will as a present spirit, which 
unfolds itself in the actual shape of an organized world." 

(p. 260.) 

"The existence of the state is the work of God in the 
wcrld,” "the divine existing in and for itself." 

"The state is the world which the spirit has made for 
itself." "Just so high as the spirit stands above nature, 
the state stands above the physical life. We must hence honor 








54 


this state as the divine on earth.” (p. 276.) 

"The state is the divine Idea as it exists on Earth." 

(Pn. of Right, p. 41.) 

Expressions such as these hardly need any comment. It is plain 
that Hegel actually deifies the state. Ho totalitarian of our day 
would speak in more absolute terms than he does. Thus we may say 
that already a hundred years before Hitler we have in a very real 
sense the totalitarian state. And this element in his thought be¬ 
comes still more apparent when we study the position Hegel assigns 
to the individual in the state. 

It should be noted to begin with tna*Hegel like Fichte has 
much to say about freedom, not only of the state as Actualized 
freedom 1 but also of the freedom of the individual. We have al¬ 
ready pointed out that the term 'freedom* can be understood in 
various ways. Thomas Hill Green in his very interesting "Lectures 
on the Principles of Political Obligations" has this to say about 
its 


"As to the sense given to freedom*, it must of course 
be admitted that every usage of the term to express anything 
but a social and political relation of one man to others in¬ 
volves a metaphor. Even in the original application its 
sense is by no means fixed. It always implies indeed some 
exemption from compulsion by others, but tne extent and con¬ 
ditions of this exemption, as enjoyed by the 'freeman* in dif- 
different states of society, are very various. As soon as tie 
term freedom* comes to be applied to anything else tnan an 
established relation between a man and other men, its sense 
fluctuates much more." (p. 3.) 











- 55 - 


There is certainly much truth in this. In fact, it is not too 
much to say that the meaning of the term depends in large measure 
on the ideas and the philosophy of the person using it. Hegel evi¬ 
dently uses the term in a metapnorical or shall ve say metapnysical 
sense. His argument runs something like this* The state is actua¬ 
lized freedom; the individual, in order to be really free, must see 
to it that his subjective will gets in tune with the absolutely 
rational, objective will of the state. To be free is to be ration¬ 
al and ’’rationality consists in the thorough unity of universality 
and individuality. Taken concretely, and from the standpoint of 
the content, it is the unity of objective freedom with subjective 
freedom, or the general substahtive will with tne indivddaul con¬ 
sciousness and tne individual will seeking particular ends.” (Ph. 
of Right, p. 241.) ”The individual is intended to pass a universal 
life,” (ibid., p. 241.) that is, if his life is shaped so that it 
may attain its true end, that which it has in it to become and 
which in the final analysis the individual really wills it to be, 
it will coincide witn the universal, which is absolutely rational. 
How since ’’rationality exists as the state,” (Ibid., p. 266.), or 
what is the same thing, since the state is the manifestation of 
objective will, the individual attains tr©CT freedom when his sub¬ 
jective will coincides with the objective will of the state. "The 
particular self-consciousness” must be raised to the ’’place of the 







56 - 


universal” which is absolutely rational. ’’This substantive unity 
is its own motive and absolute end. In this end freedom attains 
its highest right.” (Ph. of Right, p. 240.) 

In dealing with the relation of the individual, to the atate, 
therefore, it must A be supposed that tne ’’decisive features of the 
state are to be regarded as the security and protection of property 
and personal freedom. If that were the case then the interest of 
the individaul as such would be the ultimate ©nd of the social 
union, but that is not true says Hegel. ’’The state has a totally 
different relation to the individual. It is the objective spirit, 
and he has his truth, real existence, and ethical status only in 
being a member of it.” (Ph. of Right, p. 240-241.) In other words 
a person becomes a true human being only within the state. Other¬ 
wise he has no f 0bjektivitaet*, f'.Vahrheit', or *Sittlichkeit 1 • 

This is, of course, essentially what is called the Organic* 
view of the state which also Fichte held. 

”A hand which-is cut off still looks like a hand and 
exists thought it is not real." (Ibid., p. 270.) "The true 
relation is illustrated by the fable of the belly and the 
limbs. Although the parts of an organism do not constitute 
an identity, yet it is of such a nature that, if one of its 
parts makes itself independent, all must be harmed. We can¬ 
not by means of predicates, propositions, etc., reach any 
right estimate of the state, which should be apprenended as 
an organism.” (ibid., p. 267.) 

There is perhaps nothing that so forcefully brings out the 
totalitarian doctrine as this illustration of the body and the limbs 









. 


■ I 






' ' 

' 




. 










■ ! - . ■; 




n c-r 


i . 1 


■ 












- 57 - 


for, if anything, this emphasizes the point that the ■whole exis¬ 
tence of the individual is wrapped up in the life of the state. 

The state is a kind of individual writ large. As it would be fool¬ 
ish to speak of the welfare of the hand as being something differ¬ 
ent from that of the body to which it belongs so it would be foolish 
to separate the welfare and the interests of the citizen from those 
of the state. The individual obeys the state not above all because 
it is identified with the ethical world and with reason, and its 
commands with objective justice (Das Gesetz ist des Recht, als das 
gesstzt, was es an sich war) but because he is thereby obeying 
the ’’substance of his own being.” (Ph. of R. p. 41) The state* s 
law is his own law, for he thereby attains self-satisfaction which 
is his real will. 

”In carrying out his duty the individual insist in some way 
or other discover his own interest, his own satisfaction and 
recompense. ” ’’The individual, who from the point of view of 
his duties is a subject, finds, in fulfilling his civic dutie s, 
protection of persona dnd property, satisfaction of his real 
s&if, and the consciousness ahd self-respect implied in his 
being a member of the whole.” (Ph. of R., p. 251.) 

In other words, duty is identified with interest. ’’The patriot 

observes his national customs and laws as expressions of his won 

true will.” (Sterritt, p. 13.) Or to use once more tne language 

of Rousseau, the general will and real will of the individual are 

identical. The individual realizes himself in so far as the state 


realizes itself, for only through it does he become what he has it 








58 


in him to become and what he ought to be. This identity of wills 
is not set aside either when an evil doer is punished, for, says 
Regel, "the injury which tho criminal experiences is inherently 
just because it expresses his own inherent will, is a visible 
proof of his freedom and is his right.” (Ph. of R., p. 97.) 

In this way Hegel tries to harmonize obedience to the law of 
the state and pesonalfreedom, He contends that th3 common con¬ 
ception of freedom as consisting in doing what one likes belongs 
to the crudest level ofthought, "containing as yet not even a 
suspicion of what is meant by the absolutely free will, right, 
the ethical system, etc." (Ph. of Right, p. 25.) Hegel calls 
such * freedom* mere caprice (Willkuer) and not freedom at all. 

"Ordinary man, believes that he is free, when he is al¬ 
lowed to act capriciously, but precisely in caprice is it in¬ 
herent that he is not free." Caprice, instead of being will 
in its truth, is rather will in its contradiction." (Ibid., 
p. 25 and 26.) "Only that will which obeys law, is free; 
for it obeys itself—it is independent and so free." (Ph. 
of H., p. 41.) 

Hence freedom consists in obeying the law, and Hegel, like 
Rousseau, takes the view that the unperverts d mind intuitively 
recognizes the compulsion of the social institution as fundamental 
ly its own. We may say then that "to be a loyal citizen and to 
fulfill one’s station is wisdom, freedom, goodness, and happiness. 
(Carritt, p. 107.) "The ethical man is the wise man who knows and 
identifies himself with his community." (Sterritt, p. 45.) And 










59 - 


the best education one could wish for his son, says Hegel, follow¬ 
ing Phythagoras, is to have him become a "citizen of a nation with 
good institutions." 

It must be apparent to every one that in real life all this 
adds up to an absolute obedience to the state, notwithstanding He¬ 
gel’s frequent protests to the contrary. The same doctrine is set 
forth already in his "Phaenominologie des Geistes". The root of 
the whole conception is the notion that in the state we are in the 
presence of a being infinitely higher than we are, of whom we are 
but an insignificat part, and that a mind, a soul, a spirit con¬ 
stitutes the life and directs the course of organized society al¬ 
ways in accordance with reasnn. "Each becomes conscious of self 
by sacrificing it to the universal self, which is the nation and 
maintains the welfare of all." (Garritt, p. 109.) 

All these totalitarian principles and pronouncements would 
not be so bad if we could say that Hegel has in mind the ideal 
state, but this we cannot do. At times, indeed, it does appear 
that he .is speaking of the id al state, the state as it ought to 
be # He distinguishes, for example, between the good and the b ad 
state. He says, "A bad state is indeed purely finite and worldly, 
but the rational state is in itself infinite;" and again "a bad 
state is one which merely exists. A sick body also exists, but it 
has no true reality." (Ph. of Right, p. 270 and 271.) As we have 










60 - 


already heard, Hegel insists that when one is concerned with the 
'idea of the state* one need not bother about its origin^ or 1 
basis of its rights. Those things are "mere appearances and belong 
to history," (Ph, of Right., p. 241.) 

Yet Hegel*s predominant moaning is evidently on the other side, 
in the same chapter, from which the foregoing quotation is t aken 
(p. 247) he says: 

"Although a state may be declared to violate right prin¬ 
ciples and to be defective in various ways, it always contains 
the essential moments of its existence, if, that is to say, 
it belongs to the full formed states of our owhjpime." "The 
state is not a work of art. Evil behavior can deoubtless dis¬ 
figure it in many ways, but the ugliest man, the criminal, the 
invalid, the cripple, are living men." 

If these words mean anything they imply that any modern state, 
no matter how deformed or ugly it may be, still contains the essence 
of a real state. "The positive thing, the life, is present in spite 
of defects, and it is with this affirmative that we have here to 
deal." (Ibid., p. 247.) 

This agrees also with Hegel's general -thought. He roundly 
criticized the enlightenment because it tried to reform existing 
institutions on the basis of abstrict right and insisted that the 
actual is the embodiment of historical reason. The ethical idea 
is realized in the state, or to exprress it differently, the ideal 
should be viewed as ezrbodied in the actual. Now we cannot speak 
of "actualization* or ''realization* if we mean an ideal which no- 









61 - 


Wiere exists or exists only in the mind of some philosophers or 
for that matter of some god, Tnat would again be separating 
thought from being, and result in pure abstraction which Hegel 
absolutely denounces. He is never tired of insisting that the 
•rational is the real 1 , What is, is not only intelligible 
(verneunftig) it is •Vernunft 1 itself, and what is, is no ideal 
state. In the very preface to the entire work he assures us 
that he is on guard "against constructing a state as it ought 
to be, Philosophy cannot teach the state what it should be, but 
only how it, the ethical universe, is to be known. 

3<5ov Poios, 1 $0U to 7 

Hie Rhodus, hie saltus. 

To apprehend what is, is the task of philosophy, because what 
is, is reason.” ( Ibid., p. XXVIII.) 

The same idea we find propounded in the "History of Phil¬ 
osophy": "The state is the actually existing, realized moral 
life,” "It is the absolute interest of reason that this moral 
whole should exist.” (p. 40.) 

Thus we are forced to the conclusion that Hegel is speak¬ 
ing of the state or states as we find them to-day. His words 
are too plain to reach any other understanding. And since "ev¬ 
ery nation has the constitution which suits it and belongs to 
it” (Phil, of Right, p. 232.) at any particular time, it follows 
that any modern state is the »realized ethical order’ and 

that its laws are objective for the citizens /of that state. 






62 


and hence must always be obeyed. Again we arrive at a full¬ 
blown totalitarianism. The individual has no rights over 
against the state. He must always submit to its will. If 
he refuses he must be co-erced. The co-ercion is, however, 
no limitation of his freedom^ for he is being forced to do what 
in his innermost nature he wishes to do. 

This whole conception was in many ways a reaction against 
the seventeenth and eighteenth century tendency to judge all 
institutions and also the state in terms of and by reference 
to the conscience or the rights or the happiness of the indi¬ 
vidual. This criticism could easily, and in many cases was 
exaggerated, into an egoism which made tne individual supreme, 
as though one counted for more than a million. The metapny- 
sical theorists like Hegel protested against this, but went 
too far on the other side. They looked upon the organized 
society as a kind of super-entity, a spirit, a greater being, 
a god, to whom the individual with his thoughts of rights 
and aspirations of happiness is entirely subordinate, an or¬ 
ganism which embraces the whole life of man, yes, a something 
which in the last analysis is more than all the individuals 
who compose it. 

It is true, of course, that in a sense a whole is more 
than the sum total of its parts, but that depends on the 




-£ 





* 


■ 


. 

/. • ' , r 1 j; * ■: r ' ;i. *1 7 j: 77 : ' 0IcP 




:: , v v - a;l d' ;; 

■ V 

- 

•• 


. 

‘ 





■ 

. 



• • . l. ' : . 

. ' . ■ . ■ ■ ■ 

. ■ . . . ; ( . 

. i ) ’ : « : 7 .. f . ; ■ ; ■ ’ . 7 ' d 

,, 









63 


sense in which *the parts* are taken. A school, for example, 
have a certain character or stamp which it retains for 
generations. Hundreds may pass through the institution and 
all may be affected by its spirit. Yet that spirit remains 
the same. It is ever present, regardless of who or how many 
are at the school. Nevertheless, this spirit is not some¬ 
thing apart from the individuals who are in the school at any 
one time. It is maintained by individuals. It would be ridi¬ 
culous to say that you could take all the individuals out of 
the institution and that the school would still retain its 
character. 

And similarly it is with the state. It is more than 
any one of its members, but it is never more than all the 
citizens with all their ramified interests and activities. 

All these individuals make the state what it is. If the me¬ 
taphysical philosophers were right it would be quite in order 
to say that we could sacrifice all the citizens in order to 
save the state, obviously a rather grotesque piece of logic. 

Then, too, should be noted that thousands upon thou¬ 
sands of citizens have cut loose from the state in which they 
grew up and found happiness in a new state. Yes, in many in¬ 
stances they became what they had it in them to become just be¬ 
cause of the severenee from the original body politic. All 
this would be inpossible if they were mere limbs or members 





7 












- . ■ x 




7 • w *x . 1 v ; 


* 


. 


l- ' • •: * 


- 

: , • • .« v • "• 






• • 

















64 


of an organism. It proves also, that the ’Sittlichkeit’ of 
that particular nation was not the abjective standard of mo¬ 
rality, nor the actualized freedom for them.. They could live 
and <p*ow and find satisfaction apart from the home/ state 
which, according to Hegel’s totalitarian doctrine, was to en¬ 
velop them whole. 


But to continue with Hegel’s totalitarianism. Further 
evidence of this is given in the exposition of what he calls 
the ’internal constitution’. There he exp'ejfins tne situation 
as follows: 


The political state is divided into three substan¬ 
tive branches: 

a) Tne power to fix and establish the universal. This 
is legislation. 

b) The power, which brings particular spheres and 
individuals cases under the universal. This is the func¬ 
tion of government. 

c) The function of the prince, as the subjectivity 
with which rests the final decision. In this function 
the other two are brought into an individual unity. It 

is at once the culmination and the beginning of the # 1016 . 
This is constitutional monarchy. (Phil, of Right, p. 278.) 

In a subjoined note Hegel continues: 

The perfecting of the state into a constitutional mon¬ 
archy is the work of the modern world, in which the sub¬ 
stantive idea has attained the infinite fcrm. This is 
the descent of the spirit of the world into itself, the 
free perfedtion by virtue of which the idea sets loose 
from itself its own elements,-- and makes them totali¬ 
ties; at the same time it holds them within the unity of 
the conception , in which is found their real rationality. 
The story of this true erection of the etnical life is 
the subject matter of universal world-history. 

(Ibid.,p.278.) 




* 

' 








. . 

- 




> - 


. 










, ' 7 .., 


. 






. 
















■ 






■ ; 

. o ' 

■ 










65 


Thus according to Hegel the development of the constitu¬ 
tional monarchy makes tho modern state perfect, for now we 
have the ’’descent of the spirit of the world into itself” and 
this signifies the ”true erection of the ethical life.” 

Of the three powers which are held to be indispensable 
to the idea of the state the first two do not differ materially 
from the legislature and the executive of other political phil¬ 
osophers. It is Hegel’s unique conception of the monarchic 
p<bwer that interests us here. He looks upon the person of 
the monarch as the unifying force which, so to say, holds 
the whole together and makes it an organ-ism. Without the 
monarch as the unifying force the state is not fully developed; 
there would be no one to make the final decision. ”The ele¬ 
ment which implies absolute decision is not individuality in 
general but one individual, the monarch.” ( Pnil, of Right,p. 
286.) The monarch is therefore called ’the cope-stone’, the 
’ pinnacle’ of the ’great architectonic building*. He is that 
one man who ’’stands at the helm of the state”, who ’’comes 
forward, as summit add essential factor of the constitution”, 

’’the ultimate self of the state’s will.” (ibid., p. 295 & 

291.) Though Hegel insists the monarch ”may not be willful in 
bis acts” (p.290 j he goes on to say that ’’appointment and dis- 
nissai (of government officials) lies in his unlimited, free, 
arbitrary will". ( Ibid., p. 296.) Tnat is absolutism in its 




1 












' 

• • : 0 • * ' * 












, • t 




? - , » 






’ . ; 






r 




i 'll- 'i. 







66 - 


most extreme form* 

But Hegel goes beyond absolutism. What he means to say is 
that the monardh is the embodiment of the spirit of the nation* 
His person gives the state personality, makes it a living, gibing 
concern, as it were* Therefore he says: ’’The personality of the 
state is actualized only as a person, the monarch.? 1 (lbid*,p* 
287*) Hence if sovereignty is to be exercised there must in 
the last analysis be the determination of some person, there 
’’must be spoken a human will". ( Ibid.,p. 291.) It does not 
require a keen mind to recognize the parallel here with the 
*Fuenrer-concept* which is exerting such an influence in the 
totalitarian states at the present time# 

All this implies, of course, that with Hegel there is no 
such thing as sovereignty resting with the people. In fact 
he has a rather low opinion of that part of the nation which 
is usually designated *the people** They are the ones who 
are really too ignorant to know what they want. Says Hegels 

It is rather true that the people, in so far as 
this term signifies a special part of the citizens, 
does not know what it wills. ( Italics our own) To 
know what we will7 and fuHiher what the absolute will, 
namely reason, wills, is the fruit of deep knowledge 
and insight, and is therefore not the property of the 
people. ( Phil, of Right, p. 310.) 

Hegel, therefore, has no use for the literalistic doc¬ 
trine of *liberte 1 , fraternite’, egalite*. He would deny 
that the will of the people is the true source of political 








- 

. 



r 




67 


science. For him a democracy in which tho head of the state is 
chosen by a general vote is an Ending 1 , something entirely unnatu¬ 
ral. As well might one speak of the right of a familyto choose its 
own head. Such a notion proceeds from "opinion, inclination, and 
caprice." (ibid., p. 294.) It militates against the idea that the 
state is the embodiment of spirit, that it is not something acci¬ 
dental. But the "very conception of the monarch as the ultimate 
self of the state*s will" implies that it is natural. Thus the 
monarch as a specific individual is abstracted from all other con¬ 
tent, and is appointed to the dignity of monarch in a directly 
natural way, by birth, (ibid., p. 291.) while "the election of a 
monarch is the worst of proceedings." (ibid., p. 294.) 

Likewise, the people do not take part generally in the making 
of laws. That all should "share individually in the counsels and 
decisions of the general affairs of the state," Hegel considers 
"a superficial view, having no reasonable form." (ibid., p. 316 
and 317.) The argument that since all are members of tne state 
and its affairs are their affairs, all should nave a right to have 
tneir yay is foolish. It overlooks "the fact that the state is an 
organism only because of its reasonable form." (ibid., p. 317.) 
Representative government is, therefore, to be denounced. The ac¬ 
ceptation, Hegel says in his "Phil, der Geschichte" that "for 
legislative purposes generally, the people should be represented 





68 - 


by deputies,” ” is a deep rooted prejudice”, for’on this 
theory people and government are separated and there is a per¬ 
versity in this antithesis. The basis of this view is the abso¬ 
lute validity of subjective will" and caprive, which is not free¬ 
dom at all. (Phil, of History, p. 50.) 

Actually then in Hegel’s state the people can have no real 
part in the government of the nation; and this nilds in spite 
of the elaborate demonstration that in the legislative power 
(gesetzgebende Gewalt) prince, administration (Regierung) and 
people (Volk) do have a part; for the governing is done b y 
the nobility. Hegel would not admit that ’ a man is a man for a 
that’. He abhors the word equality as that term is usually un¬ 
derstood. T^e people are divided into classes. "A nob&ifc or 
governing class, represents ■che absolute universal spirit of 
the others; it is the manifestation of God. That it should be 
elected by the people or have the supreme authority conferred 
upon it would rather diminish tnan increase it sanctity." (Car- 
ritt, p. 112.) Its "ethical character," says Hegel, "is natu¬ 
ral". "Hence it is called and entitled to this pihere by 
birth, without the accident of choice." ( Phil, of Right, p. 

316.) 

To understand this part of Hegel’s thought one must keep 
in mind that for him the state is not founded upon the con¬ 
tract of individuals nor upon the will of the tnousands of its 







. 












. 




■ }> 


.. 














' 




■/! ■ ■ „' 7 J V 

* 

' 


. 















- 























69 


members. That view is too atomistic for nim. As we have seen, 
he holds the state is an organic totality, a natural entity, 
which cannot depend upon the capricious choice of individuals. 
”It is the absolute interest of reason that this moral whole 
should exist,” (Pnil of History, p. 40.) and nerein lies its 
justification. 

At this juncture we may well ask, what the relation be¬ 
tween the various •moral wholes 1 would be which exist at the 
same time and which are presumably all manifestations of ob¬ 
jective spirit or reason. Hegel explains this in the section 
on ’’International Law.” In a way nis whole thought on tnis 
point is summed up in one of his opening sentences: ”The state 
is not a private person, but is in itself a completely indepen¬ 
dent totality." (Phil, of Right,p.336.) (Italics our own.) 

The expression * a completely independent totality 1 is certainly 
3 .11-embracing. It implies that states should not be regarded 
from ’’the stand of private right and morality”, for ”private 
persons have a law courst over them, whereas against the state 
there is no power to decide what is intrinsically right and to 
realize this decision.” (Ibid. ,p. 336.) And again, "The nation 
is a state is the spirit substantively realized and directly 
:'eal| hence it is the absolute power on earth”. ( Ibid., p.337) 
ifhat people airways seem to forget, Hegel would say, is that 









I 


1 ' ' 

■ ! r, ' ' ' . : : 

. 

1 

‘ 



' 
















70 


the sta e is the spirit realized, or reason actualized. Hence 
every politically self-conscious nation is a complete totality, 
absolutely free, having *absolute power 1 . It cannot be subject 
to a higher power, and there cannot, therefore, be a law gover¬ 
ning its relations with other states* 

Kant*s idea that universal peace should be secured by an 
alliance of states "assumes that nations are in accord” which 
they are not, at least not for long. Any agreement is there¬ 
fore "liable to be disturbed by the element of contingency", 
for the state is not obligated to a higher law than its own; 
being absolute there is no power that can force it to keep an 
agreement with another state. All stipulations which they 
make with one another are only provisional*. And the rea¬ 
son Hegel states in these v/ords: 

Because the relation of states to one another has 
sovereignty as its principle, they are so far in a con¬ 
dition of nature one to the other. Their rights nave 
reality not in a general will, whicn is constituted as 
a superior power, but in tneir particular wills. Accor¬ 
dingly the fundamental proposition of international law 
remains a good intention ( Italics our o^vn.) wnile in 
the actual situation the relation established by the 
treaty is being continually shifted or abrogated. 

A state, then, has a right to break an agreement any time 

it sees fit. If controversies accur the only recourse it to 

war; and this is quite ethical, says Hegel. "The state, as tne 

ethical substance, has directly its reality or right not in an 

abstract but in a concrete existence. TJiis existence, and not 
















71 - 


one of the many general thoughts held to be moral commands, 
must be the principle of its conduct.” ( Ibid., p. 340.) I n 
other words a »self-dependent state* as the * spiritual whole* 
may make war on a neighbor state any time circumstances seem 
to demand. And this means also what is commonly called an 
offensive war, for "threatened danger arising from the possible 
action of the other statS'’ is due cause for opening hostilities. 
"IN&ll-being," pronounces Hegel, "constitutes the highest law 
in its relation to another.” (ibid., p. 339.) 

But from another standpoint wars are not an evil, accor¬ 
ding to Hegel, but a positive good, for by them "finite pur¬ 
suits are rendered unstable, and tne ethical neAlth of peoples 
is preserved. Just as the movement of the ocean prevents the 
corruption which would be the result of perpetual calm, so by 
war .people escape the corruption which would be occasioned by 
a continuous or eternal peace." ( Ibid., 331) And again, "As 
a result of war peoples are strengthened; nations wnich are in¬ 
volved in civil quarrels, winning repose at home by means of 
war abroad.” ( Ibid., p. 331.) 

Accordingly it would be quite all right, since the wel¬ 
fare of the state demands it, to wage war on another state, 
in order to have internal peace. And if we ask who decides 
ipon this momentous question which involves the sacrifice of 

thousands, if not millions, of human beings, Hegel answers. 















72 - 


this belongs to the function of the prince or tne monarch, for he, 
as the individual summit, command* ef the armed force^ and he alone 
entertains relations witn other states, and decides upon peace and 
war," (Ibid., p. 335.) Thus war and aggression are not only -justi¬ 
fied as necessities but declared to be positive ethical goods. 

All this is, of course, the logical sequence of the general pro¬ 
position that the state is 'a completely independent totality* or 
Objective reason 1 , subject only to its own will. By that token it 
can do no wrong. This is exactly the straing in whic, Machiavelli 

i 

wrote his ’’Prince”. Morals and politics are not opposed to each 
other. Those who harbor such views give evidence of ”a shallow 
notion both of morality and of the nature of the state in relation 
to morality.” (ibid., p. 340.) The true ’’idea of the state in¬ 
volves that the opposition between right or abstract freedom on one 
side and the complete specific content or well-being on the other 
is superseded.” (ibid., p. 339.) 

As between warring nations the only thing that decides the is¬ 
sue of right is the final result as viewed from the standpoint of 
world-history. Miat may seem wrong from tne individual’s point of 
view is but a part of the larger moral whole. The mere fact that 
one side has been victorious in a struggle shows that it is right 
for also this result is the world-spirit being actualized. That is 
of course only another way of saying that God is always on the side 


I 



* for at times we aretold that there is T no judge over states' 
(ibid., 338.) and then again we read that world history 
'constitutes itself absolute judge over states'. (248.) 
However, it is not our purpose to make Hegel's statements 


- 73 - 

of those -who have the largest cannon or that *might is right*. 

Hegel sums all this up by saying: "Die Weltgescnichte istdas Welt- 
gericht." (World History is the judgment of the world) (ibid., p. 
341*) We are thus lead to his philosophy of history. 

Not everything that Hegel says about universal history or the 
universal spirit can be made to harmonize with his rhapsodies about 

V 

the absolute power and independence of the state § for vat b^ffie-s Ac¬ 
cording to Me el world-history (Weltgeschichte) is 

"self-caused and self-realized reason, and its actualized 
existence in spirit is knowledge. Hence, its development issu¬ 
ing solely out of the conception of the freedom is a necessary 
development of the elements of reason. It is, therefore, an 
unfolding of the spirit*s self-consciousness and freedom." 
(Phil, of Right, p. 342.) 

What Hegel would say is that the world-spirit is forever trying to 
become' conscious of its own freedom and thus to realize that free¬ 
dom. It is always trying to become actually what it always was 
potentially. In this struggle spirit is affected by consciousness 
and will which are influenced by the natural life. Hence we may 
say spirit is at war with itself; it has to overcome itself as its 
most formidable obstacle. "What spirit really strives for is the 
realization of its own ideal being." (Phil, of H., 57.) The goal 
is "spirit in its completeness, in its essential nature, i.e., 
freedom." (ibid., p. 58.) Yle should, therefore, define world- 
history as "the exhibition ofthe divine, absolute development of 






74 - 


spirit in its highest forms.” (ibid., p. 55.) 

To understand this aright we must keep in mind thst world events 
are not the result of the working of spirit as though the spirit were 
the producer and history Record of what it has produced. That, 
according to Hegel, would again be making a mere abstraction of the 
spirit. No, the movement, the development is the spirit. The 
spirit of the world is "only the movement of its activity in order 
to know itself absolutel , to free its consciousness from mere di» 
rect naturalness. n (Phil, of R., p. 345.) That brings us back to 
the fundamental theses in Hegel’s general philosophy that the Abso- 
lute is the World-Process . 

In this grandiose developmental movement everything that has 
ever happened finds its proper place and ultimately also its justi¬ 
fication; for 

"justice and virtu^e, wrong, force, and crime, talents and 
their results, small and great passions, innocence and guilt, 
the splendour of individuals, national life, independence, the 
fortune and misfortune of states and individuals, have in the 
sphere of conscious reality their definite meaning and value, 
and find in that sphere judgment and their due." (Ph. of R., 
p. 343.) 

We murt not make the mistake to judge these things on the basis of 
moral law supposedly revealed by God or dictated by the individual 
conscience. In the absolute, evil itself is reconciled unto itself. 
Wickedness and suffering, goodness and pleasure are all part of the 
divine scheme which that ineffable thing called spirit has i posed 

















75 - 


upon us, and which from the larger view mu t be counted to it for 
righteousness; for the world is governed by spirit or reason and 
therefore mu t be good. "Reason governs the world, and has conse¬ 
quently governed its history.” (Phil, of H., p. 26.) "Universal 
reason does realize itself.” It is philosophy that leads us to bhe 
insight that "the real world is as it ought to be--that the truly 
good—the universal divine reason—is not a mere abstraction, but a 
vital principle capable of realizing itself.” (Ibid., p. 37 and 
38.) And the state is the shape assumed by spirit in its complete 
realization in phenomenal existence. 

In accordance with tnis view Hegel says that great leaders of 
states, ’vrorld-historical individuals’ as he calls them, are not 
to be judged like other men. They are the agents of the world 
spirit.’ "TWr deeds, their words are the best of .that time.” 
(Ibid., p. 32.) Even though men like Caesar, Alexander, or Napoleon 
may not have been conscious of it, the execution of their design was 
"an independently necessary feature in the history of the world.” 

(p. 31.) "'^hey derived their purposes and their vocation from that 
inner spirit.” They were guided by an "unconscious impluse that 
occasioned the accomplishment of tnat for which the time was ripe.” 
(Ibid., p. 31.) Even a monster like Ivan the Terrible, who massa¬ 
cred thousands, often for little or no cause, was accomplishing 
that for which ’the time was ripe’. "So mighty a form must trample 

















' 




— 

' 




;* 










■ • . . 




















76 


down an innocent flower, and crusch to pieces many an object in its 
path." (Ibid., p. 34.) 

We are to believe then, that the deeds of such worlo-nistorical 
figures are exempt from the claims of morality. "Against them we 
must not raise the litany of private virtues of decency, modesty, 
humanity, and charity." (Carritt, p. 115.) All this tallies ex¬ 
actly with the preachments of the arch^prophet of totalitarianism 
today, who has said, "we will then feel that, in a world in which 
. power alone is always master of weakness and forces it in¬ 
to obedient service or else breaks it, there can be no special laws 
valid for men." (Mein Kampf, p. 147.) 

And what, we ask again, becomes of the individual in this world 
movement? Evidently in He gel* s scheme of things he is a moment of 
such insignificance as to escape the attention of providence. At 
any rate it would seem sheer blasphemy for him to criticize the 
» agent of the v>ror Id- spirit * or even to oppose what *is a necessary 
feature in the history of the world*. History is so all-embracing 
that mere individuals fall outside the sphere of its notice. ’^Par¬ 
ticular persons are only phases. M (Ph. of R., p. 247.) And again, 
"the particular is for the most part of too trifling value as com¬ 
pared with the general: Individuals are sacrificed and abandoned.” 
"As a general rule they come, under the category of means to an ul¬ 
terior end." (Ph. of H., 34.) 















77 - 


In speaking of great men, however, we should note that for He¬ 
gel they were great because they were founders and leaders of states. 
Reason wants the *moral whole* to e: ist, and ’’herein lies the justi¬ 
fication and merit of heroes who have founded states,—however rude 
these may have been.” (ibid., p. 40.) The period before the rise 
of states is ante-historical*. The growth of families into clans 
and of clans intp peoples, this long series of facts which depicts 
the struggle of man to a higher level,—”a process whicn is so rich 
in interest, and so comphrehensive in extent,--has occurred without 
giving rise to history;” (ibid., p. 65.) for ’’history is the de¬ 
velopment of the consciousness of freedom on the part of spirit,” 
and without political life there can be no thought of freedom. 

How in the leng process of the unfolding of universal spirit, 
though in a sense every people has its part, yet certain nations are 
preeminently the embodiment of spirit. In their "Volksgeist” is the 
expressed the ’Zeitgeist” in a particular way and in large measure. 
Such nations are, then, "for a given epoch dominant.” (Ph. of R., 
p. 345.) 

In general, accord ng to the principles of Hegelian dialectic, 
we can distinguish three phases or states in the development of 
spirit,—The Oriental, the Greek and the Roman, and the Germanic. 

(Ph. of H., p. 19.) Elsewnere Hegel says that n as the different 
forms of.the spirit’s self-consciousness, as they a pear in the 









78 - 


process of liberation, are four, so, in accordance with these four 
principles, there a re four world-historical empires," (Ph. of R., 

P* 346.)--The Oriental, the Greek, the Roman, and the Germanic, 

"The history of the wrold, then, travels from East to West, for 
Europe is absolutely tne end of history, Asia tne beginning," "The 
East knew and to the present day knows that one is free'; the Greek 
and Roman world that some are free; the German world knows that all 
are free." (Ph. of H., p. 109 and 110.) 

What Hegel means to say may be briefly explained as follows: 
The destiny of the world at large is the coming to consciousness 
of its own freedom on the part of spirit. The political life of 
the Orient is not very well developed. There is some real ization 
of rational freedom but this does not advance to the subjective 
stage. The individual "unconsciously projects the legislative 
principle into some governing power* (one or several), and obeys 
it as if it were an alien, extraneous force, not the voice of that 
spirit of which he himself (though at this stage imperfectly) is 
an embodiment." (Translater 1 s footnote, Ph. of H., p* 110.) Thus 
obedience is the law of his being, not freedom. That is despotism. 
The only one in such a state who is free is the despot himself; 
but in the last analysis he is not free either for his freedom is 
mere capriee. "That one is therefore only a despot, not a free 
man." (ibid., p. IS.) " 1 he East is, therefore the childhood of 









79 


of history." (ibid., p. 111.) 

In the Greek world we have an advance in the march towards 
freedom. This may be compared with the peridd of adolescence; for 
’’here we have individualities forming themselves. ” Morality is 
impressed on individuality, and consequently denotes "the free voli¬ 
tion of individuals." These individuals act according to tne pre¬ 
cepts of justice and the laws of the state, but they do so unre- 
f^jOctingly. They have no real understanding of what is going on. 
"The individual is therefore in unconscious unity with the idea.” 
(Ibid., p. 115.) 

In the Roman state, which may be likened unto "the severe la¬ 
bors of the manhood of history,” the state on the one hand,’"begins 
to have an abstract existence," and on the other hand, there arises 
the philosophical recognition of the person and his rights as such. 
This constitutes progress in the development of subjective freedom. 
However, both in Greece and Rome, only some were free. Slavery 
flourishes', indeed, the whole civilization was built upon slavery. 
Hence man as such was not free. 

The consummation of the development of spirit into conscious 
freedom we find in the German world. "German nations," says Hegel, 
"were the first to attain the consciousness, that man, as man, is 
frees That it is the freedom of spirit which constitutes its es¬ 
sence." (ibid., p. 19.) This phase begins witn the advent of 








80 - 


Christianity, which is the religion of freedom. In the long struggle 
between the inner and the outer, between the particular and tne uni¬ 
versal, there finally takes place a harmonization of the two. The 
individual wills the universal. His will and the universal will be¬ 
come one; he freely wills the universal good. This stage corre- 
spnnds to the peii od of old age. Old age in nature means senility 
and weakness, but in the realm of spirit it is "perfect maturity and 
strength." "Freedom has found the means of realizing its ideal, its 
true existence." (ibid., p. 115 and .116.) Thus, as Dunning says, 
"with benumbing legeridemain the philosopher makes the common-place 
facts of familiar history fit themselves nicely at the word into 
the categories and re^Ltions of his logic, and shows us mankind 
through all the ages marching steadily but unconsciously along He¬ 
gelian lines toward the Germanic perfection of the nineteenth cen¬ 
tury •" (Political Theories, III, p. 165.) 

At the risk of being monotonous we must again warn against a 
misunderstanding of what Hegel 1 s means with 'freedom*. At first 
blusn it might seem that he is a liberal and that his whole philo¬ 
sophy of history is the very antithesis of totalitarianism; but 
that is not the case. Subjective freedom for Hegel is not what is 
usually understood by that term. As we have seen, it is the union 
of the subjective with the rational will or the synthesis of the 
universal essential will with tnat of the individual. This con— 



. 

.. v ' • ■ 1 

' ' ' 

* 

. 

. 

■ ■ 

- 

' 

. . . ' 

* f i? 1 r 

. . . 























81 


the "moral whole, or the state, which is that form of reality in 
which the individual has and enjoys his freedom." (Ibid., p. 40.) 
And this is not to be understood in the sense that the individuals 
in a state limit their own freedom so that the universal freedom 
might secure a small share for each. "Rather," says Hegel, "we 
affirm, are law, morality, government, and they alone, the positive 
reality and completion of freedom." (ibid., p. 40.) By this token, 
it would seem, that tne more law and government we have the better. 
The more the whole life of the individual is controlled by the state 
the nearer he gets to that which is *tne substance of his own being 1 , 
rational freedom. That's why Hegel can say, quite consistently, 

"that all the worth which the human being possesses—all spiritual 
reality,—he possesses only through the state." (ibid., p. 40-41.) 

And there is one more point in connection with Hegel's ideas 
on history which is of importance for our consideration. Like 
Fichte he exhibits the usual tendency of philosophers to represent 
their own times and their own nation as the climax and the summation 
of progress. Thus Hegel pronounces with much assurance: "The Ger¬ 
man spirit is the spirit of the new world." Hence "the destiny of 
the German peoples is to be the bearer of the Christian principle, 
the principle of spiritual freedom." (ibid., p. 354.) And a little 
further on we are toldt "The Christian world is the world of com¬ 
pletions the grand principle of being is realized, consequently tne 













- 82 - 


end of days is fully come.” (ibid., p. 355.) 

After that there is not much more that can be said, unless in 
the Hegelian logic the end equals *not-end* ahd there is a synthesis 
of the two, which is beyond the end. However, the words are a bit 
too plain. Objective freedom has been realized and ”this is the 
ultimate result which the process of history is intended to accom¬ 
plish.” (ibid., p. 116.) If tne ♦ultimate* has beenreached we need 
look for no more progress. In the German people world-his.tory has 
reached its sublimest height. The German nation is the very apex 
of humanity. And all this has been fore-ordained in the eternal 
counsels of God for ”the Germans were predestined to be the bearers 
of the Christian principle, and to carry out the idea as the abso¬ 
lutely rational aim,” (ibid., p. 368.) 

~"hat this implies is plain. If tne Geramn nation is really 
the unique embodiment of the universal spirit then it has a special 
mission to carry out and in consequence special rights and privileges 
over against other nations. And indeed this is just what Hegel 
teaches. According to him ”the principle of the modern world as a 
whole is freedom of subjectivity,” (Ph. of R., p. 281.) and this 
principle is the natural principle of tne German state. To it, 
therefore is "assigned the accomplishment of this stage through the 
process characteristic of the self-developing self-consciousness 
of the world-spirit.” (pn. of R., p. 343.) Hence this nation is 













83 - 


*dominant*, and in contrast witn the absolute right of this nation 
to be the bearer of the current phase in the development of the 
world-spirit, the spirits of other existing nations are void or 
right, and they, like those who$fl. epochs are gone, count no longer 
in the history of the world.” (ibid., p. 343-344.) 

The duty of other nations can therefore never be in doubt. 

Since the Germans are *Traeger der Kultur* other peoples ought to 
look to Germany for leadership. They can do better than to submit 
to it as the representative of the world-s irit, not only because 
they are *void of right', but because it is also in their own in¬ 
terest, for it is self-evident that the wisest and tne best should 
rule. That is stating the idea of 'Herrenvolk* just as plainly and 
with quite as much pride as we find it in ”Mein Kampf”. The only 
difference is that Hegel expresses it in loftier strains than does 
the Nazi Fuehrer. 

.And finally we must say a little more about Hegel* s idea of 
religion and the church. i/Ve find his tnought on this subject parti¬ 
cularly in the section ’'Internal Polity" in the "Philosopny of 
Right", and in the introduction of the "Philosophy of History". 

As already stated Hegel is an outspoken proponent of the deifi¬ 
cation of the state. The state is for him *the divine, existing in 
and for itseif*, or *the divine will as a present spirit, which un¬ 
folds itself in the actual shape of an organized world*. (Phil, of 












84 


R* s p* 260*) It must, therefore, be the supreme object of II]&n , s de¬ 
votion* There can be no separation of church and state. In fact, 
this idea is abhorrent to Hegel* "The state as the nation's spirit, 
is the law which permeates all its relations, ethical observances, 
and the consciousness of its individuals." (Ph. of R., p. 282.) 

Religious obligation and political obligation are really iden¬ 
tical. In_dded, Hegel cannot think of one spirit as embodied in 
religion or the church and another in the state. He is an enemy of 
all dualism. There is really only one spirit as such, and the state, 
he hastold us, is the Realized ethical spirit*. "Philosophy teaches 
us that ail the qualities of spirit exist only through freedom," (Ph. 
of H., p. 18.) and freedom is actualized only in the state. 

There is, then, an evident ambiguity in Hegel*s later protesta¬ 
tions t hat there exists above the state a realm of pure spirit, nane- 
ly the free realm of art, religion, and philosophy. He speaks in 
such absolute terms of the state that if words mean anything we can¬ 
not make such a distinction; in fact, we find passages in Hegel where 
he says this in so many words. Take, e.g., the following statement 
in his introduction to the "Philosophy of History": 

"We observe, therefore an essential union between the ob¬ 
jective side—the idea,—and the subjective side—the personal¬ 
ity that conceives and wills it. The objective existence of 
this union is the state, which is therefore the basis and centre 
of the other concrete elements of the life of a people,—of 
art, of law, of morals, or religion, of science." (p. 51.) 

Here we are told definitely that religion, as one element in the life 











85 - 


of the people, has its basis and centre in the sta^e. And though 
Hegel insists in the next sentence that "among the forms of this 
conscious union religion occupies the nighest position,” still it 
is just one form of the union which is the state. That is quite 
consistent with what he has to say in the "Philosophy of Right": “,To 
*the deepest religious feeling tnere is present the state as a 
whole." (p. 262.) 

In the further exposition of his theory of religion Hegel says 
that the difference between the province of religion and that of 
the state in this, that "religion is the relation to the absolute 
in the form of feeling, imagination, faitn," or intuition (Ph. of 
R., p. 260.), whereas "the state works and acts in obedience to con¬ 
scious ends, known principles and laws, which are not merely implied, 
but expressly before its consciousness." (ibid., p., 258.) And 
again. 


"the state in general knows its own ends, recognizes them 
with a clear consciousness, and busies itself with them in ac¬ 
cordance with fundamental principles, while religion, though 
it has truth for its universal object this content is merely 
given and its fundamental principles are not recognized through 
thinking and conceptions." (p. 266.) 

"Feeling, sensibility, and fancy are tne ground on which 
religion is built, and on this ground everything has the form 
of subjectivity. The state, on the other hand, actualizes it¬ 
self, and gives its phases a solid reality." (ibid., p. 272.) 

Hence "whenever the church takes up the point of doctrine, and deals 

in its teaching with objective thought and principles of the ethical 




' 








■ 











86 - 


and rational, it passes over into the province of the state." 

(ibid., p. 267.) That can only mean that the state must tell the 
church what to teach. The church has no solid basis; it is all 
faith and feeling and subjectivity. If the individual, therefore, 
wants to know definitely what is etnical and right he must not go 
to to his church but to the state; for "in contrast with faith and 
the authority of the church, in contrast with the subjective con¬ 
victions which it requires, the state is tnat whicn knows." (ibid., 
p. 267.) (italics our own.) 

In one sense, Hegel tells us, it is quite all right to say that 
the state is founded upon religion, for ethical and political prin¬ 
ciples pass over into the realm of religion and must be established 
in reference to religion; on the other hand, however, 

"there remains to tne state the right and the fora of self- 
conscious objective rationality, the right, that is, to main¬ 
tain objective reason against the assertions which have their 
source in the subjective form of truth, no matter what depth 
of certitude and authority surrounds them." (l.c.) 

That is stating the supremacy of the state prett definitely. There 

is no religious freedom in Hegel*s state. The church is absolutely 

subject to political authority, and that not only because it is an 

external organization but also with regard to doctrine. And this 

finas its justification in the fact tnat "tne principle of the 

states*s form is universal, and nence essentially the tnought, free- 

dome of thought and scientific investigation issue from tne state. 












: ■ 




' ' ' p. 

,' ■■ '■■■ r ■ • . ;; ■» r- ' • ■ ' ; ■ 








- 87 


It was a church that burnt Giordano Bruno, ana forced Galileo to re¬ 
cant upon his knees.” (l.c.) 

In his Introduction to the ’’Philosophy of History" Hegel gives 
this whole conception a somewhat different turn, developing the idea 
of the * spirit of the people 1 . This spirit, ne says, may be likened 
unto the soul of the individual. As the soul of a person exists on¬ 
ly as the "complex of its faculties", so the soul or spirit of a 
people exists as the complex of all its particular affairs. "The 
actual state is animated by this spirit." (Ph. of R., p. 52.) It 
is "determinate and particular spirit", "one individuality which, 
presented in its essence as God, is honored and enjoyed in religion." 
(Ph. of R., p. 55.) So the spirit of the people finally emerges as 
God Himself and this spirit is the object of worship on the part of 
individuals. Man must not look upon it as something apart from 
himself. It is his and he is representative of it. It is also 
necessary that he "attain a consious realization of this his spirit 
and essential nature, and of his original identity with it." (Ph. 
of R., p. 52.) 

Religion, Hegel goes on to say, is, therefore "the sphere in 
which a nation gives itself the definition of that which it regards 
as the true." (i.c.) A nation may make a mistake in its concep¬ 
tion of truth, and then its religion eventuates in a fanaticism 
which cannot be the basis of a true state. But if we ask: What is 





- 88 


"the truth? Hegel answers: ’’Truth is the unity o 1 tne universal and 
subjective will; and tne universal is to be found in the state.” 
(ibid., p. 41.) Indeed, the state is this "unity of the universal, 
essential will, with that of the individual;” (Ibid., p.40.) and 

’’The saying of the wisest man of antiquity is the only 
true one,--to be moral is to live in accordance with the moral 
traditions of one's country.” (*/erke, Vol. I, p. 400.) 

It is interesting to note that He el always believed he was 
keeping strictly to the ground occupied by the Reformation# he was 
thankful to the Reformation because it broke tne power of the church 
and helped the state to its high place of dignity. ”It is far from 
Deing a weakness or misfortune for the state,” he says, ’’that the 
shurch has been divided. Only througn tnis division has the state 
oeen able to develop its true character, and become a self-consious, 
national, and ethical reality.” (ph. of R., p. 270.) Hegel, there¬ 
fore, does not look with favor upon the Catholic church, for he 
maintains ’’the Catholic confession, although sharing tne Christian 
:iame with the Protestant, does not concede to the state an inherent 
justice and morality,” whereas in the Protestant principle this ccn- 
iession is fundamental. (ibid., p. 54.) 

Stripped of the Hegelian terminology He el’s theory of religion 
nay be reduced to this: Politics and religion are one. The state 
:.s the focus of religion as w ell as of the otner elements in the 
; ife of a people. Art, religion, and philosophy all occupy the same 




- 

- 

r i ' : 

. . . v . 

- 

■ 

. 

■ ' ' , 'i. > 

. 














■ 


, ■ 









89 - 


general ground as the state, and are therefore "inseparately unit¬ 
ed with the spirit of the state.” (rbid., p. 54.) And really this 
is only logical if the state is the ’actual God 1 , the embodiment of 
all that is good on earth. The individual citizen mu t regard such 
a super-entity with awe and reverence and find his greatest happi¬ 
ness and the highest good in political obligation. It is, there¬ 
fore, quite consistent for Hegel to say that the state "is its own 
motive and absolute end" and that "this end has the highest right 
over the individual, whose highest duty in turn is to be a member 
of the state." (Ph. of R., p. 240.) 

Thus also Hegel’s ideas on religion are but another proof of 
his thorough-going totalitarianism. Indeed, it is not too much to 
say that no one, either before or after Hegel, has developed this 
doctrine more elaborately than he did. Political thought was never 
quite the same since his time. How potent a force he was we see 
very clearly if we study the writing of a man like Heinrich von 
Treitschke, to whom we now turn. Though Treitschke approached the 
problem from an altogether different anggll he betrays the influence 
of his great forbear on almost every page, 



- ' :: " J . f . .« . ■ •' ' n ' r ';t ( T J“/i t 

. . . , ' ' . . . ' 

J , T :'•■■■ 1 

' : . ' - c , ■ ■ ; • - ■ ' 

' J 

v ; ... ; ' ■ ■! ‘ ■: - ■ • • . ■ ' 

■ 

*1 * 

. 

. 






90 - 


Heinrich von Treitschke 
(lc334 - 1896) 

About the middle of the nineteenth century there arose in Ger¬ 
many a powerful school of historians whose admitted aim was to 
glorify the Prussian state. These men dug into the records of the 
past, not above all for the purpose of relating what had happened 
in former years, but in order to influence public opinion of their 
own times. They were interested in showing from past history what 
should be done now . In other words they were politician prophets 
and propagandists who wished to make history as well as record it. 

And it must be admitted that they accomplished their purpose 
to a remarkable degree. Brilliant writers and at the same time 
enthusiastic about their mi sion, they succeeded in transforming 
the political view of the mass of the German people so that repub¬ 
licans and democratic movements were checked, if not entirely up- 
rotted/and Prussian hegemony with its paternal domination and con¬ 
trol by an aristocratic bureaucracy was accepted as quite the thirg . 
And, what is of special importance here, their influence continued long 
after their death. Their ideas carried over into the twentieth cen¬ 
tury and even survived the Bismarckian empire they helped to glorify. 
For the poin s of similarity between the Prussianistic doctrine pro¬ 
claimed by these men almost a centrcry ago and the totalitarianism 
of Hitlerian Germany are not hard to trace. 

Of these outstadning historians (Droysen, Sybel and others rnig&t 

















91 - 


be mentioned) Heinrich von Treitschke was easily the most popular 
and the most influential. Though actually of Slavic (CzochishJ an¬ 
cestry he was a real Prussian at heart and is rightly called one of 
the * great apostles of German Nationalism*. 

Treitschke began his career at the universities of Leipzig, 
Freiburg, and Jena, Even here, outside Prussia, he preached his 
Prussian gospel with such fervor that he was anything but popular. 
But it was at the University of Berlin where he did his real work. 
Here, as the personal friend of the Kaiser and of Bismarck, he la¬ 
bored for over twenty years until his death in 1896. However, 
Treitschke was more than a propagandist and professor of history. 

He was a political philosopher as well. In his famous lectures on 
politics he developed a well definied system of thought concerning 
the state. Because he presented his doctrine with such great en¬ 
thusiasm and in almost poetical language he attracted students by 
the thousands, and was therefore, a mighty factor in moulding the 
minds of the youth of Germany. 

There is some difference between the political views of the 
younger and the elder Treitschke, but essentially he was always the 
ardent advocate of a strong national government. It v/as the idea 
of the "Zwangstaat" particularly that he took over from Fichte and 
Hegel. His fundamental these is: THE STATE IS POWER. All he has 
to say about politics is really based upon this idea, which may 












92 - 


rightly be called the key to his whole system. 

In defining the state, therefore, Treitschke says: M Tne state 
is the people legally united as an independent power, M (Lectures 
of Politics, Selections, p. 9) (Note: quotations in this section 
are from these selections by Gowan, unless otnerwise indicated.) 

To him the idea that the state was based upon the consent of the 
governed was foolish for it was contrary to experience. Likiwise 
the state was not based upon reason. It was not the embodiment of 
*Geist* as Hegel had taught, nor was it the totality of the people. 
The people are not amalgamated with it, he insists. To Treitschke 
the state 

On principle does not ask how the people is disposed . 

It is a step in advance when the silent obedience of the citi¬ 
zens becomes an inward, rational consent, but this consent is 

not absolutely necessary.What the state needs, is Tn 

the first place what isexternal ; it wills that it be obeyed, 

its nature is to execute what it chooses.One may say: 

’’Power is the principle of the state , as faith is the prin¬ 
ciple oT ~the church, and'Tove’ of the family. (Italics our own.) 
(p~. 12) 

This power state, Treitschke further assures us, has always ex¬ 
isted. In this respect he agrees with Aristotle who held tnat the 
state was *prior to the individual* and that man would not be human 
without it. The notion of a prepolitical state of nature or a social 
contract a la Rousseau was completely rejected by Treitschke. He 
maintained 

’’The state is primordial and necessary .... it is as endur¬ 
ing as history and no less essential to mankind than speech 


















93 


.Creative political genius is imiierent in man and 

. the state, like him, subsists from the beginning. The 

attempt to present it as something artificial, following upon 
a natural condition, has fallen completely into discredit • •• • 
We can imagine humanity without a number of important attri¬ 
butes; but humanity without government is simply unthinkable, 

. Man is driven by his political instinct to construct 

a constitution as inevitably as he constructs a language, 
(Politics, I., 3-7) 

This natural necessity of a constituted order is further dis¬ 
played by the fact that the political institutions of a people, 
broadly speaking, appear to be external forms which are the 
inevitable outcome of i:s inner life. Just as its language 
is not the product of caprice but the immediate expression of 
the most deep-rooted attitude towards the world, so also the 
political institutions regarded as a whole, and the whole spirit 
of its juris-prudence, are the symbols of its political genius 
. (Politics, I, 10.) 

Treitschke is quick to add, however, that there is one essen¬ 
tial difference between the evolution of the state and of a language. 
A language develops more or less spontaneously and unconsciously, 
but in the case of the state ”we see that the conscious will co¬ 
operates in the building.in far greater measure.” (ibid., 

I, p. 10.) No doubt he had men like Emperor William and Bismarck 
in mindj wno by imposting their will upon tne whole body created the 
Prussian state. A state is therefore not an ’’academy of ar^s, 
still less a stock exchange.” (p. 100.) It is an 'independent power*, 
’’power which makes its will to prevail.” (Pol. I, p. 22.) 

It is a mistake, therefore, says Treitschke, to inaen.ify the 
state with society, for society is not the product of a conscious 
will. It is not a unit and hence we can have no duties and obliga- 















94 - 


tions towards it. Society is but a mixture of all kinds of elements 

which are forever v/arring with each other, for "its natural tendency 

is towards conflict, and no suggestion of any aspiration after unity 

is to be found in it." (Ibid., I, p. 46) The state, however, is 

"the legal unity which counterbalances this multiplicity of 
interests, and it is only playing with words to speak of poli¬ 
tical and social science as two separate things. Law and peace 
and order can not spring from the manifold ana eternally clash¬ 
ing interests of society, but from the power -which stands above 
it, armed wi.h the strength to restrain its wild passions. • • • 
(Ibid., I, p. 47.) 

That it is at bottom always power that counts, tender natures 
find difficult to believe, but it is true and history bears this out, 
says Treitschke. At all times it has been the states which were 
stern and willing to use force that have endured and achieved their 
purpose. Genius is of no avail. As proof of this we have only to 
review the history of cultivated Athens and dour Sparta, or of re¬ 
fined Florence and militant Venice. A state that "neglects its 
power in favor of the ideal strivings of mankind, renounces its na¬ 
ture and goes to ruin." (p. 141.) Weaker nations are always forced 
to the wall and rightly so. Indeed, "in this everlasting for and 
against of different states lies the beauty of history; to wish to 
abolish this rivalty is simply unreason. Mankind has perceived this 
in all ages." (p. 11.) 

Since the state is above all power "its essence is tnis, that 
it can suffer no higher power above itself." (p. 14.) As soon as 







95 - 


it does it ceases to be a state in the tr e sense. Herein lies the 
ludicrousness^of the small state, says Treitschke. It passes as a 
power, whereas it is really weak. That can only have the result 
that e beggarly state of mind is produced which judges the state by 
the amount of taxes it raises. This begets materialism; and that 
is tne reason the "small state has so pernicious an effect on the 
mind of its citizens." (p. 18.) "It is only the state that is 
powerful that corresponds to our idea." (p. 17.) 

Treitschke will, therefore, near nothing of a super-state or 
a world-state. He insists it c nnot be the future of the human 
race to form one single political power. "The idea of a world- 
state is odious.; the ideal of one state containing all mankind is 
no ideal at all." (p. 9.) The eternal conflict between a plural¬ 
ity of nations guarantees progress. Huafinity would stagnate with¬ 
out it. 

But does not the power-state limit itself by treaties and in- 

terna(j)Sonal law? No, says Treitschke, a treaty may be made but in 

reality the sovereignty of the state is not affected; for any so- 

called limitation is always voluntary, and 

"ail international treaties are written with the stipulation: 
rebus sic stantibus. A state cannot possibly bind its will 
for the future in respect to another state. The state has no 
higher judge above it, and will therefore conclude all its 
treaties with that silent reservation. Tnis is vouched for 
by the truth, that, so long as there has been a law of nations, 
at the moment that war was declared between the contending 








96 


states all treaties ceased; but every state has as sovereign 
the undoubted right to declare war 'when it chooses, conse¬ 
quently every state is in the position of being able to can¬ 
cel any treaties which have been concluded.” (p. 15.) 

It should be noted in this connection that Treitschke is not 
explaining an all too obvious fact of history. He is not telling 
us what experience has taught, and that this is to be regretted. 

By no means; this is as it ought to be. A state has perfect right 
to alter or abolish a treaty arbitrarily simply because it is a 
state. Not only that, such action is even a blessing to mankind for 
"upon this constant alteration of treaties the progress of history 
is founded. .... Treaties that have outlived themselves must be 
denouigjned.” (p. 15.) Of course it is tne power-state itself that 

decides when the time comes to alter a treaty. It canno : recognize 
an arbiter outside or above itself. "The erection of an inter¬ 
national court of artibration as a permanent institution is incom¬ 
patible with the nature of the state." (p. 16.) Perhaps in minor 
matters one might consent to arbitration, but where questions 
vital importance are concerned no state can trust the judgment of 
any one else. In this connection Treitschke cites the problem of 
Alsace-Lorraine and asks: "Who will seriously believe-that an ar¬ 
biter could be impartial?" (l.c.) It is a matter of honor for a 
state to decide such questions herself. "Thus there can be no final 
international tribunal at all." (l.c.) 

That is but another way of saying that the larger questions are 






97 - 


decided by force. It is the nation which has power that makes its 
word count. The smaller notions which are weak: hardly deserve the 
name and have really forfeited their right of existence. "The 
larger states are gaining ever more predominance" and "the whole 
development of our company of states aims unmistakably at ousting 
the states of second rank." (p. 17.) Quite bluntly, therefore, 
Treitschke approves of a policy of aggression. It is quite all 
right for the state of power to rape an innocent neighbor, simply 
because it can be done. 

"If it does not make a compact whole the state mutt try 
to round it off more conveniently. This, however, applies 
onl to great states who are keenly conscious of themselves, 
and take pride in the belief in their great future. They can 
not allow raggedness in their territory." (Politics, I, p.36.) 

Particularly so far as the non-European world is concerned 

Germany has always gotten the worst of it. Now that she has power, 

Treitschke advises, she should demand her share lest other powers 

get the major part of the booty. "The nation which does not take 

a share in this great rivalry will ptgjfy a pitiful part at some later 

day. It is therefore a vital question for a great nation today to 

display a craving for colonies." (p. 40.) 

Since the state is power, Treitschke tells us, the aim of the 

state is a twofold one: "It is power in an external direction and 

the regulation of justice internally . n (p. 21) Hence one of the 

fundamental functions of the state is to organize end maintain an 










98 - 


army. Treitschke is a militarist of the first water. When he speaks 
of power he moans physical power, and that resides in the military. 

A person is stupid if he does not recognize this, for "now even the 
average man feels that military affairs stand higher than economic 
interests, that they are exalted above price." (p. 4-4.) Indeed"a 
state contradicts its own nature if it neglects the army." (p.100.) 
"It remains the normal and rational course when a great nation em¬ 
bodies and develops in an organized army the nature of the state, 
which is precisely power, by means of its physical strength." 

(p. 103.) Universal military strvice is, therefore, quite the thing 
and "it is a defect of English civilization that it does not know 
it." (p. 102.) 

However, a powerful army is not organized above all for the 
purpose of keeping the citizens within bounds or of protecting 
them against attack. In this same chapter on "The Aim of the State" 
Treitschke says very emphatically that :, the second essential func¬ 
tion of the staue is to make war ." (p. 21.) 'Blessed are the 

peacemakers 1 does not fit into tne Treitschkian philosopny. 7far 
is the creator of states for "all the states known to us have arisen 
through wars." (p. 22.) It is proof of the effeminacy of some 

civilian thinkers that in the science of the state this has not been 

appreciated. 

"Without war there would be^tate at all.War will 

last till the end of history, as long as tnere is a plural num- 








. .' - : • ■ • 










:i ' 




; . 1 ‘ 
















99 - 


ber of states. That it could ever be other wise is neither to 
be deduced from the laws of thought or from the human nature, 
nor in any way desirable. The blind worshippers of perpetual 
peace commit the error of thought, that they isolate the state 
or dream of a world-state, which we have already recongized as 


something irrational . The great strides which civili¬ 

zation makes against barbarism and unreason are only made ac¬ 
tual by the sword • • . • • Most undoubtedly war is the one 
remedy for an ailing nation. Social selfishness and party ha¬ 


treds must be dumb before the call of the state wnen its exis¬ 
tence is at stake. ... In war the chaff is winnowed from the 

■wheat.The historian who moves in the world of real 

Will sees at once that the demand for eternal peace is purely 
reactionary.” (p. 22.) 

Look at the Duteh, says Treitschke, How splendid they were when 
engaged in war with the world-power Spain; but ”the curse of peace” 
came to them and ”the once so bravo Dutchmen have turned into cre¬ 
ditors of the state and have degenerated thereby, even physically. 
That is the curse of a people that is quite engrossed in social 
life and loses the taste for politcal greatness.” (p. 20.) 

In nis enthusiasm for war Treitschke even goes so far as to 
claim that it is sacred and highly moral. 

”To the end of history arms will maintain their rights; 
and in that very point lies the sacredness of war , (p. 16.) 

We have learned to know the moral majesty of war in the very 
thing that appears brutal and inhuman to superficial observers. 
That one must overcome the naitiural feelings of humanity for the 
sake of the fatherland, that in this case men murder one another 
who have never harmed one another before and who perhaps es¬ 
teem one anotner highly as chivalrous enemies, that is at first 
glance the awfulness of war, but at the same ti ie its great¬ 
ness also.” (p. 103.) 

In accordance with these views Treitschke is quite convinced 
that ”it is precisely political idealism that demands wars, while 









■ •; ; ;.g. ' \i 

. ' . 







* 

■ • 













■ 1 I . 

• .■ ' J : Y ' ■. 

' . ' . . . • . 


.1 ; * ' :v u : '■ 










' i 





. 








- 100 


materialism condemns them.” (p. 24.) The idea of perpetual peace 

is ’nonsense’ for ’’without war ail movement, all growth must be 
struck out of history.” (p. 25.) Treistschke even quotes Scrip¬ 
ture in support of his position, he tells us t at all reference to 
Christianity in this case is perverse for tne Bible says explicitly 
that the powers that be shall bear the sword. (p. 24.) 

Such glorification of the state and of aggressive power quite 
naturally led Treitschke to a rabid nationalism and tribalism. He 
is thoroughly convinced the Germans as a nation are far superior 
to other European peoples. It is quite all right for them to over¬ 
rate themselves for without that they do not come to a true know¬ 
ledge of themselves. ’’The Germans are always in danger of losing 
their nationality, because they have too little of this solid pride.” 
(p. 10.) Treitschke*s lectures are filled with words of scorn for 
the English, the Frencn and the Italians. There is a ’’want of 
chivalry in the English character which strikes the simple fidelity 
of the German nature so forcibly.” (Pol. II, p. 395.) The French 
are not reasonable and free enough^ in character. The Latin in 
general has no ’Gemuet*. He ’’has no feeling for the beauty of the 
forest; while he takes his repose in it, he lies on his stomach, 
while we rest on our backs.” (Ibid., jE, p. 206.) 

Still worse off are the ’sub-German* poe'p les, such as the 
Russians, Poles, C z echs, etc. As compared with the Germans, who are 















101 


naturally cultured, they are semi-barbarians. Their only hope is 
tiiat some day they may be conquered and tnus snare in the blessings 
of German culture. 

On the lowest rung of the ladder are, of course the Jews. 

Though probably not quite as violent as anti-Semite as Hitler and 
Himmler, Treitschke has very little good to say about the Jews. For 
one thing they have become unnecessary now that the Aryans have them¬ 
selves become accustomed to the management of money. 

"Now all that is dangerous in this people becomes promi¬ 
nent, the decomposing power of a nation which assumes the mask 
of different nationalities. If nations had self-knowledge, 
even noble Jews would be obliged to confess that there is no 

room left nowadays for the cosmopolitanism of Judaism. 

Judaism can only, play a part if its members decide to become 

Germans.That is a perfectly just and moderate demand 

.So far I see only one means that we can employ here: 

real energy of our national pride, which must become a second 
nature with us, so that we involuntarily reject everything that 
is strange to the Germanic nature.Inhere there is Jew¬ 

ish filth soiling our life the German must turn away, and he 
must accustom himself to speak the trutn straignt out." (ibid., 

p. 60-61.) 

But Treitschke also goes farther tnan that. Peter Viereck in 
his "Metapolitics" points out that "like Wagner, Treitschke accused 
Jews of importing into Germany tne French ideas* of rationalism, 
legalism, and democracy," and that he made Judaism synonymous with 
the sordid, materialistic- symbol of*gold in the minds of millions 
of Germans." (p. 205.) From some of his later statements we see 
that Treitschke finally came to believe that the Jews were guilty 

of no less a crime than of "undermining the foundations of state. 










102 


church, and society." Trus he followed in t. e footsteps of Fichte 
and other Jew-baiters and aided in preparing the way for the anti- 
Semitism of our times. 

From tne fore-going it will have become abundantly clear tnat 
totalitarianism is inherent in every fiber of Treitschean philosopny . 

But a moment*s thought will reveal that such nationalism and the ex¬ 
altation of the state of power quite naturally imply that the state 
is supreme in every respect and embraces the entire life of its sub¬ 
jects. And indeed Treitschke teaches this in so many words. He 
says: "The State protests and embraces the life of the people , re¬ 

gulating it in all directions." (p. 21.) (italics our own.) There 
is absolutely nothing the state cannot do to maintain its povrer. It 
has unquestioned authority in every field of human endeavor. 

"Theoretically no limit can be set to the functions of the 

state.History shows us how the sphere of the state *s 

activity increases with the growth of culture.experi¬ 

ence teacnes that the state is better fitted than any other 
corporate body to take charge of the well-being and civilizing 
of the people." (Politics, I, p. 74.) 

Hence Treitschke demanded of the modern state "positive labor 
for the economic and intellectual welfare of its members." *Econo- 
mig and intellectual welfare* takes in a lot of territory. Though 
not a ^socialist he could think of no instance in which the state 
could not interfere in the economic field. And/the sa e pertained 
to intellectual activity. The state must actively foster and guide 

the educational systems. Treitschke had no use for private or de- 













« 








-• ' 



■ 

. 













. " 0 / ' 


'i ■ 

. 


' 


c 

i : X' r ' ■'•M'" a : ' ur: S ( ' . ‘lit 1 . ; , * :: v-i 

' 

; ■ ' >•' I ■' ' l l i, 






















- 103 - 


nominational schools* Such schools tended toward division* Like 
Fichte and Hegel he insisted that state schools were the only ones 
to be permitted and ail instructors were to be appointed and paid 
by the state* The home or the church could not be entrusted with 
thi® important duty. Treitschke even exttlts that the Reformation 
brought about such a large measure of secularization in the train¬ 
ing of the youth. He says 

’’Briefly put, what was the great result of the Reforma¬ 
tion? The secularization of great portions of the common life 
of men. When the state secularized tne larger portion of the 
church’s lands it also took over its accompanying public du¬ 
ties, and when we reckon how much the state has accomplished 
for the people’s culture since the Reformation, we recognize 
that these duties fall within its natural sphere.” (Politics, 
I, p. 75.) 

And where, we ask once more does all this leave the individual? 
From the fore-going citations the answer is obvious. Treitschke sub 
scribed wholeheartedly to the organic view of the state. To him 
the state was a whole to which the citizen must dedicate himself 
with every fiber of his being. The state was not to be looked upon 
as a means to an end but as an end in itself. It ’’must seek its 
own goal within itself,” he says. (Ibid., I., p. 61.) For that 
reason 


”no individual has the right to regard the state as a 
servant of his own aims, but is bound by moral duty and physi¬ 
cal necessity to subordinate himself to it. Forgetting himself 
the individual must only remember that he is a part of the 
whole and rea.lize the unimportance of his own life compared 
with the common weal.” Ibid., I, p. 66.) 









- 104 - 


Treitschke, therefore, has only scorn and contempt for the doc- 
trire of liberalism. That tne smte should be established for the 
purpose of guaranteeing our life and property seems ridiculous to 
him. "How comes it," he asks, "that the individual will sacrifice 
life and property to the state, if we simply look upon it as in¬ 
tended to secure life and property?" (Ibid., I, p. 15.) 

"It is a false conclusion that wars are waged for the sake 
of material advantage. Modern wars are not fought for the sake 
of booty. Here the high moral ideal of national honor is a 
factor handed down from one generation to another enshrining 
something postiviely sacred, and compelling the individual to 
sacrifice himself to it." (Poligics, p. 15.) 

Treitschke tells us quite frankly that he does not believe 
in the sovereignty of the people. The idea that the general will 
of the people should be made operative in some way was abhorrent to 
him. True, he favored a national assembly which would have some 
voice in legislation, but he opposed having the members of an as¬ 
sembly elected by the people. Again like Fichte and Hegel he held 
it ms "a sound principle to exclude the wholly irresponsible sec¬ 
tion of society from the exercise of a right which implies a capa¬ 
city for independent judgment." Universal suffrage, he believed, 
gave a "disproportionate share of influence to stupidity, super¬ 
stition, malice and mendacity, crude egoism and nebulous waves of 
sentiment." (Politics, I, p. 1S7.) S^fues do not rest upon the will 
of the people Treitschke insists; they are "created against the will 
of the people; the state is the power of the stronger race which 








- 105 - 


established itself,” (p, 39) 

The only share that the individual has in the whole scheme of 
things is to obey, "Strict obedience is the first requisite," in¬ 
sists Treitschke. (p, 44.) ”The state says: * It is quite in¬ 
different to me what you think about the matter, but you must obey,” 
(p. 13.) ”The terrible 3 i<x fttu permeates the whole 

history of states." (p. 12.) 

When Treitschke, therefore, speaks of political freedom he does 
not mean what is commonly understood by that term in democratic 
countries. Like all Hegelians he identifies it with duty. In the 
last analysis it, too, amounts to nothing more than the freedom to 
obey. This demand of absolute obedience is of oourse the logical 
outcome of the doctrine of power. Since the "essence of this great 
collective personality is power,” it stands to reason that the in¬ 
dividual citizen counts for something only in so far as he can con¬ 
tribute toward that power. He is a mere tool and instrument of the 
body politic. His individuality must be submerged socnat tne state 
might be strong. 

In point of fact Treitschke cannot think of tne members of the 
state other than as soldiers in an army. War is the national po- 
Licy and military affairs are ‘exalted above price*, as we have 
seen. Hence "the army is the organized political strength of the 
state*" (p. 104.) The military power is supreme in the nation 













■ 





106 


and it dominates tne entire life of the citizenry. As the soldier 
cannot have a voice in the direction of military affairs but must 
render "unconditional obedience" (p. 104.), so it is with the in¬ 
dividual in the state. He must "forget his own ago ana feel him? 
self a member of the -whole; he must recognize wnat a nothing his 

life is in comparison with the general welfare.The small 

man disappears entirely before the great thought of the state." 

(p. 23-24.) 

And this renouncement of self goes so far that a man must sac¬ 
rifice not only his life, but also''natural, profoundly justified 
feelings of the human soul; he must yield up his whole ego to a 
great patriotic idea; that is the moral exaltedness of war. (p. 
104.) That amounts to saying that a person must really forget that 
he is human, that he must se$l his very soul, so bhat the state 
might live and be strong. 

That is deification of the state pure and simple. Tnough 
Treitschke*s doctrine is not based upon an elaborate metaphysic as 
is Hegel 1 s yet the implications are just as far-reaching. He, too, 
would subscribe to the dogma that there are no other gods above 
the state. He clearly teaches that the nation is tne vessel of 
divine spirit. "The rays of the divine light, he says, only ap¬ 
pear in individual nations infinitely broken; each one exhibits a 
different conception of the divinity." (p. 10.) And again we are 








107 


told that national traditions as unfolded in the life of tne state 
must be regarded as "the objectively revealed will of God." 

It is quite in line witn s ch reasoning to conclude that the 
state is supreme also in the field of morals and religion. If it 
is divine, then of course there can be no higher law to wnich it 
must submit. In discussing the relation of tne state to the moral 
law, therefore Treitschke quite frankly praises Machiavelli. It 
was Machiavelli, he says, who first "set the state upon its own 
feet and freed it in its morality from the church; and also, above 
all, declared for the first time: 'The state is power. 1 " (p. 27.) 
True, the Italian went too far in some respects, says Treitschke, 
for he dragged the state "away from the moral law altogether," and 
in his doctrine of mere power he failed to realize, that the power 
acquired by the state "must justify itself by employing itself for 
the highest moral good and mankind." (p. 28.) hovrever, a little 
closer scrutiny reveals that Treitschke is just as Machiavellian as 
Machiavelli himself. He places the state above everything else in 
the world and claims that the highest moral duty of the state is to 
maintain its power and that it is always its own arbiter when ques¬ 
tions of right and wrong arise. The following par.agrapns are very 
significant here: 

"If we now apply this standard of a more profound and genu¬ 
inely Christian morality to the state, and if we remember that 
the essence of this great collective personality is power, tnen 








108 


it is in that case the highest moral duty of the state t o safe- 
guard its power * The cTiristian duty of self-sacrifice for some- 
tiling higher has no existence whatever for the state, because 
there is nothing whatever beyond it in world-history* 11 
(italics our own.) 

"Thus it follows from this, that we must distinguish be¬ 
tween public and private morality.The order of rank 

of the various duties must necessarily be for the state, as it 
is power, quite other than for individual men.To main¬ 

tain itself counts for it always as th e highest commandmen t; 
that is absolutely moral*YoF - £tf. And on that account we must 

declare that of ail political sins that of weakness is the most 
reprehensible and the most contemptible; it is in politics the 
sin against the Hoi Ghost." (p. 31 and 32) (italics our own.) 

This is stating the doctrine that f might is right 1 and that the 

state is above all moral law in such crass terms that little remains 

to be said. The fact that Treitschke continues by claiming that the 

consequences of this truth are "that the state must only set moral 

aims before it, otherwise it vrould contradict itslef," (p. 34.) means 

very little after he has given us his conception of morality. Even 

a dastardly act like tying human beings to the mouths of cannon and 

blowing their bodies to bits is justifiable, for "it behooves us to 

apply the standard of relativity to place as well as to time." 

(p. 37.) 


In view of this attitude Treitschke would consider it imperti¬ 
nent if a mere individual would rise up ana criticize the state. 

He maintains "that the private citizen has no right to resist the 
will of the state on the ground that such a resistance is based upon 
the voice of conscience or obedience to a nigher law with greater 





















, - 


- 109 - 


claims than the dictates of the state." (McGovern, From Luther to 
Hitler, p. 372.) 

M The pure individualism of the natural law teaching came 
to the preposterous conclusion that the citizen has the right 
to desert the state if it declares a war which he holds to be 
unjust. But since his first duty is obedience such unfettered 
power cannot be granted to his individual conscience. For me 

the upholding of the mother country is a moral duty. 

The individual should feel himself a member of the state, and 
as such have the courage to take its errors upon him." 
(Politics, I, p. 104-105.) (italics our own) 

Under such circumstances it is to be expected that all reli¬ 
gious expression is to be subjected to political control. At times, 
indeed, Treitschke appears to adopt a liberal attitude and seems to 
be in favor of religious freedom. There are passages in his writ¬ 
ings which would indicate that he does not want to bind the con¬ 
science of the Individual. Thus he says it wou:.d be "impolitic and 
unmoral if a state interfered with the religious life of its sub¬ 
jects." Yet a closer scrutiny reveals that the real Treitschke is 
not a liberal by any means. 

For one thing he has a very low opinion about religion in gen¬ 
eral. It is something very relative, something that appeals to 
children and old people and the women folk, but hardly to the edu¬ 
cated and the strong. Thus he says: 

"Religious truths are truths of the mind, true as nothirg 
else is for the believer, but altogether non-existent for the 
unbelieving# Childhood, which lives for tne future aid old 
age with its quiet contemplativeness are especially accessible 
to the promises of religion. To the female mind, also, the 
profound unrest of an existence without religion is unbear¬ 
able. In the life of the state, however, it is above all men 









no - 


who decide.Religion wishes to know only v/hat it be¬ 
lieves, the state wishes to believe what it knows. n 

(Selections, p. 66 and 67.) 

For that reason, "the aristocrat must use violence upon his ac¬ 
customed views of life in order to come around to the view that we 
are all God*s children. But this feeling will exist more strongly 
among more humble people.’ 1 (l.c.) 

In spite of this disparagement, however, Treitschke would make 
use of religion. He wants it taught in the schools. "From the 
standpoint of the State, atheists, strictly speaking, are an anomaly.” 
(Politics, I, p. 334.) And again, ”eve 17 father has the right to have 
his children in&tructed in the religious creed of his own choice, 
but he is not entitled to allow them to grow up without any religion 
at all." (Politics, I, p. 359.) Of course, all this instruction 
must be supervised by the state. 

Treitschke*s position is evidently this: Religion means a 
great deal to the common people. The state must, therefore, make 
use of it, for it is of value in making good citizens. Under no 
circumstances, however, is it permissible "for any one to make his 
religious convicitions a reason for disobeying his law or neglect¬ 
ing his duty as a subject." (Politics, I, p. 334.) That simply 
means that also in religious matters every one must bow to the will 
of the state. Treitschke thoroughly disliked the old Catholic doc¬ 
trine that the church was superior to the state, but had a like 








Ill 


aversion to the American idea that tne chi rch should be a purely 
voluntary organization, separate from the state. This separation 
implies that it is not to be controlled by the state, and tnis, to 
Treitschke*s mind, wo* id interfere with tne supremacy of the state. 

M The church received privileges as a corporation and is 
therefore to that extent brought into subjection to the state 
which superivses and decreases its legel status in civil so¬ 
ciety. The education of the clergy is a matter which 

properly concerns the church, but the state must supervise 

it. The state cannot afford to surrender its share in 

the patronage of the highest offices of tne church.” 

(Politics, I, p. 351-355). 

From these and similar passages it is clear that Treitschke 
came to the conclusion that the state could not really be tolerant 
in religious matters. Particularly is this true of him in the later 
part of his life. And this should not suprise us. It is the natu¬ 
ral result of his glorification and deification of the stace. It 
must never be forgotten totalitarianism has a religion ail its own. 
The national state is its god. Treitschke seems to forget that he 
himself is actually propagating a pagan faith which is unalterably 
opposed to other religions, particularly the Christian. To him no¬ 
thing is more sublime than *Vaterlandsliebe 1 and the role of the 
Church is to be a handmaiden unto the state. 

Viewing Treitschke*s political philosophy as a whole, there¬ 
fore, we find that it is thoroughly permeated with Fichtean and He¬ 
gelian doctrine. The one important difference is that it lacks the 
metaphysical background of the earlier thinkers. Being more vealis- 








112 


bic and living in a practical age Treitschke extols power above all 
slse. But as for his totalitarianism, it was just as pronounced as 
that of any other German thinker; and there can be no doubt that Yb 
was an important factor in spreading the ideology of the later Nazis. 

We turn now to Nietzschke who, though in a different sense, was 
also an 1 apostle of power*. 

Friedrich Nietzsche 

-CmT- TS'OO)- 

Niebsche has often been called a rank individualist, and hence 
a discussion of his philosophy might seem out of place in this pa¬ 
per. However, he has been such a potent force in the totalitarian 
countries of the present day that his ideas must be dealt with when 
we are trying to trace the elements of totalitarianism in German 
thought. It is certainly not without significance that Mussolini 
frankly admits the strong influence which the writings of Nielzsche 
have had upon the formation of his own political opinions. 

Nietzsche*s biographer and apologist, A. M. Ludovici, says of 
his subjects 

"Throughout his life and all his many recantations and 
revulsions of feeling, he remained faithful to one purpose and 
to one aim—the elevation of the type-man. However bewildered 
we may become beneath the hail of his epigrams, treating of 
every momentous question that has ever agitated the human 
mind, we still can trace this broad principle running through 
all his works: His desire to elevate man and to make him more 
worthy of humanity T s great past." (Ludovici, p. 12.) 

Nietzsche T s worst enemy might agree with this estimate if *sle- 






. 

■ 


, 

. 

' 

I 









- 113 - 


vation' and Worthiness' are to be understood in a Nietzschean 
sense. In other words the statement m~ans very little unless we 
have first agreed upon a standard of values. This much, however, 
the words of Ludovici make clear, that Nietzsche was above all an 
ethical philosopher. He was coneerned about morality, about under¬ 
standing of what is meant by 'good' and 'bad'. 

In his "Genealogy of Morals" Nietzsche tells us that already 
as a boy of thirteen the problem of the origin of evil haunted 
him. His first philosophical composition dealt with this ques¬ 
tion. A little later, he says, the problem ananged into that other 
one: Under what circumstances and conditions did man invent the 
valuations ’good'and bvil? And what is their own specific value? 

A few years later, while writing a thesis on the subject "Theognis, 
the Aristocratic Poet of Magara" he was struck with the author's 
use of these terms 'good' and 'bad'. Theognis made them synony¬ 
mous with aristocratic and plebeian or democratic. Everything that 
endangered the power of the aristocracy was bad and everythi g that 
enhanced it was good. This arbitrary use of these concepts, Nietz¬ 
sche tells us, induced him to look upon morality in an altogether 
different light. Morality, it appeared to him, was a means of 
acquiring and maintaining power. 

This idea he combined with the doctrine of evolution and be¬ 
lieved he had a solution of his problem. Accordingly he denied 












- 114 - 


the existence of any moral code which was absolute and unchange¬ 
able and which might be known by an inner moral sense or discover¬ 
ed by reason. All ethical concepts developed according to time 
and place and the character of the people involved. Even nature 
proved this, says Nietzsche, Every species of animal adopts a mode 
of conduct which is designed to strengthen and preserve it, regard¬ 
less of -what this may mean to members of another species. Thus the 
lion's good is the antelope's evil. The lion is not concerned , 
and what is more, we should not expect him to be concerned, about 
what contributes to the welfare of the antelope or for that matter 
about animals in general. The only thing of value to him is what 
aids in the extension and the prevalence of his kind. And so it 
is with the thousands of other species. They either adopt the 
proper mode of behavior or succumb in the grand struggle for power. 

Turning to man Nietzsche finds the same thing applies to him. 
He, too, adopts the kind of moral code that suits him. Hiscory 
proves that there have been all kinas of moral codes. What one 
people considers good, another denounces as bad and vice versa. 
Always, says Nietzsche, it will be found that a group adopts the 
code which tends to preserve it and strengthen its position. Hence 
it will tend to develop the type of human being representative of 
the group. Differently stated, the kind of morality prevalent at 
any given time will depend upon the character of people among whom 








- 

















. 


- 








- 


























■ 








- 


■ 












■i ' . .. 













115 


it comas into being. It will, therefore, tend to develop and mul¬ 
tiply the type of human being representative of that group, "All 
moralities are but so many Trade Union banners flying above the 
heads of different classes of men, woven and upheld by them for 
their own needs and aspirations," (Ludovici, p. 32,) And Nietz¬ 
sche says in his Zarathustra, which incidentally contains in poetic 
form his entire philosophy; 

"If a people would maintain itself, it must not value 
as its neighbor doth. Much that one people called good 

another called scorn and dishonor.Verily men have 

made for themselves all their good and evil. Verily, they 
did not take it, they did not find it, it did not come down 
as a voice from heaven. Values were only assigned unto 
things by men in order to maintain himself," (Zarathustra, 
p. 53 and 54.) 

Thus "all moral valuations are in reality nothing but the ex¬ 
pression of the needs of the particular community or herd, of that 
which is to its advantage. As the conditions for the maintenance 
of one community have been very different from those for the main¬ 
tenance of another community nave been*there have been different 
codes of morality at different times and places. (McGovern, p. 
411.) 


Accordingly there must have been as many moral codes as there 
have peoples in the world. Nietzsche would admit this, but he te Is 
us in "Beyond ©ood and Evil" that a careful study of the history of 
morals will show that ’of the finer and coarser, moralities which 
have hitherto prevailed or still prevail on earth* certain traits 











116 - 


recur so regularly together, and are so closely connected with one 
another, that, one can readily put ail of them into two classes. 
They are characterized by the type of men who nave brought tnem in¬ 
to existence, Ve may conveniently call them master morality and 
slave morality . To the masters strength, power, heroism, health, 
awfulness, is the good. They are actuated by a desire to discharge 
a plenitude, a superabundance of spiritual and physical wealth. 

They are the heaven storming Titans. The other class are concern¬ 
ed about avoiding pain and unpleasantness. They desire peace and 
comfort and ease. Hence pity, good Samaritianism, patience, in¬ 
dustry, and humility are of the highest value in their judgment. 

The first are like the oak tree which spreads out and reaches for 
the sun; the other are like the shrub which curses the oak because 
it.is mightier and overshadows it. Misanthropists, pessismists, 
demagogues and foolish saints are the product of slave morality, 
while the master morality brings forth great artists, great 
statesmen, and great warriors. 

With these ideas as a basis Nietzsche proceeds to examine the 
morality prevalent in the Europe of his time. He says there can 
be no doubt that it belongs infcthe class of slave morality. And 
if we ask how this has developed, our philosophei tells us that 
it is all due to the influence of Christianity, tor 2000 years 
Christianity has taught man that he sho Id be kind and good and 










117 - 


humble. It has lauded the meek and the lowly and the poor in 
spirit* It has gushed about an imaginary blessedness in an here¬ 
after and consigned all unbelievers to eternal torment. .hat kind 
of minds, says Nietzsche, would find such teachings palatable? 
Certainly not the strong, the heroic and the mighty of tne world. 
No, the weak-kneed and the cowardly, those who are afraid, for it 
is through such morality that they can maintain and preserve their 
kind. Only a race of slaves can be the result. Therefore he de- 
no\mces Christiainity root and branch, and that with a vehemence 
which is at times demoniac. Voltaire’s cry &crasez 1*infame 
(destroy the infamous thing) reechoes throughout his works. To 
him Christian values symbolized all that was stupid and mean and 
worthless. Hence he cries outj 

”0 my brethren! Where lies the greatest danger for the 
whole human future? Is it not with the good and the just? 

’’And whatever harm the wicked may do, the harm of the 
good is the most harmful harm! 

”The creator they hate most,—him who breaketh tables 
and old values, the breaker. They call him a law-breaker 
(Verbrecher)•” (ibid., p. 205.) 

”0h, these good! Good men never speak the truth, for 
the spirit such being good is a sickness.” (Ibid., p. 193.) 

Nietzsche never tires of assuring us that God is dead and 

that all this talk of a divine code ora divine influence is so 

much trash. Even such well tried maxims as ’Thou shalt not steal! 

Thou shalt not kill!* are but the vrimperings of the weaklings who 

are afraid of losing life and property. 








113 - 


v -ftou shalt nob robl* 'Thou shalt not commit manslaughter 
Such words were once called holy; before them the folk bent 
their knees and heads and took off their shoes, 

"But I ask you: Where in the world have there ever been 
better robbers and murderers than such holy words? 

"Is there not in all life--robbing and manslaughter? Aid 
by calling such words holy, did they not murder truth itself? 
"0 my brethren, break, break the old tables!" 

(Zarathustra, p. 155.) 

The divine Christ is put down as an immature youth, overcome 
with a desire for death, one who had done better to stay in the de¬ 
sert. 


"Too early died that Hebrew whom the preachers of slow 
death revere; and his dying-too-early hath been fatal to many 
since," 

"As yet he knew only the tears and the melancholy of the 
Hebrews, together with the hatred of the good and just,— 
that Hebrew Jesus: then suddenly he was overcome with a 
longing for death, 

"Believe me, my brethren! He died too early; he himself 
would have revoked his doctrine, had he reached my age! But 
he was still unripe," (Ibid., p, 67 - 68,) 

All clergymen are denounced as poor deluded souls who are 
held in the bonds of 'falscher Werte und Wahn-Worte.' Tney ought 
to be 'redeemed' from their so-called 'Redeemer'. 

In this strain Nietzscne rants against everything that has 
been considered holy for centuries. He sees as the inevitable re¬ 
sult of Christian values nothing but degeneracy and decadence. It 
is Christianity,he declares, that is retarding the evolutionary 
progress. 

This Christian slave morality might be good enough for the 
rabble who are really slaves at heart anyway. But real men ought 









119 - 


to denounce it and ascend to somethi g higher. They should adopt 
the roaster morality and make their sole aim power and yet more 
power; for M the only true goods are strength of heart and strength 
of limb and power, and splendor. These we must love and cherish 
and seek to build up in ourselves and in the race. The strong 
must take what they can. The weak must go to the wail, and suffer 
they must." (Fuller history of Philosophy, p. 561.) Only in this 
way can a superior race be brought forth and mankind ascend to 
Superman . ,! 5ch lehre enoh den Uebermenschenl M That is the final 
refrain in all if Nietzsche*s teaching. Tnis *Uebermenscn* be¬ 
comes to him the apex and the supreme goal of all values. He takes 
the place of God, is God himself. ’’Einst sagte man Gott, wenn man 
auf feme Meere blickte: nun aber lehrte ich euch sages Ueber- 
mensch.” (Once we used to say God, when we looked out upon the 
distant seas; but now I teach you to says Superman.) (Zarathustra, 
p. 77.) 

From this view flows Nietzsche’s whole conception of life. 

The chief and ultimate reality is not spirit or reason or God, 
but will. Therefore he says 

’’But thus willeth my creative will my doom. Or to put 
it more candidlys such a doom is just willed by my will. 

’’All that feeleth within me suffereth and is in prison^- 
but my willing always appr oacheth me as my liberator and 
bringer of joy. 

’’Away from God and the Gods this will enticed me; What 
could one create if there were Gods. 

"Willing delivereths that is the true doctrine of will 










120 


and freedom--thus yo are taught by Zarathustra! 11 (ibid., p. 
79.) 

But this will is not the will to exist and to survive, as 
Schopenhauer taught. It is the will to dominate and control, the 
will to power (der Wille zur Macht). This will is the deciding 
element in all phases of life. Is is the divine spark, the ever 
driving element in the activities of all living things. 

"Wherever I found living matter I found will unto power; and 
even in the will of the servant, I found the will to be mas¬ 
ter. 

"Even thou, 0 perceiver, art but a path and foot step 
of my will. Verily, m y will unto power valketh on the feet 
of thy will unto truth! 

"Only where there is life,there is will; but not will 
unto life, but—thus I teach you—will unto power." (ibid., 
p. 108 and 109.) 

And in his "Antichrist" Nietzsche says: 

"W'glht is good?—All that increases the feeling of power, 
will to power, pov/er inself in man. 

"What is bad?—All that proceeds irom weakness. 

"What is happiness?—The feeling tnat power increases, 
that resistance is overcome. 

"Not contentedness, but more power; not peace at any 
price, but warfare; not virtue, but capacity." 

Life to Nietzsche was, therefore, not a striving to avoid 
pain and to attain happiness. Such teaching would again lead to 
softness, and degeneracy. No, life was the constant struggle for 
this surplus power. In "Beyond Good and Evil" he defines it as 
’appropriation, injury, .conquest of the stange and weak, suppres¬ 
sion, severity, obtrustion of its own forms, incorporation, and, 
at least, putting it mildest, exploitation.’ 









121 


Nietzsche calls this love of power 'the demon of mankind*, 
but he is not thereby denouncing it. This conflict was to nim what 
made life zestful and contributed to the elevation of man. Schopen¬ 
hauer saw the same struggle and thought it horrible. For Nietzsche 
it ms magnificient. He is thankful that he has enemies with whom 
he can engage in mortal bombat. Even if one goes down in the 
struggle, that does not matter. "Also zu sterben is das Beste; das 
Zweite aber ist: im Kampfe zu sterben und eine grosze Seele zu 
verschwenden." (Zarathustra, p. 66.) All this talk about seeking 
peace and comfort is evidence of low character. To struggle, to 
exert oneself, to overcome obstacles tha':< is the thing. As Fuller 
puts it, it is this will to puwer that "gives us moral backbone. 

It inspires us to live Dangerously. It gives us the guts to sub¬ 
mit and suffer with gritted teeth, when and where we must. 1 ’ (Fuller, 
561.) 

Nietzsche feels that ^ ere these values ob:ain there will be 
real evolution ahd the elevation of mankind will result; for the 
cause of all evolution is just this will to povrer. The only moral 
law sanctioned by nature is that 'might is right'. Therefore 
Nietzsche calls out: 'Transvalue your values!* Make them noble, 
virile, masterly. "For it is values, values, and again values, 
that mould men, and rear men, and create : ?n; and ignoble values 
make ignoble men, and noble values make noblemen!" Ludovici, p. 

73 .) 











" J : ** 



X 


I 






: ■ 



122 


Nietzsche is sure some of these 1 noble men* have already ap¬ 
peared. They are those strong characters who have left others be¬ 
hind and make great progress along the road to that higher goal. 

As a result they will often feel lonely, but this loneliness should 
not discourage them. They should be comforted by the fact that 
they can be instrumental in raising mankind to a higher level and 
thus aid in bringing forth super-man. "Awake and listen, ye lonely 
ones!” Nietzsche calls out. "From the future winds are coming 
■with a gentle beating of wings, and there cometh a good message 
for fine ears. Ye lonely ones of today, ye who stand apart, ye 
shall one day be a people; from you who have chosen yourselves, a 
chosen people shall arise; and from it Super-man." (Zarathustra, 
p. 72.) 

Yi/hether the world envisaged by Nietzsche would be so much 
better than the present is, to sa/ the least, very doubtful. Our 
philosopher forgets that there may be others who would disagree 
with hi as to the meaning of greatness and of worth, and that, on 
very valid grounds. Then, too, it is pretty difficult to see how 
these greet men, once they did appear, and particularly if they 
were great statesmen and warriors, could be kept from using every 
means to destroy each other, wreaking terrible havoc and destruc¬ 
tion and thus setting mankind back insteaa of elevating it. However, 
we are not concerned here in evaluating Nietzsche’s philosophy 












123 - 


as a whole, but rather in setting forth in what respect and to 
what extent his doctrine tends to be totalitarian. Let us look 
into this question. 

In the first place it should be emphasized that Nietzsche does 
not glorify the state a la Fichte, Kegel, or Treitschke. In fact, 
he often denounces the state and speaks of it in the most dispar¬ 
aging terms. In "Zarathustra” he calls it »das kalte Untier' (the 
cold monster) and ' der neue Goetze 1 (the new idol), which does no¬ 
rthing but lie and destroy. 

’’The state? What is that? Well, now open your ears, 
for now I deliver my sentence on the death of peoples. 

’’The state is called the coldest of all cola monsters. 

And coldly it liethj and this lie creepeth out of its mouth; 
*1, the state, am the people. 1 

’’The state is a liar in all tongues of good and evil, 
whatever it saith, it lieth; whatever it hatfc, it hath stolen. 

’’Far too many are born; for the superflous the state v/as 
invented.” (Zarathustra, p. 43-44.) 

And in the "Gdtterdaemmerung" Nietzsche points out that there 
is always a conflict between the political power and the cultural 
activities of a people. "Culture and the state," he says are 
antagonists,—let no one be deceived aboutchis. The one lives on 
the other. All great periods of culture are periods of political 
decline. Whatever is great in a cultural sense is non-political, 
i| even anti-political.” (Quoted in Rocker, "Nationalism ana 
Culture," p. 83.) 

It must be admitted, then, that Nietzsche is not a thorough- 





- 18*. - 

going totalitarian who, like so man^. others, wishes the state to 
have supreme power in all things. He insisted too often on the 
free scope of the individual will, which also nught oppose the 
state. And yet there are many features of his political philosophy 
which are^acceptable to totalitarian that many of his ideas nave 
been taken over by them and made a part of their doctrine; and 
Nietzsche is still one of the most popular writers among them. 

One of these features, in fact the most important one, is 
•just Nietzsche 1 s doctrine of povrer. As we have seen, a.l totali¬ 
tarian glorify povrer. Nov/ there is nothing on this earth more 
powerful than the state. According to Hobbes it is ’the great 
Leviathan’, the all-devouring. And even Nietzsche] as already 
mentioned, calls it ’das grosze Untier’. He seems to forget, how - 
ever, that the chief characteristic of the *Untier’ is its isuper- 
human povrer. His ’Uebermensch’ would be very stupid indeed, if he 
failed to make use of this instrument of povrer. That is more, in 
the front ranks of Nietzsche’s masters we find just the great 
statesmen and military leaders. He wants tnese to be rulers and 
lords, for he says: "The highest man shall also be the Highest 
lord on earth. There is no harder lot in all hucmn fate than whe n 
the powerful of the earth are not at the same time the first men. 
Tnere everything becometh false and warped and monstrous." (Zara- 
thustra, p. 236.) 






























. 






. 

. 



















-• ,i 




- 125 - 

But if Nietzsche insists upon this, then it is entirely in¬ 
consistent for him to deprecate the state. To laud the statesman 
because he has power and then denoqjce that which makes this power 
possible is not very logical to say the least. Nietzsche evident¬ 
ly failed to realize that worship of power inevitable leads to a 
worship of the powerful state . We might add that the opposite also 
holds true. It can be readily understood, therefore, why totali- 
tarians were quick to seize upon this B^ietzschean doctrine and 
.give it their hearty assent. 

And closely allied with the power idea is the notion that war 
is glorious. This we must expect for the simple reason that no¬ 
thing is such a test of strength as warfare, and nothing enhances 
the power of a nation more than to be victorious in military com¬ 
bat. We should, therefore, expect the apostle of power and struggle 
to extol war, and that is just what he does. "War and courage," 
Nietzsche tells us, "have done more great things than charity. . . . 

Every natural gift must develop itself by contest.One will 

have to forgive my occasionally chanting a paean of war. Horribly 
clangs its silvery bow, and although it comes along like the night, 
war is nevertheless Apollo, the true divinity for consecrating 

and purifying the state.War produces an ethical impulse 

indicative of a much higher destiny.e rejoice in every¬ 

thing which like ourselves loves danger, war, adventure." And in 












\ y 










■ 















126 


"Zarathustra" we find our philosopher counseling his follovjers in 
this way: 


"You I do not advise to work, but to fight, I do not 
advise you to conclude peace, but to conquer. Let your work 
be a fight, your peace a victory! 

"Ye say, a good cause will nallow even war? I say unto 
you: a good war halloweth every cause. (Z., p, 42,) 

"Man shall be brought up for war, and woman for the re¬ 
creation of the warrior. Everything else is folly." (ibid., 
p. 60.) 

Peace, according to Nietzsche, is an unnatural condition. 

Real men long for battle. They look upon every peace as a prepara¬ 
tion for the next war. "Ye shall love peace as a means to new 
wars," says Zarathustra, "and the short peace better than the long 
one." (Ibid., p. 42.) Surely no totalitarian has ever ’chanted 
the paean of war* in clearer tones than Nietzsche. He sees in war 
nothing but a pnase in that universal struggle of the will to 
power. And is it not of more than passing significance that we 
find the Fuehrer of the Third Reich speaking in the very same 
strains? Says he 

"Mature knows no political boundaries. She places the 
living being on this earth and then watches the free play of 
powe r. The strongest in courage and persistence, as her 
favorite child, is awarded the right to be master of exis¬ 
tence. So-called humanity is an expression of a mix¬ 

ture of stupidity, cowardice, and assumed smartness. In the 
eternal combat mankind has become great—*in eternal peace 
it sinks into ruin." (Mein Kampf, p. 147-148.) 

A further element so dear to the heart of all totalitarians 

is Nietzsche*s denunciation of democracy. He will hear nothing 

of popular sovereignty and truly libertarian ideas. Again and 








127 - 


again he heaps opprobium upon the common people. They are to him 
a conglomerate mass who should receive no consideration. It nause¬ 
ates him to think that these people should have power and perhaps 
even rule, he says 

,f The common herd is a mish-mash. Therein is all mixed 
uj^with all, saint and rogue and gentleman and Jew and every 
animal from Noah’s ark." (Z. p. 235.) 

"^/Thatever is of the womanish tribe, whatever is of the 
slaves’ tribe, and especially the mish-mash of the mob—these 
now will to be come the masters of all human fate. Oh, 
loathing, loathing, loathing!" (Zarathustra,p.279.) 

Nietzsche’s hatred of democracy stems from the feeling that it 
makes possible the control by the low, the mean, and the base to 
the detriment of the elite. It is also, according to him, directly 
contrary to-the principle of evolution; for evolution means the sur¬ 
vival of the fittest, -while democracy means control of the fittest 
by this *Poebe 1-Mischinasch’. For a like reason Nietzsche has no 
use for the doctrine of utilitarian liberals, who maintain that the 
aim of all government should be ’the greatest good to the greatest 
number’. He believes that governments should seek t o develop the 
elite of society. If need be the masses should be sacrificed for 
the benefit of the strong men.—That is whatwouldconstitutes real 
-progress. "The sufferings and toils of humanity are necessary in 
order to permit the existence of a few creators, supreme masters 
of the destinies of mankind, sublime lympian artists who con¬ 
stitute the justification of humanity. ‘The progress of civiliza- 











■ 

* 

- 


■ 






. 



. 




* 






r 





■ 

. 







• 














. 







128 


tion has not for its aim the emancipation of the masses. The real 
interests of civilization demand the existence of a vast confused 
mass of humanity which shall serve as the instrument whereby tne 
race ofthe elite, of the masters may be cultivated.” (G. Chatter- 
ton-Hiil, "The Philosophy of Nietzsche", p. 207.) (Quoted in 
McGovern, p. 413.) 

According to Nietzsche, then, the state does not exist for the 
purpose of furthering the happiness of the people, but rather to 
aid ; .n producing the master race. Hence he favors a strict caste 
system, after the manner of the patricians in Rome, or the "aristoi" 
in Athens. An aristocracy, he believes, is absolutely necessary 
if there is to be progress. "Every elevation ofthe human type nas 
until now been the work of the aristocratic society—and this will 
it always be—the work of a society which believes in the necessity 
of the hierarchy of rank and values, and which necessarily has 
slavery in some form or another." (ibid., p. 413.) This can only 
mean that the average man has no other duty then to obey those who 
are above him. He exists for their sake. All of this would not 
be quite so bad if Nietzsche*s ‘elite* were men, greal in intellec¬ 
tual ability and great in character; but that is not the case. 

His ‘race of elite* are those who have p ower . And everyone knows 
that history is full of examples of men who were cunning enough to 
gain superior power, but who belonged to the very dregs of humanity. 

Thus it must be plain, that Nietzsche, in spite of his constant 











. 

e 












129 


reiteration of the freedom of the will, is not actually a friend 
of the individual. This becomes still clearer when we note what 
he conceives the role of the individual to be. Nietzsche insists 
time and again that a human being exists that he ’might be overcome’. 
He is not an end but a means. His orole purpose is bo be of some 
value in the grand process of realizing the Superman. Accordingly 
we hear Zarathustra saying: 

"I teach you Super-man. li ianfis something that snail be 
surpassed. 

"Man is a cord, connecting animal and Super-man, a rope 
over a precipice. 

^What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a 
goal: what can be loved in man is tnat he is a transition and 
a destruction." (Zarathustra, p. 6 and 8.) 

If the average man is but a ’bridge’ or a ’cord’ or mere 
’Uebergang* and ’Untergang’, then of course he cannot have indivi¬ 
dual worth. Indeed, Nietzsche does not want his masters to think 
of individual worth. They should be ferocious, and cruel and hard 
when it comes to handling these slaves. If they show pity and con¬ 
sideration that is already a sign of v/eakness. Master mora. ity is 
concerned only with the welfare of the masters and the enhancement 
of their power. 

It is not difficult to see how nicely all this fits into the 
system of totalitarian thought. All glorifiers or the national 
state agree that the individual as such does not really count, that 
he is a mere tool who may be used in any way the rulers might see 












- 130 - 


fit to attain a larger goal. They also agree that the master-concept 
is quite acceptable.to them; and they a plaud very enthusiastically 
when they hear Nietzsche call out: ”0h blessed remote time, when a 
people said unto itself: T I will be—master of peoples.'" (Zara- 
thustra, p. 203.) They merely add: We are these masters. In other 
words, it is not a far cry from Nietzsche's 'race of masters' to 
Hitler's 'master race'. 

Of even greater significance is the fact that Nietzsche's doc¬ 
trine of the relative value of all moral codes is thoroughly accept¬ 
able to the propagandists of the all-embracing state. As we have 
seen, Nietzsche holds that any moral code is the product of a group 
or community and is an expression of what that group or community 
considers to be to its own advantage. If we substitute 's ate' 
for 'group' or 'community' we are talking in totalitarian terms. 

True, Nietzsche insists the better morality is that of the masters. 

He waits onlythat one kind, all others being worthless. But again, 
totalitarians make no objection. They apply that to themselves 
and say: Our code is the code of the masters. We are the higher 
race, the 'Herrenvolk', and hence everythi g is right and good 
which tends to enhance our power aid welfare. 

And finally, a similar situation obtains with regard to the 
religious views of Nietzsche. In two important respects his re¬ 
ligion and that of the totalitarians agree. In the first place 



















■ 




















f ! 

* 

< 

' 

- ' } . ■ . 








131 


both are decidedly and fundamentally anti-Christian, If there is 
any difference it is this that Nietzsche is more honest and out¬ 
spoken in his opposition. He bluntly says the Christian influence 
is perverse and must be swept aside entirely. Most totalitarians 
are more subtle, particularly those in Germany. In his "National 
Socialism and the Catholic Church" Dr. Miklem o Oxford points out 
that "Herr Hitler has not infrequently expressed himself in appre¬ 
ciation and genial terms as the protector and friend of the Chris¬ 
tian Churches." (P. 3.) And, indeed, the official Nazi program 
states very definitely: "We demand freedom for all religious sects 

in the state.The party as such represents the point of 

view of a positive Christianity." (Art. XXIV.) But ail that means 
only that the fight against the church is not out in the open. 
Fundamentally the line between the totalitarian Weltanschauung* 
and the Christian view of life is just as sharp and just as per¬ 
manent as between Nietzscheanism and Christianity. Both are the 
direct antithesis of historical Christian values and so pagan to 
the core that not even a compromise is possible. 

In the second place Nietzsche*s position on religion is like 
that of the totalitarians in that both are world/ religions; that 
is to say f they deny a universally supreme being to whom everyone 
everywhere and at all times is accountable. TTith one the ultimate 
reality is the Super-state, u±th the other tne Super-man. Both 






J . 

. 

’ 

■ ■ 



132 - 


are ofthe earth, earthy. Totalitarians do not want their followers 
go 1 seeK first the kin dom of God 1 . As we nave soen tney are wor¬ 
shippers of the state. Their kingdom is on this earth and is the 
glory of the nation. Nietzscne’s attitude is similar. It would be 
wrong to say that he is irreligious, but if tnere is one thing ne 
insists upon is this, that tne masters must renounce all thought 
of a higher being. They must keep their feet on the ground, as it 
were, and never let their thought soar to a nebulous world beyond. 
Zarathustra, speaking in aa voice that is transfigured* (ver- 
wandelt) implores his disciples: 

"Remain true to the earth, my bretnren, with the might 
of your virtue! Your ever-giving love and your intelligence 
should serve the earthly mind. Thus I implore and adjure 
you. 

"Let these not fly away from the earthly and beat their 
wings against everlasting wails. Lead the virtue which has 
flown away back to the earth as I do." (Zarathustra, p. 61.) 

Thus many ideas in the philosophy of this supreme egoist readi¬ 
ly appeal to the totalitarian mind. And Nietzsche’s doctrines 
found wide-spread acceptance and nad a profound influence upon 
political thought. Dr. J. MacEachran of Alberta University is 
authority for the statement that numerous Nietzsche-Clubs were form¬ 
ed, particularly at the centers of learning in Germany. The youth 
was attracted to these organizations in large numbers and became 
fanatical followers of Nietzsche. Intoxicated with his ideas of 
power they were readjk to throw overboard all traditional values 























- 133 - 


and worship at the shrine of the goddess of Power. Whether he was 
aware of it or not, therefore, Nietzsche played an important role 
in preparing Germany for totalitarianism, he was in a very real 
sense a precurser of the later Nazi ideologists. 
















- 134 


Conclusion 

Fichte, Hegel, Treitschke, Nietzsche,—these are, then, with¬ 
out doubt the four names that loom large on the horizon of totali¬ 
tarian thought in Germany* It is almost impossible to overestimate 
their influence* As one studies the writings of otner political 
philosophers among the Germans one is struck by the fact tnat there 
is hardly anything new and original, though there is a shift of em¬ 
phasis* Whether it be Goerres, Bluntschil, Spengler, Bernhardt, 
or even the poet-musician Yfagner,—all have reiterated the thoughts 
and sentiments of these four men. 

Again and again we meet with the doctrine that the state is a 
vessel of divinity absolutely supreme in the life of man; that it 
has organic existence and is therefore an end in itself; that there 
are in the ^olk* collectivity some siper-natural and unconscious 
forces; that in the evolutionary process of history material power 
is all-important and war a divine agency of progress; that the 
Germans are a superior people destined to save civilization by im¬ 
posing their will upon the world; thau national interests are su¬ 
preme and that the sublimest thoughts and aspirations of man cul¬ 
minate in *Vaterlandsliebe'. And this continues right on down to 
Huston Chamberlain, Goebbels, Rosenberg and Hitler himself. The 
Fuehrer is no Moses with a new gospel* As a matter of fact there 
is not one original idea in the whole of "Mein Kampf”. True, tne 

























- 135 


Nazi doctrines appear in new guises and bear new names; but what 
are ’Blut und Boden’, 'Gemeinnutz vor Eigennutz', 1 deutsches 
Christentum*, ^'uehrerprinzip*, 'Volksseele', *Rassenk:anipf', 
’Herrenvolk 1 , etc., etc., but reechoes of Fichte and Hegel and 
Treitschke and Nietzsche] 

However, these philosophers did not influence political wri¬ 
ters only. Their doctrines also gradually seeped down to the 
masses. Indeed, it is not too much to say that the German people 
were nurtured for a century on spiritual fare supplied by these 
men. 'Tien therefore Hitler and his fellow-aemogogues, wno under¬ 
stood mob psychology and the value of pageantry, preacned the to¬ 
talitarian doctrines with the fervor of prophets, literally mil¬ 
lions were found gullible enough to accept the •new* Weltanscnau- 
ung as true and make it their own. With the dynamic impetus given 
it by the Nazis totalitarianism has become a mass movement in Ger¬ 
many and racial and nationalistic megolamania reign supreme. 

All of this brings home to us with telling force the truth 
that ideas play a vitally important role in the affairs of men. 
Some may deny this, but it is true; for, as Peter Viereck says: 
"Ideas are exciting, exciting because they can move men to deeds 
ana move nations to make history." (Metapolitics, p. IX.) 

The objection has been raised that the Nazi leaders do not 
believe these ideas, that they are cynic opportunists who are try- 






, 

' 

1 

■■■■■■■■■ ■ . 

'' 

' 

' 

' 






136 - 


ing to maintain their power in their own interests. Even if this 
were true, it would nob do away with the fact tnab the Gorman 
people are sincere in their belief in totalitarian doctrine. This 
is particularly the case with the youth. One need only observe 
the behavior of young German prisoners to learn wnat kind of spirit 
dwells in their hearts. Their constant 'heiling* of Hitler is a 
bold proclamation of their Nazi faith. They have become fanatical 
adherents of the doctrine of 'Deutscnland ueber ailes" and are 
willing to die in the defense of it. 

fnd what is of equal significance, cynics or no. Hitler and 
his satellites have and are making successful use of these ideas. 
For whether we take the destruction of all personal freedom, the 
persecution of the church, the rape of neighboring countries, the 
extermination of the Jews, or that ruthless waging of a war for 
world domination,—all are but the carrying out a program based 
upon totalitarian ideas. 'As a man thinketh, so he is’, and we 
might add, so he acts. The words and beliefs of the Nazis have 
born practical fruit. Similarly, the 'new order', wnich Hitler 
has promised the people of Europe, finds its a justification in the 
principles laid down in his writings. 

It utmost importance at tnis time that we realize 

this, for if we are to arrive at a proper understanding of the 
world-wide struggle in wnicn we is are now engaged we must see in it 








■ 


• 



<■ .. 












, 





137 - 


a clash of ideas as well as of arms. As Prime Minister King puts 
it, "the storms of human passions which have swept the oceans of 
; . world, and arrayed nations, continents and hemispheres alike, 
in conflict the one against the other" are due "to two wholely 
different interpretations of life, and of the purpose of life." 
(Address to the 1 Pilgrims of the United States’, p. 11.) This war 
is a bactle between two worlds of thought, and in that sense a cru¬ 
sade as some are want to call it. Even tne dictators agree with 
us on this point, for Mussolini’s famous "We or they!" is a direct 
challenge to all who think differently. lie is saying tnat there 
is not room for both upon the earth at the same time. It is not 
going to far, therefore, to say that the ’Weltanschauung* with 
which we have dealt and which is not*/backed by the military and 
economic efficiency of the Germans and their Axis partners, con¬ 
stitutes the gravest menace the free peoples of the world nave ever 
faced. 

We should not forget that our civilization is based upon the 
heritages of rationalism, liberalism, and Christianity. Totali¬ 
tarianism is the absolute negation of all of these. It is for brute 
force as against reason, for authoritarianism as against freedom, 
for a tribal paganism as against the Christian view of the worth 
of the individual soul and tne universal brotherhood of man. For 
that reason a victory of the Axis powers would involve much more 







- 138 


than the re-drawing of national boundaries or the shifting of 
sovereignty. It would mean the destruction of our whole way of 
life. The only crue freedom,—moral and spiritual—could not exist 
in a totalitarian world. To quote the Prime Minister once more, 
"The Nazi purpose is to destro every belief, and to subvert every 
institution which, from childhood^ days, men and women of the free 
countries of the world have been taught to reverence. Their aim 
is the total destruction of -Christian civilization." (Radio ad¬ 
dress, "The Real Issue in the ‘tar", p. 4.) 

In view of this it must be plain that there can be no thought 
of a compromise peace to end the war. It is well that our leaders 
see this. In his recent message to the Congress of the United 
States President Roosevelt pointed out that the enemy must be 
brought to "abandon the philosophy which has brought suffering 
to the world." The same thought was emphasized after the historic 
meeting at Casa Blanca. Certainly everyone, who understands the 
situation, will agree that unless this purpose is attained, unless 
the millions who are now carried away by false promises, can be 
convinced that the social traumas as preached by the spiritual 
descendants of Fichte ana Hegel and Treitschke and liietzsche are 
inherently false and outrage the dignity of man, the peace after 
this war will be but another armistice in which the nations will 
soon find themselves girding for another struggle more horrible 











139 - 


than the last. 

At th same time we should not think that the accomplishment 
of this task is fcoing to be easy. The youth in the totalitarian 
countries have been saturated for years with this false ideology. 
They are so steeped in extreme racialism and nationalism that a 
military triumph of oir armies alone will not be sufficient, We 
must battle the enemy also in the field of ideas. That means that 
education and enlightened propaganda must play a large role in all 
post-war attempts at reconstruction. 

Because of this it becomes urgently necessary for all friends 
of liberty and the democratic way of life to study the totalitarian 
creed in all seriousness and become thoroughly acquainted with the 
momentous issues involved. 

Nor should the objection be raised that this study is of se¬ 
condary importance in such a time of action as 1943, for as a mat¬ 
ter of fact these ideas, thought often dealt with theoretically, 
are just, as "urgently important and as urgently dangerous as any 
concrete action reported in the daily headlines." Kow true this 
is we see from a recent boast of Dr. Joseph Goebbels, who says: 

"The aims of National Socialism are being achieved one after another. 
The world is only surprised at our attitude because it does not 
know us." We must know them, we must see clearly what their aims 
and aspirations are. But in order to do that we must have a 

thorough understanding of their fundamental philosophy which is the 








140 - 


we 11-Spring of their actions. Only then will we be able to take 
counter measures; only then can our program of education and pro¬ 
paganda, be effective. 

However, there is another reason why we should study and fully 
recognize the implication of totalitarianism. Not all the danger 
is from the side of the Axis enemy. For one thing there is Russia. 
The Russians are fighting with us; but every student of politics 
knows that communistic ideology is decidedly anti-libertarian and 
anti-Christian; and all the praise thab is being heaped upon the 
’gallant ally' at the present time doesn’t cnange this fact. 

In the second place, danger threatens us also from within. 

There is no point in lulling ourselves into a false security. We 
all know that the pov/er and the influence of the state also in the 
democracies has been expanding for years. Ever wide- areas of human 
life are coming under its domination. Education, health, housing, 
transport, employment are just some of the elements which are in¬ 
creasingly affected, or directed, by the state. And there is no 
guarantee th^t this trend will not continue, particularly after 
the war. It is entirely possible that also a democratic state 
gradually drifts into some form of totalitarianism. As the Bishop 
of Chicnester points out 

’’The citizen of a democratic state may be deprived of 
his freedom, by the subtle influence of the universal pro¬ 
vision of social services, from ante-natal clincis to eu^hani- 
asia couches, just as effectively as the German subject is 











- 










141 


robbed of his liberty by the system of spies and concentration 
camps. The youth of a democratic state may be moulded on a 
pattern, and given a particular philosophy, by a socalled 
democratic education, just a3 truly as Hitler Youth is moulded 
on the Hitler pattern, and given a Rosenberg Weltanschauung.* 
(Christianity and ..orId Order, p. 6 .) 

Thus the danger is real that the state becomes not merely a 
conspicuous factor in the social existence of man but so overwhelm¬ 
ingly dominant as to imperil and even destroy man’s freedom. True, 
the forces at work in a demorcracy would be different and the state 
might continue to call itself humanitarian, democratic, and paci¬ 
fic, but it could "make the same universal claims as the totali¬ 
tarian state.and be equally unwilling to tolerate any 

division of spiritual allegiance.” (Dawson, Religion and the Modern 
State, p. 54.) Proponents of liberalism must, therefore, be alert 
and see to it that the trend toward state control be halted in 
time, for at bottom the problem is the same. It really matters 
very little, if we lose our freedom, whether this be through the 
despotism of a dictator or the despotism of a collectivized state. 

With this we do not wish to give the impression that we favor 
ultra-conservatism and urge a return to pre-war conditions. Our 
democracy must be dynamic enough to cope with modern problems as 
they arise and demonstrate its ability to work toward a better 
world. If the state can be of service in this respect and can aid 
in attaining a larger measure of human welfare and social security. 






' 










♦. 

■ 











- 

- 

r 















142 - 


then by all means we should use it; but it must not be permitted 
to become all-embracing, The growth oi' individuality—that is, 
uniqueness and freedom of initiative, so far as this is compatible 
with the general social good,--must be guaranteed to everyone. 
There must always be room for the development of that wide range 
o human activities which are non-political. Associations such as 
churches, clubs, foundations, universities and the like, must be 
permitted relative freedom fro interference on the part of the 
state. In short, the state must always be a means to an end, it 
must remain man's servant and never become his all-powerful master 
To put it in the words of R. B. Perry: "It behooves us to avoid 
a superstitious veneration of the state, and to reaffirm the tradi 
tional view that government is an instrument which is justified 
only by the benefits which it confers on the individual men and 
women who live under it." (Philosophic Roots of Totalitarianism, 
p. 31.) 



















. 

. 








. 








































Bibliograpny 


Fichte: Grundzuege des gegenwaertigen Zeitalters 

Fichte: Reden an die deutsche Nation 

Fichte: Nachgelassende Werke 

Fichte: Vocation of Man 

Engelbrecht: Johann Gottlieb Fichte 

Hegel: Philosophie des Rechts 

Hegel: Philosophie der Geschichte 

Sterritt: The Ethics of Hegel 

Treitschke: Auserwaehlte Schriften 

Treitschke: Politics, Selection by Gowan 

Nietzsche: Zarathustra 

Ludovici: Friedrich Nietzsche 

Carritt: Morals and Politics 

Green: Lectures on the Principles of Political Ob¬ 
ligation 

Bosanquet: Philosophical Theory of the State 
Hobhouse: The Metaphysical Theory of the State 

Plato: Republic and Laws 
Aristotle: Politics 

MacEachran: Notes on Plato and Aristotle 

Rousseau: Social Contract 

Dunning: From Rousseau to Spencer 

Gettell: History of Political Thought 

Sorokin: Social and Cultural Dynamics, Vol. Ill 

Mac Iver, Bonn, Perry: The Roo:s of Totalitarianism 

McGovern: From Lather to Hitler 

Viereck: Metapolitics, From the Romantics to Hitler 

Hitler: Mein Kampf 

Rocker: Nationalism and Culture 

W. L. MacKenzie King: Speeches 

Schumann: Germany since 1913 

Official Reports of the Oxford Conference 

Bishop of Chicnester: Christianity and World Order 

Dawson: Religion and the Modern State 

Miklem: National Socialism and the Catholic Church 

Hill & Stoke: Backgrounds of European Governments 

Fuller: A History of Philosophy 

Durant: The Story of Philosophy 

















- 

. 























































. 



















B29750 




