



©X MW 

mwinsreaus 







Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/trollopesenglandOOemry 












TROLLOP'S ENGLAND 


BY 

EMRYS JONES, B.A. 
DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE 
UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS 
FOR THE DEGREE OF MASTER OF ARTS 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OF PROFESSOR R.K. GORDON 


EDMONTON» ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1944 






[ he si s 

I 3 4-^" 


UKTVERSITY OR ALBERTA 
FACULTY OR ARTS AND SCIENCE^ 


The undersigned hereby certify that they have 
read, and recommend to the Committee on Gra¬ 
duate Studies for acceptance, a thesis on ”Trol 
lope 1 s England”, submitted by Emrys Jones, B.A. 
in partial fulfilment of the requirements for 
the degree of Master of Arts* 


Professor 


Professor 


Professor 


Professor 











AC KE OWLEDGEMBM TS 


I wish to offer my sincere thanks to 
Professor R.K.Gordon, under whose pa¬ 
tient supervision this thesis was writ¬ 
ten. 

I wish also to thank Mr. D.B.Cameron, 
Mr. David Appelt, and Miss Dorothy 
Hamilton of the Library of the Uni¬ 
versity of Alberta for their valuable 


assistance 








Ill 



TAB IS OF CONTENTS. 


Page 

Chapter I: 

Introductory 


1 

Chapter II: 

The Old Guard, the New Rich 

» 



and the Decline of the Caste 



System 


5 


(a) The Ola Guard and the 



New Rich 

5 



(h) Caste 

17 


Chapter III: 

Morality and Propriety 


36 


(a) Morality 

36 



(h) Propriety 

44 


Chapter IV: 

Language and Education 


52 


(a) language 

52 



(h) Education 

64 


Chapter V: 

Women 


82 


(a) Costume 

82 



(h) Womanly Beauty 

103 



(c) Women*s Occupations 

(d) Women’s Deportment 

107 



and Attitudes 

113 



(e) The “ Lady” 

122 





iv 


Chapter Vis 

Men 


12 7 


(a) Costume 

12 7 



(b) Appearance and Attitudes 

136 



(c) The Squire 

148 



(d) The Gentleman 

155 


Chapter VII: 

Love and Marriage 


165 


(a) Courtship 

165 



(b) Married Life 

178 


Chapter VIII: 

Social Life 


191 


(a) Rural Society 

191 



(b) The London Season 

194 



(c) Social affairs 

198 



(d) Amusements and Sports 

204 


Chapter IXs 

Shooting and Hunting 


207 


(a) Shooting 

207 



(b) Hunting 

212 


Chapter X: 

Church and Clergy 


219 

Chapter XI: 

Politics 


246 


(a) Parliament 

246 



(b) Political Parties 

251 



(c) Elections 

255 


Chapter XII: 

Tr ans p or ta t i on 


261 


(a) By Road 

261 



(b) By Railway 

269 













V 


Chapter XIII: 

Miscellaneous Motes 


275 


(a) London 

275 



(b) Prices and Wages 

280 



(c) Meals 

286 


Chapter XIV: 

The Changing Times 


292 

Bibliography: 



301 







1 


CHAPTER OKS 
INTRODUCTORY. 

Anthony Trollope was born April 24th, 1815, and died 
December 6th, 1882. His first novel, The MacDermotts of 
Ballycloran , was finished in 1845; and he continued writing 
until his death, having resumed his last, unfinished novel. 
The Landleaguers , on September 2nd, 1882. His first two 
novels (The MacDermotts of Ballycloran , and The Kellys 
and the 0kellys ) deal with Irish tenant problems, and are 
not particularly well-written; these were followed by a 
novel, La Vendee , and a play, The Noble Jilt , both dealing 
with the French Revolution. Hone of these works has any¬ 
thing to contribute to the subject of this thesis; 

therefore, they are not discussed herein. 

The earliest of Trollope’s novels dealt with will be 
The Warden , his first book on English life, begun in 1852 
after he was transferred to western England on a special 
postal mission. Between this and his last book, I have 
selected twenty-one novels and the Autobiography . These 
have been chosen so as to avoid needless repetition of 
similar topics, and so as to leave untouched no long period 
in Trollope’s career. The latest of his novels dea.lt with 
will be Doctor Wortle’s School , published just one year 


before his death 
























2 


The material of this thesis, then, is drawn chiefly 
from Trollope’s experience of England between the years 
1852 and 1879, with, of course, the things he recalls of 
his youth and childhood and the references he makes to 
matters historical.(1) 

It will be my purpose simply to describe England and 
English ways as Trollope wrote about them. This will hot 
be a statistical treatise showing the number of times each 
English habit or condition is mentioned by Trollope: If 
the existence of such habit or condition is clearly esta¬ 
blished, it will be recorded, whether it is found once or 
a hundred times in the novels. Nor is it intended that 1 
should deal only with the peculiarities of Trollope’s 
'England: All matters of interest will be dealt with, whether 
or not they differ from the ways of to-day; and those 
customs or occurrences that are peculiar will not neces¬ 
sarily have their peculiarities demonstrated or underlined. 

It is necessary to re%£ze that Trollope’s interests 
were strictly limited. His novels deal almost exclusively 
with people of wealth and position, or with those who pre¬ 
tend to wealth and position. Almost everyone of his charac- 

(1) In the Bibliography at the end of this thesis I have 
listed the novels dealt with, showing for each the 
date of first publication, the editions I have consulted 
and the publication dates of these editions. 













3 * 

I <. ^ 

ters is a ”lady“ or y & '* gentleman", or someone wno wishes 

to oe mistaken as such. Outside of such lowly but interes- 

1 ting foiK as the Brattles {!), Bunce {2), Mr. and Mrs. 

' 

Bunce (3), and the Moulders (4), the omy ones who do not 

even pretend to gentility are the scores of servants who 

wait upon Trollope* s heroes and neroines and nave no more 

_ 

life nor individuality than the furniture of the homes in 

which they serve. What Trollope did concern himself with 

is aptly told by Michael Sadlier:- 

"Specific reference to history, to politics 
and to contemporary achievement in thought 
and deed is not found in Trollope. He him- 
seif took little account of them. To him, 
as to the majority of his less articulate 
fellows, the interpretation in terms of his 
own life of such fundamental human impulses 
as love, enmity, ambition, charity, honour 
and courage, was the cardinal duty of man. 

Ideals, philosophies, laws and conquests 
were indeed implicit in a right performance 
of that duty; but they were subordinate to 
it, as the theory of friendship Is subordi¬ 
nate to its practice.” (b) 


Some exception may be taken to the above statement, 
insofar as Trollop© was rather keenly interested in politics, 
even to the extent of presenting himself as a candidate for 
Parliament. This political interest gives life to some of 


(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton . 

(2) The Warden . 

(3) Phineas Finn , & Phineas Redux . 

(4) Orley Farm . 

(5) Trollope: A Commentary , Michael Sadlier (London,1927),4. 



















4 . 


his most readable novels(l); and in them he makes quite 
specific references to contemporary history and tt> political 
machinery. However, Michael Sadlier goes on to say: - 

“Let it be clear from the outset that Trol¬ 
lope 1 s 'expression of the mid-Victorian spi¬ 
rit has always the limitation, of class and 
background congenial to his taste. He is the 
chronicler, the observer and the interpreter 
of the well-to-do, comfortable England of 
London and the English shires. The industrial 
north, whence came the wealth that gave the 
period prosperity, is beyond his range of 
vision, and deliberately so. Newman, Darwin, 

Arnold and Ruskin -- with all that these names 
imply of spiritual struggle, of scientific 
discovery, of the'philosophies of education, 
of beauty, and of economic ideals — might 
never have lived in thetworld he made so pecu¬ 
liarly his own. Wherefore, to speak of Trollope*s 
mid-Victorians is to accept the limits that he 
set upon himself; to claim for hmm unrivalled 
skill as social interpreter is to assume that 
it is skill within these limits ... His portrayal 
of actuality is often literal and conscious, 
and this particularly with scenes of country- 
house life, sporting and shcial." (2) 

a 

This is a good definition of those things which con¬ 
cerned Anthony Trollope. Re limits himself almost entirely 
to "the smiling England of the squirearchy," (3) and to 
those fit associates of squires *£nd their ladies: Members 
of Parliament, Civil Service gentlemen, doctors, lawyers, 
and clergymen. 


(1) Notably: Phineas Finn , Phineas Redux , The Prime Minister 

& The Duke* s Children. 

(2) Trollope; A Commentary . 5* 

(3) IMd , 5. 















CHAPTER TWO 


5. 


THE OLD GUARD, THE NEW RICH, AND THE DECLINE OF 
THE "CASTE SYSTEM". 


"When Anthony Trollope died, there passed not 
only the mid-Victorian novel hut a social 
epoch also. This dual significance of Trol¬ 
lope — at once literary and social — sets 
him apart from the other novelists of his time 
and makes him one of the small group of Eng¬ 
lish authors who, at any time, have expressed 
alike a period and an individual psychology." (1) 

"Forces are already at work, refuting and dis¬ 
crediting the long-accepted legend (that mid- 
Vi ctorianism is synonymous with hypocritical 
smugness and small-mindedness); and among them 
not the least is Trollope, who — re-discovered, 
re-appraised and re-appreciated — speaks from 
beyond the grave in sturdy vindication of his 
age." (2) 


(a') The OH Goar<i «^cS tV*€. hkw Rich. 


It will he the purpose of this chapter to discuss the 
character of England and her people in the mid-Victorian 
era,-- that part of the 19th century (1850-1880) which 
coincides so closely with the years of Trollope®s writing 
and publication (1851-1882). First of all, I shall discuss 
"mid-Victoriansim"* The first two volumes of Wingfield-Strat- 


(1) Michael Sadlier, op.c it., 3 

(2) ibid., 4 


i 






















6. 


ford’s excellent treatise (1), and the sixth volume of 
Social England (2) have been consulted; but these books 
do not disagree with Michael Sadlier, whose discussion of 
the subject I shall quote exclusively and copiously,— for 
my want of the ability to improve upon it* Then I shall go 
directly to Trollope® s own works to find examples of mid- 
Victorian attitudes l^fards ,, Caste ,, . 

G-oing beyond the immediate period of Trollope’s novels, 
we find his childhood spent in the England of the 1820* s,— 
a time of social dissatisfactions during the aftermath of a 
long war. Then was enjoyed the "last unchallenged riot of 
G-eorgian fashionable dissipation. 1 * (3) Morality was strictly 

personal; and there was a growing evangelicism. G-overnment 

tL 

was still in control of the great families. 

h 

Although not outwardly, yet certainly in fact, the 
Reform Bill of 1832 began a new epoch. The enthronement of 
the middle class was achieved and the old order was doomed. 
By 1840 England was under bourgeois rule. Revolution raged 
abroad and the great families, ’’having lost their complete 
control of government, were now threatened with the further 
loss of their possessions *" 


(1) Esm^ Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Tragedy , The 

Vic torian Sunset, & The Victorian Aftermath,(London, 

, 0 , 1939 ) 

if' H.D.Traill & J.S.Mann, ed., Social England, (London,1904) 
(3) Michael Sadlier, o Ejl _olt. This", and all ^her quotations 

















7 


The 1840*s, " a decade of turmoil, fears, menace, 
unrealities ••• a between-time, a slack period of mid- 
century exhaustion, following on the death of one epoch 
and the birth of another,* 1 gave way to the ’50’s and the 
beginning of the ’’Mid-Victorian Age*'. 

"Mutual jealousies of landed and industrial em¬ 
ployers resulted in the Repeal of the Corn Laws 
and passage of the Factory Act. The resulting 
commercial and agricultural prosperity removed 
England from the fever zone of revolution. She 
looked on with superior self-satisfaction — a 
national well-being among all classes that 
bordered on the sanctimonious **.The mid-Vic¬ 
torian age smiles like a flowery meadow between 
the discontent and prodigality of the indignant 
’forties and the ’eighties, with their aesthetic 
languors and their flushed imperialism.*' 

The habits and attitudes of the English people in the 
’fifties, ’sixties and ’seventies have been ridiculed so 
frequently in our day that "mid-Victorian" has become an 
epithet of lofty and sophisticated contempt, applied to a 
people who are taken to have been hypocritical, narrow¬ 
minded and smug. Some other of the many criticisms levelled 
against these times are that they were days of social 
injustice, with an exaggerated respect for rank; that "idea¬ 
lism was smothered in the interests of material comfort;" 
that the rigidity of morals was merely outward, and was 
accompanied by an outward appearance of dowdiness; that the 


down to page 9 are taken from the work referred to, 
pages 1 to 25 . 











8 


discipline of young people and of women was artificial; 
and that there was less candour and courage than to-day 
Sadlier admits that there is a little truth in these 
“faulty generalizations," hut says that, 

“All such reasoning, however*, naturally it may 

arise, is none the less a distortion of the 

truth. It gives a character to the mid-Victo¬ 
rian age that is mainly negative, mainly a 

falling short of the ideals of later epochs; 
whereas the age had qualities more definite 
than these and, if it is to he compared with 
modern days at all, the comparison. should at 
least he fairly drawn and the two periods given 
as much credit for their good qualities as 
discredit for their had." 

"For indeed, and to a peculiar degree, this mid- 
Victorian period Is Trollope* s period/' He is the 
articulate perfection of its normal quality, and 
in his hooks lives the spirit of its dominant 
class — a spirit kindly hut ardent; a spirit 
at once gay and thoughtful; a spirit as sympa¬ 
thetic to individual distress as it was indif¬ 
ferent to class suffering; a spirit that com¬ 
bined a species of national self-satisfaction 
with eager personal striving, a ready personal 
generosity with the vaguest of general charity, 
a contented personal simplicity witi£ a conven¬ 
tional spaciousness of life; a spirit, in fact, 
serious in its aim to better self and thus to 
better others, hut distrustful of theories and 
aloof from large idealisms." 

“It has been the great misfortune of the mid- 
Victorians that, amid the jeers provoked by 
their few insincerities, their manifold vir¬ 
tues of energy, generosity and self-sacrifice 
have been forgotten — Thousands of families 
who lived their lives in contented and indus¬ 
trious well-doing were more typically mid-Vic¬ 
torian than others ... They had ardour, cou¬ 
rage, and, in their self-subjection, a deter¬ 
mined if a somewhat cumbrous idealism ... To 










9 


them there was a daily opportunity of adjus¬ 
ting self-indulgence to self-discipline. 1 11 


These quotations from Sadlier pretty well define the 
spirit of the age. It remains now, in this chapter, to shov; 
what Trollope himself had to say about it. He does not 
undertake to give a formal description or definition of 
the spirit of his own epoch,— as who could, while living 
within it? But there are a few incidental and accidental 
remarks of his which throw a light upon the manners and 
the ideals of his day. 

Trollope speaks nostalgically of the old squirearchy, 
while he recognizes the growing power of industrial and 
commercial princes. He admits the passing of the feudal 
power from the hands of landed gentlemen;- 

’^But the old symbols remained, and may such sym¬ 
bols long remain among us; they are still lovely 
and fit to be loved. They tell us of the true 
and manly feelings of other times; and to him 
who can read aright, they explain more fully, 
more truly than any written history can do, how 
Englishmen have become what they are. England is 
not yet a commercial country in thfc sense in 
which that epithet is used for her; and let us 
still hope that she will not soon become so. She 
might surely,as well, be called feudal England, 
or chivalrous England. If in western civilized 
Europe there does exist a nation among whom there 
are high signors, and with whom the owners of the 
_ land are the true aristocracy, the aristocracy 


(1) The last of the series of quotations from Sadlier.(See 

footnote, page 6. 












. 












10 


t hafc'"i-* 

that is trusted as being best and fittest 
to rule, that nation is the English*.. Eng¬ 
land a commercial country*. Yes; as Venice was. 

She may excell other nations in commerce, but 
yet it is not that in which she most prides 
herself, in which she most excells. Merchants 
as such are not the first men among us; though 
it perhaps be open, barely open to a merchant 
to become one o£ them*” (1) 

In the same book, however, Trollope has to admit the 
success of such a merchant, Sir Roger Scatcherd, who gains 
wealth, title, power ? and position through nothing but his 
industry; and of whom, when he dies, it is said:- 

”... the Queen had delighted to honour him, 
and nobles had been proud to have him for a 
guest at their mansions*” (2) 

In another place the poverty of the landed gentleman 
is described:- 

”lf a moderate estate in land be left to a man 
now , there arises the question whether he is 
not damaged unless an income also be left to 
him wherewith to keep up the estate. Land is 
a luxury, and of all luxuries is the most costly. 

Now the Carburys never had anything but land .. 

... No eldest son had gone into trade or risen 
high in a profession so as to add to the Car- 
bury wealth. No great heiress had been married. 

... But in the days of which we write the Squire 
of Carbury Hall had become a poor man simply 
through the wealth of others. 11 (3) 

Indeed, Trollope* s novels are so full of gentlemen 
and ladies who must marry for money that this comparative 

(1) Doctor Thorne, 11 - 12. 

(2) ibid . , 298. 

(3) The Way We Live Now , I, 48. 





















11 


poverty of the squire was likely the rule rather than the 
exception. Young G-resham cannot marry Mary Thorne because 
she is poor (1); Major G-rantly is almost prevented from 
marrying Grace Crawley, largely because she is poor (2); 
Adolphus Crosbie cannot live like a gentleman and also 
marry Lily Dale. (3) Captain Marrable gives up Mary Low- 
ther because she is poor, and then marries her only after 
she inherits money.(4) 

Trollope could boast as he 'liked that England was 
still ruled by and for the aristocrat; but he himself admits 
the parvenu into society, and shows how the nouveau r iche 
bought his way wherever he wanted to go. As Michael Sadlier 
says: - 

"The merchant princes had already (late * fifties) 
caught the grand manner of a vanished feudalism 
.... commerce could play the insolent as well as 
any nobleman.” (5) 

Typical of these parvenus was Sir Roger Scatcherd, 

who started as a stonemason in BarChester and who, before 

he died, became a multimillionaire, a baronet, the owner of 

a rich country eslate, a Member of Parliament, and a famous 

builder of r ailroads, canals, docks, harbours, jails, and 

hospitals;— this Roger Scatcherd, n who looked on men of 

6 ________ 

ri) "Doctor Thorne . 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset . 

(3) The Small House at Allington . 

(4) The Vicar of Bullhampton. 

(5) Michael Sadlier, Op. cit ., 13. 



















. 


\ 







12. 


his own class as the men of the day, and on himself as by 
|no means the least of them.” (1) 

Although he could buy his position and his power, the 
parvenu could not purchase the esteem nor the repect of his 
1 betters*• The Countess de Courcy could call Scatcherd 
nothing better than "some horrid man, a railway maker, I 
believe...” (2) And poor Sir Roger,himself, shrieks on 
his drunken death-bed, 

”1 can do nothing I would choose to do; be 
nothing that I would wish to be*. What can I 
do? ... If I go among gentlemen, can I talk 
to -them? ... If I go among my workmen, can 
they talk to me? ... Where are my friends?.. 

... I*m worth three hundred thousand pounds; 
and I*d give it all to be able to go to work 
to-morrow with a hod and mortar.” (3) 

Another parvenue of Trollope* s time and creation was 
Miss Dunstable (4), the patent-medicine heiress, whose 
enormous wealth had come from her father* s manufacture of 
the * Ointment of Lebanon*♦ Miss Dunstable was not so unfor¬ 
tunate as Scatcherd, for she managed to purchase her secure 
place in society, not with her money, but with her own good 
sense and high courage. But, even without these qualities, 
she could have had her choice of almost any titled husband 
in the r^alm, which fact Trollope is careful to show was to 


(1) Doctor Thorne , 114 

(2) ibid ., 108 

(3) ibid ., 127-8 

(4) J& ibid . & The Last Chronicle of Barset , & Framley 

Parsonage . 



















13 


the discredit of her “betters* 

But there was another kind of parvenu — the deliberate 
social climber, to whom social position was an eager ambi¬ 
tion rather than a burden as with Scatcherd, or a becoming 
appurtenance as with Miss Dunstable* That such people were 
plentiful is suggested by the number of them in Trollope 1 2 s 
novels. They are not encountered, however, in these novels, 
until 1867, when The East Chronicle of Barset was published. 
Perhaps this was because Trollope simply did not concern 
himself about suchipeople before that time; or perhaps it 
was because such climbers became more plentiful in the late 
1 sixties and in the 1 seventies, when commercial enterprise 
had gotten into its full stride, and by which time aristo¬ 
cratic and landed power had become pretty well softened 
under the attacks of the new liberalism. Typical of these 
pretenders to gentility are Dobbs Broughton and Madalina 
Demolines. (1) Mr. Broughton made his money by lending at 
usury, and spent it lavishly in maintaining a giddy wife 
as the mistress of an extravagant home. Of them Miss Demoline^ 
says:- 

they are always living in the crater of a 
volcano ... There is no saying what day a smash 
may come. These city people get so used to it 
that they enjoy it. The risk is everything to them. (2) 

(1) The"'last^Chronicle" of Barset. 

(2) OP* cit »« I, 408. 


i 






























. 

. 

. ' 

■ 

‘ 










■ • 


f 







. ..J 










. 










14 


They give expensive dinner parties at which they 
i strive to have the attendance of titled people and genuine 
gentlefolk, hut succeed in getting only other climbers 
like themselves* Madalina Demolines -- before her harri¬ 
dan of a mother made a fortune by backing such financial 
adventurers as Dobbs Broughton — was called by her proper 
name, Maddy Mullins. Everything about her is cheaply false 
— even her "little gold Geneva watch"* (1) She is unlady- 
like^her brazen man-chasing, in her intimate manner of 
reclining, of putting her elbows upon the table, and^her 
over-dramatic, exaggerated posing. She plays at intrigue 
and romance as other young ladies played at croquet. She is 
a thorough Bohemienne, and has all the qualities opposite 
to those of a gentlewoman. These cheap qualities stand out 
glaringly against the genuine and sweet characteristics of 
her rival, Lil^ Dale. Speaking about her to Johnny Eaznes, 
Conway, the artist, says:- 

"I strongly caution you to beware of the bird. 

The bird is a bird of prey, and altogether an 
unclean bird. The bird wants a mate and doesn’t 
much care how she finds one. And the bird wants 
money, and doesn’t much care how she gets it. 

The bird is a decidedly bad bird and not at all 
fit to take the place of domestic hen in a 
decent farmyard." ( 2 ) 

The prince of parvenus is Augustus Melmotte (3), a 
(i) ibid., II, 20. ( 3 ) The Way We Live How . 


(2) ibid .. II, 368 















15 


"Bohemian Jew", a confidence-man de luxe ,— high-financier, 
swindler and money "baron, who has holding*in great enter¬ 
prises the world over, and has been credited with the 
making and breaking of dynasties. Such a man — and the 
excited times in which such a man could grow — are seen 
in such lines as these:- 

"it was said that he had made a railway across 
.Russia, that he provisioned the Southern Army 
in the American civil war, that he had supplied 
Austria with arms, and had at one time bought 
up all the iron in England. He could make or 
mar any company by buying or selling stock, and 
could make money dear or cheap as he pleased. 

All this was said of him in his praise,—■ but 
it was also said that he was regarded in Paris 
as the most gigantic swindler that had ever 
lived ... He was now established privately in 
G-rosvenor Square and officially in Abchurch 
Lane; and it was known to all the world that a 
Royal Prince, a Cabinet Minister, and the very 
cream of duchesses were going to his wi£@ f s 
ball. All this had been done within twelve 
months." (1) 

He would sell his daughter to the highest bidder, the 
medium of exchange being, not money, but a title. He could 
spend sixty thousand pounds to give a banquet to the Empe¬ 
ror of c\na, just to buy recognition in society. This 
enormous fake, like the Robber Barons of the day before 
yesterday in America, could hardly find elbow-room for his 
energetic activities in our world to-day; but he is a real 
and believable and brilliant figure in Trollope® s England. 


(1) Op. cit., I, 31 




















. 




16 


In spite of all this, Melmotte is not accepted by the true 
gentlemen of his day. Speaking of Melmotte, one of these 
gentlemen, Roger Carbury, says:- 

"Of course he*s a failure, whether rich or poor; 

— a miserable imposition, a hollow vulgar fraud 
from beginning to end,-- too insignificant for 
you and me to talk of, were it not that his po¬ 
sition is a sign of the degeneracy of the age. 

What are we coming to when such as he is an ho¬ 
noured guest at our tables?" (1) 

Roger Carbury, of course, is a squire,— one of the 
old school, a stubborn bulwark against all change in caste. 
Like him^in this respect^is old Mrs. Morton, who, speaking 
of her son*s estate, says: - 

"A property like this should never be lessened. 

It is in that way that the country is given 
over to shopkeepers and speculators, and is 
made to be like France or Italy." (2) 

In speaking about another squire, Trollope says:- 

"As to his estate ... it was hardly sufficient 
to maintain his position with that plentiful 
hospitality which he would have loved;—- and 
other property he had none. And as to his rank 
he had almost become ashamed of it, since,— 
as he was wont to declare was now the case,— 
every prosperous tallow-chandler throughout 
the country waa made a baronet as a matter of 
course... he did veritably believe that his dear 
country was going utterly to the dogs. (3) 


(1) ibid., II, 44.' 

(2) The American Senator . 400. 

(3) The Prime Minister , I, 146. 















17 


(b) CASTE. 


In a society subjected to such violent changes in 
wealth and power as those of the mid-nineteenth century 
it is to be expected that considerable concern would have 
been felt as to who were or were not eligible companions 
and friends. That such concern was felt is evident in 
Trollope* s constant references to the rank and social- 
admissability of his characters. Those who ’'belonged** so 
jealously guarded their social positions, and those who 
were ambitious to“belong^so diligently laboured to invade 
such positions that a clearly defined picture of English 
caste has been given to us in Trollope* s books. Some of 
Wingfield-Stratford*s comments on this topic are well- 
worth quoting:- 

"But for some time it must have been apparent that 
in England, least of any country, could social 
barriers be permanently maintained. England might 
be described as a country that has gone off the 
birth standard. There were individual noblemen, 
but no such thing as a noble caste, rigidly de¬ 
fined by blood and quarterings. Consequently *So¬ 
ciety,® like an unconvertible pound, might be 
°pegged* for the moment, but could not be stabi¬ 
lized permanently at a dictated level. Sooner or 
later, social values must conform to money values. 

"The fact that money was to so small an^fextent con¬ 
sidered a passport to ’Society* during the fifties 
and sixties was not unconnected with the overflow- 
ingAncomes that still insured from the possession 
of broad acres. A great landowner, unless he chose 
to dissipate his fortune on the turf, was almost 
invariably opulent, and had no very obvious induce- 








18 


ment to court the advances of the newly rich." 

11 ... The small minority within the pale regarded 

.themselves as superior beings to the vast ma¬ 
jority without, and made no effort whatever to 
conceal it ... The limits of gentility were far 
more strictly drawn than nowadays. A doctor, 
unless he were a very famous specialist, the 
family lawyer, with his stovepipe hat and rather 
rusty frock-coat, though treated with respect, 
were not likely to be seen at the Hall except 
alone and on professional business. Half the 
families^whose descendants form the present-day 
county set, would not have been considered fit 
to be callecppon in 1870." (1) 

There is a great deal of talk in Trollope about the 
division between the upper and the lower classes. Miss 
Thorne of Ullathorrie has the greatest trouble arranging 
guests according to their rank at her F^te Champ^tre : (2) 
The ” quality" were to eat a breakfast, and the ’’non-quality” 
a dinner; 

"Two marquees had been erected for these two ban¬ 
quets, that for the quality on the esoteric or 
garden side of a certain deep ha-ha; and that for 
the non-quality on the exoteric or paddock side 
of the same.” (3) 

Because of the great crowd of guests, further space was 
arranged in the manor dining-room for the cream of the 
quality, and "at a subsidiary board sub dio ” for the "lower 
class of yokels.” (4) But then there began the real job 


(1) Esml Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Sunset (London, 

1932), ch. IVT 

(2) Barchester Towers , ch. 35* 

(3) ibid., 333. 

(4) idem . 
















19 


of determining who should be placed in which of the four 
places:- 

"In the first place there was a dreadful line to 
be drawn. Who were to dispose themselves within 
the ha-ha, and who without? To this the unthin¬ 
king will give an off-hand -answer, as they will 
to every ponderous question. Oh, the bishop and 
such like within the ha-ha; and Farmer G-reenacre 
and such like without. True, my unthinking friend; 
but who shall define these such-likes? It is in 
such definitions that the whole difficulty of 
society consists ... where will you put Mrs. Look- 
aloft, whose husband, though a tenant on the 
estate, hunts in a red coat, whose daughters go 
to a i^shionable seminary in Barchetter, who calls 
her farmhouse Rosebank, and who has a pianoforte 
in her drawing-room? ... And how was she to di¬ 
vide her guests between the marquee and the par¬ 
lor? She. had a countess coming, an Honourable 
John and an Honourable G-eorge, and a wnole bevy 
of Ladies Amelia, Rosina, Margaretta &c; she had 
a leash of baronets with their baronettes; and, 
as we all know, she had a bishop. If she put them 
on the lawn, no one would go into the parlor; if 
she put them into the parlor, no one would go 
into the tent." (1) 

If dear old Miss Tnorne, the last of the longest line 
of blue-blooded, form-worshipping families,could not deter¬ 
mine the exact rules of social precedence, it may safely be 
said that no such exact rules could have existed. Divisions, 
ranks, stations, and classes, though they certainly were 
recognized,could not have been rigidly confining upon 
people: A person* s place must have been determined largely 
by his ambition for advancement, and the extent to which he 


(1) ibid., 333-4. 


















. 








20 


could put such ambition into effect. Only those who were 

! definitely of the ’’lower class” seemed to be fixed in 

their rank; even so, "Mrs G-reenacre is at present well 

content with the paddock, but she might cease to be so if 

she saw Mrs, Lookaloft on the lawn.” (1) But, on the whole, 

if there was any contentment of people with their social 

standing, it existed only among the ’’non-quality”: - 

”... we have no evidence that the wage-earners, 
as a whole, resented the affable condescension 
implied in such habitual forms of address as 
1 my man*, ’my good fellow*, and 'my good woman', 
or that mutinous feelings were excited among the 
vast army of domestic servants...” (2) 

When Peregrine Orme shouted, "Here, you fellow, come and 

hold these horses'.” the boy ”who in following the sport 

had got as far as this ditch,” did not scowl nor grumble 

nor openly reb^l, but quietly and cheerfully "did' as he 

was bid and scrambled over” (3); and was no more mentioned 

by Orme,-- nor by Trollope. Lady Scatcherd is discontented 

only with her uncomfortably high station: She loudly 

\ 

regrets the fact that her husband had been knighted:"Oh, 
why did they do it? Ah, doctor*, people such as us should 
never meddle with them above us.. Seqjtfhat has come of itl”(4) 
;Lucy Robarts was contented not to take a prominent place 

UT'ibid.. 334 ■ “ “ ~ 

(2) Esme Wingfield-Stratford, Op. cit ., ch. IV. 

(3) Orley Farm , 402 

(4) Doctor Thorne , 514. 

















21 . 


I 


among the titled folk who were entertaining her (l); and 
Lady Lufton gives her “credit for too much sense and 
proper feeling” (2) than to set her cap for Lord Lufton. 

Mr. Bunce, however f ”had an aversion to his superiors in the 
world because they were his superiors" (3), while his wife 
was suitably and humbly satisfied with her lot, and "had 
a liking for them for the same reason," (4) and "S&e 
despised people poorer than herself, and thought it a fair 
subject for boasting that her children always had meat for 
dinner." (5) Mr. Runciman* just a hair’s breadth from 
gentility, but eternally excluded because he was an inn¬ 
keeper, was quite unresentful; and Trollope could safely 
refer to him as, "Runciman, who was often allowed (sic) 
by his lordship to say a few words to him in the hunting- 
field." (6) Elias Gotobed, that irrepressible logician 
and patriotic American critic of things English, sums up 
the matter in these words 

The man who is born a lord, and who sees 
a dozen serfs around him who have been born to 
be half-starved ploughmen, thinks that God ar¬ 
range d(it all, and that he is bound to maintain 
a state of things so comfortable to himself, as 


(1) Pramley Parsonage , 124. 

2 ibid ., 142. 

(3) Phineas Finn , I, 82. 

(4) idem . 

(5) idem . 

(6) The American Senator , 119. 
























' 























22 . 


"being God's viceregent here on earth. But they 
do their work as videregents with an easy grace, 
and with sweet pleasant voices and soft move¬ 
ments, which almost make a man douht whether 
the Almighty has not, in truth, intended that 
such injustice should be permanent. That one 
man should be rich and another poor is a neces¬ 
sity in the present imperfect state of civili¬ 
zation;.— but that one man should be born to be 
a legislator, born to have everything, born to 
be a tyrant,-- and should think it all right, is 
to me miraculous. But the greatest miracle of all 
is that they who are not so born,— who have been 
born to suffer the reverse side,— should also 
think it to be all right.” (l) 

One thing is clear: For a man to work at any commer¬ 
cial, labouring, or retail occupation was decidedly infra 
dig ., and excluded him from the company of gentlemen. Mr. 

Moffat, for example, was wealthy but of lowly birth; and 

1 • 

of him Lady Amelia de Courcy says:- 

"Neither money nor position can atone to me for 
low birth ... the match (of a Lady de Courcy) 
with Mr. Moffatt was not disgraceful, though it 
could not be regarded as altogether satisfactory. 

But with Mr. Gazebee (an attorney) the matter 
would be altogether different. He is a man ear ¬ 
ning his bread : honestly , I dare say but in a 
humble position. You say he is very respectable: 

I do not doubt it; and so is Mr. Scraggs, the 
butcher in Courcy. You see, Augusta, to what 
such arguments reduce you.” (2) 

Frank Gresham bewails the limited choice of professions 
open to him as a gentlemen and the son of a squire:- 

”Oriel, if there be an empty, lying humbug in 
the world, it is the theory,of high birth and 
pure blood which some of us"endeavour to main¬ 
tain. Blood, indeed! If my father had been a 
baker, I should know by this time where to look 
for my livelihood. As it is, I am told of nothing 
(l) ibid ; /?/ 

60 Doctor- TKet-v> g 4S 6 


















i 




t 















23 * 


"but my ‘blood* Will my blood ever get me half 
a crown?" (1) 

His mother # lady Arabella, thought that "hard work as a 
doctor, or as an engineer would degrade him;" (2) but to 
"dangle at a foreign court ( as a diplomat) • would be 
in proper accordance with iJfee high honour of a Gresham of 
Greshamsbury." (3) The division of society into two large 
classes was easy; but the placement of ranks within these 
classes was a troublesome problem* If old Miss Thorne of 
Ullathorne found it difficult (4), there were, however, 
others, like Miss Marrable, who were quite positive and 
dogmatic in their definitions:- 

"Miss Marrable thought a good deal about blood* 

She was one of those ladies,*— now few in num¬ 
ber,— who within their heart of hearts conceive 
that money gives no title to social distinction, 
let the amount of money be ever so great, and its 
source ever so stainless* Hank to her was a thing 
quite assured and ascertained, and she had no 
more doubt as to her own right to pass out of a 
room before the wife of a millionaire than she 
had of the right of a millionaire to spend his own 
guineas* She had always addressed an attorney by 
letter as Mister, raising up her eyebrows when ap¬ 
pealed/bo on the matter, and explaining that an 
attorney is not an esquire* She had an idea that 
the son of a gentleman, if he intended to maintain 
his rank as a gentleman, should earn his income as 
a clergyman, or as a barrister, or as a soldier, 
or as a sailor* Those were the professions inten- 


(1) ibid*, 472-5* 

(2) ibid*, 522. 

(3) idem * 

(4) cf* supra, 19. 















24 


ded for gentlemen. She would not absolutely 
say that a physician was not a gentleman, or 
even a surgeon; hut ^ie would never allow to 
physic the same absolute priveleges which, in 
her eyes, belonged to the law and the church. 

There might also be a doubt about the Civil 
Service and Civil Engineering; but she had no 
doubt whatever that when a man touched trade 
or commerce in any way he was doing that which 
was not the work of a gentleman. He might be 
very respectable, and it might be very neces¬ 
sary that he should do it; but brewers, ban¬ 
kers, and merchants, were not gentlemen, and 
the world, according to Miss Marrable’s theory, 
was going astray, becausejpeople were forget¬ 
ting their landmarks. 1 11 (Ij 

Only Miss Marrable and other such relics of a more 

conservative generation could live up to the ideal that 

the possession of money did not entitle a man to high 

social position. But time and again we find others selling 

this ideal and brazenly peddling their titles for guineas. 

Squire Gresham says:- 

"If Porlock (the de Courcy heir) were to marry 
the daughter of a shoeblack, without a farthing, 
he would make a misalliance; but if the daughter 
of the shoeblack had half a million of money, 
nobody would dream of saying so.' 4 ( 2 ) 

The de Courcy family readily forgot their energetic opposi¬ 
tion to Mary Thorne’s marriage to young Gresham after she. 
became an heiress; and Trollope jeers at their sudden new 
friendliness towards Marys- 

tt What honour, indeed, could be too great to show 


(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 60-1, 

( 2 ) Doctor Thorne > 468 






, 

















s 























































. 








25 


to a bride who had fourteen thousand a year 
in her own right, or to a cousin who had done 
his duty by securing such a bride to himself J rr (l) 

Indeed, the novel Doctor Thorne could easily be called 
a treatise on Caste, or a satire upon people of high rank 
whose ideals of gentility can be bought for gold or passion* 
Mary Thorne’s father, a gentleman, seduces the daughter of 
a stonemason. The same stonemason becomes a baronet and a 
power in his country. S’ra.hk Gresham, a gentleman, loves 
Mary Thorne, an illegitimate child whom the de Courcys 
contemn, but whom the sarnie de Courcys embrace when she 
inherits the ex-stonemason’s fortune* Because of Lady 
Amelia’s objections, the haughty Augusta fails to marry Mr. 
Moffatt, a man with wealth but without rank or birth; but 
the very same Lady Amelia steals from Augusts the much 
lesser man, Mr. Gazebee, who works for his living in the 
ungentlemanly occupation of attorney. 

Money, the leveller, again operates with the insuf¬ 
ferably proud Lady Aylmer, who objects to her son’s marriage 
with Clara Amedrozs- 

w As she (Clara) got out of the carriage, she 
lookedjdp, expecting to see her (Lady Aylmer) 
in the hall; but Lady Aylmer was too accurate¬ 
ly acquainted with the weights and measures of 
society for any such movement as|that. Had her 
son/ brought Lady Emily to the house as his 
future bride. Lady Aylmer would probably have 


(1) ibid ., 561 


























26 


been in the hall when the arrival took place; 
and had Clara possessed ten thousand pounds of 
her own, she probably would have been met at 
the drawing-room door; butt as she had neither 
money nor title ... lady Aylmer was found stit¬ 
ching a bit of worsted, as though she had expec¬ 
ted no one to come to her. 11 (1) 

Even the fact of gentle birth could not assure one of 

being accepted into any given station of society. Station 

and class were separate considerations: a man could belong 

to the class of 11 gentleman” , yet not be admitted into the 

station of society enjoyed by a nobleman. Grace Crawley, 

for example, though the daughter of a clerical gentleman, 

was, on the grounds of poverty, considered by some as unfit 

(2 ) 

for wife to Major Grantly. Again,— all of her people felt 
anxious for Lucy Robarts, the sister of a clerical gentle¬ 
man, because she was to go up ”into a station so much above 
her own in the eyes of the world” (3) in marrying lord Luf- 
ton. Becaused of their money, the Tappitts (brewers) and the 
Griggses (grocers) were higher than Mrs. Ray in the world, 
although she knew ”that her forbears had been gentlefolk, 
when there were, so to speak, no Griggses and no Tappitts 
in existence." (4) Mrs. Ray f s undoubted gentility stood her 
laughter Rachel in no good stead as an eligible bride for a 
squire’s son, because it ” was only proper to remember that . 


(1) The Belton Estate , 323-4. {4) Rachel Ray. 109. 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset . 

(3) Framley Parsonage . 











































27 . 

Mrs. Ray lived in a cottage, and that farmer Sturt was her 
friend and neighbour." (1) 

Definitely among those at the top of the social ladder 
were, of course, the nobility and the landed gentry, most 
of whom were careful to protect the dignity and exclusive¬ 
ness of their positions. Lady Amelia expresses her horror 
at Mr. Bateson 1 2 3 s father going off with the governess, and 
Mr. Everbeery*s marrying the cook-maid, accusing them 
of diluting the best blood in the country, and paving the 
way for revolutions."-(2) Frank Gresham, her cousin, him¬ 
self the farthest from a snob, M had said that he hated 
money, that he hated the estate; but he would have been 
very slow to say, even in his warmest opposition to her, 
that he hated the roll of the family pedigree. He loved, it 
dearly, though he seldom spoke of it; — as men of good 
family seldom do speak of it.” (3) Such men as these squires 
and nobles, though they admitted that different titles gave 
men different ranks, set greater store upon lineage than 
upon station: Trollope says of Sir Harry Hotspur:- 

”To have Humblethwaite and Scarrowby lost amidst 
the vast appanages andjdomains of some titled 
family, whose gorgeous glories were new and paltry 
in comparison with the mellow honours of his own 


(1) ibid., 170 

(2) Doctor Thorne , 81. 

(3) Ibid. , 367. 



















t 








. 




. . . ... ... ' { ... 


: 

* . 



















. 


! - -- O X 






: ■ 





























27 . cu 

house, would have been to him a ruin of all 
his hopes. (1) 

Right at the top of the social ladder — other than 
members of the Royal Family, whom/ we hardly meet in Trol¬ 
lope* s books -- are the Dukes and Duchesses. The social 
value of a reception, an ’'at-home'*, or a ball could be 
increased by thirty per-cent ifjthe hostess could manage to 
get the Duke of Omnium to drop in,— merely to show himself 
there for a moment. (2) Even Lady de Courcy, the wife of 
an earl, is found preening herself because she succeeded in 
getting the untitled heir to the Duke to appear at her 
home: "Mr. Palliser had been at/ Courcy Castle, and neither 
enemy nor friend could deny the fact." (3) Even against the 
levelling pressure of the new democracy, a duke could main¬ 
tain the full awesomeness of his position:- 

"But men and women thought but little of the Duke 
of St. Bungay, while the other duke was regarded 
with an almost reverential awe. I think the sec¬ 
ret lay in the simple fact that the Duke of Omnium 
had not been common in the eyes of the people. He 
had contrived to envelop himself in something of 
the ancient mystery of wealth and rank." (4) 

The staunchest Liberal of them all, this same Duke of 

Omnium, was yet the greatest stickler for the dignity of 

his rank:- 


(1) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 35 

(2) Framley Parsonage , 31# 

(3) The Small House at Aldington , I, 438 

(4) Phineas Finn , II, 101 













28 


"To the Duke 1 2 s thinking the maintenance of the 
aristocracy of the country was second only in 
importance to the maintencance of the Crown. 

How should the aristocracy he maintained if 
its wealth were allowed to fall into the hands 
of an adventurer! 

’’Such were the opinions with regard to his 
own order of one who was as truly Liberal in 
his ideas as any man in England, and who had 
argued out these ideas to their consequences. 

As by the spread of education and increase of 
general well-being every proletaire was brought 
nearer to a duke, so by such action would the 
duke be brought nearer to the proletaire. Such 
drawing-nearer of the classes was the object to 
which all this man’s political action tended. 

And yet it was a dreadful thing to him that his 
own daughter should desire to marry a man so 
much beneath her own rank and fortune as Frank 
Tregear.” (1) 

And yet Frank Tregear was undoubtedly a gentleman, and the 
son of a landed gentleman of ancient family*. The Duke* s 
philosophy is further explained:- 

’’The peer who sat next to him in the House of 
Lords, whose grandmother had been a washer¬ 
woman and whose father an innkeeper, was to 
him every whit as good a peer as himself. And 
he would as soon sit in counsel with Mr. Monk, 
whose father had risen from a mechanic to be 
a merchant, as with any nobleman who could 
count ancestors against himself. But there was 
an inner feeling in his own bosom as to his 
own family, hisjown name, his own children, and 
his own personal self, which was kept altogether 
apart from his grand political theories. It 
was a subject on which he never spoke; but the 
feeling had come to him as a part of his birth¬ 
right.” (2) 


(1) The Duke’s Children , I, 213-4 

(2) ibid ., II, 86 












This noble duke*s attitude is summed up in these words:- 

"Of all that properly belonged to his rank and 
station he could be very proud, and would al¬ 
low no diminution of that outward respect to 
which they^were entitled. Were they to be trenched 
on by his fault in his person, the rights of 
others to their enjoyment would be endangered, 
and the benefits accruing to his country from 
established marks of reverence would be impe^- 
rilled." (1) 

In fact, this can be taken as the attitude of all men 
who had a station, high or low, to maintain,— duke, earl, 
squire, clergyman, barrister, or even a labourer who valued 
his own dignity and integrity. 

Whether he was a nobleman or a commoner, a man, it 
was considered, could raise a woman to his rank by marrying 
her; but a woman could not so raise a man. Mr G-azebee^ 

n was an excellent sort of man, with a full con¬ 
viction of the too great honour done to him by 
the earl* s daughter who had married him, and a 
complete consciousness that even that 
marriage had not put him on a par with his wife’s 
relations, or even with his wife. ,! (2) 

But, 

"He would perhaps have liked it better If she had 
not spoken so frequently to him of her own high 
position as the daughter of an earl, or so fre¬ 
quently to others of her low position as the 
wife of an attorney.” (3) 

Regarding this same rule of marriage:- 

"Mrs. Dobbs Broughton ought to have known better. 


(1) The Prime Minister , I, 211 

(2) The Small House at Al li ngton , I, 229 

(3) ibid., 304 
































' 





















( 












30 


As she professed to he guided in such matters 
by the rules laid down hy the recognized autho¬ 
rities, she ought to have been aware that a 
man takes no rank from his wife/' (1) 

Although, on the other hand, a man could raise his wife to 
his own station, Trollope 

"is bold to affirm that a man from the ordinary 
ranks of the upper classes, who has had the 
nurture of a gentleman, prepares for himself 
a hell on earth in taking a wife from any rank 
much below his own,— a hell on earth, and, 
alas', too often another hell elsewhere also*" (2) 

The squire was usually looked upon as the "first 
commoner" (3) in his locality, and as being somewhat 
better than a city man of equal rank: It was something for 
Sir Peregrine Orme, In proposing to Lady Mason, to offer 
that "she should no longer be regarded as the widow of a 
city knight, but as the wife elect of a country baronet."(4) 
Mrs. Dale and her daughters were called "county people" 
because they lived on Squire Dale's estate, "raised to a 
level with .their own squire and other squires by the cir¬ 
cumstances of their residence." (5) But if, as they contem¬ 
plated, they should move into the town of G-uestwiek, they 
would lose this rank and its priveleges. 

Clergymen of the Church of England were, as a rule, 
"gentlemen". This title was conceded to the vulgar Mr. 


(1) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 247 

(2) The Three Clerks , 383 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 107 

(4) 0rley Farm , I, 497 

(5) Tiie Small House at Alllngton , II, 138 
















31 


( 1 ) 

Slope, even, just because he was a clergyman; although the 
Grantlys and the Hardings and the Arab ins — and most of 
his other colleagues — look A upon him as the vilest of men. 
So also, the melancholy and righteous Mr, Crawley (2) is a 
”gentleman”, despite hisjpoverty, hi^numble position as a 

perpetual curate, and his suspected criminality. Clergymen 

) 

are listed among the gentlemen in The Warden (page 233); 
yet they are somewhat below the station of the nobility, 
particularly the nobility of their own parish. (3) In 
atjjher place we are told that "Clergymen,-- particularly 
the rectors and vicars of country parishes,— do become 
privileged above other professional men." (4) Within the 
ftofevstan itself there were, of course, well-observed 
degrees of precedence, there being not only the obvious and 
wide distinction between bishops and rectors, archbishops 
and bishops, and deans and canons, but also the one which 
placed a beneficed clergyman above the parson who enjoyed 
no living. (5) In county society the bishop took pre¬ 
cedence over all commoners (6); unless onejbf the company 
happened to be a Cabinet Minister. (7) 

Parsons f, come in among county people. That's their 

(1) Bar Chester Toilers. 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset . 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 382 

(4) Doctor Thome , 455 

(5) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 61 

(6) Framley Parsonage , 60 

(7) Phineas Finn, II, 315 



























' 

















32 


luck in life. Doctors never do; nor lawyers." (1) 

"Mr. Crawley was remembering the fact that he was 
a clergyman of the Church of England, and that 
he had a rank of his own in the country ... where¬ 
as this attorney, of whom he was speaking, was, 
so to say, nobody in the eyes of the world." (2) 

Lady Amelia did not consider Mary Thorne, a doctor* s 

daughter, fit to be the wife of her Frank, a squire’s son.(3) 

Yet Dr. Thorne himself was asked to the Duke of Omnium* s 

yearly gatherings. (4) It must be said, of course, that this 

gathering was not very select, because it Included Finnie 

the attorney, and Bolus the apothecary (5); and attorneys 

and apothecaries were definitely not "gentlemen". Although 

(*) 

we find in one placed lawyers coupled with clergymen as 
"gentry", we must read the word "lawyer" as meaning "bar¬ 
rister" only; Mr. G-azebee"would be a perfect gentleman, 
only, that his family had never been anything but attorneys/ 7 
(7).... "The name of attorney is very bad, is it not?" (8)... 
Miss Penelope Mason would not talk to Mr. Dockwrath at her 
own father’s dinner table because "she ... knew that Mr. 
Dockwrath was an attorney from Hamworth, and considered her¬ 
self by no means bound to hold any sort of conversation with 
him. " (9) The dogmatic Miss Marrable "always addressed an 


(1) The Small House at Allington 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 61 & 80 

(4) Ibid., 237 

(5) Idem . 

(6) The Warden , 232 

(7) Doctor Thorne , 404 


, II, 571 

, I, 321 

(8) Ibid., 432 

(9) Orley Farm , 


I, 


111 






















1 








. 







■ 














33 


attorney by letter as Mister, raising up her eyebrows when 
appealed to on the matter, and explaining that an attorney 
is not an enquire.” (1) 

Merchants, bankers, and other people of commerce did 
not belong to the gentry; although their wealth was very 
attractive to those "gentlefolk” who cared to marry money. 
"The mercantile part of the community, the mayor and corpo¬ 
ration, and council,” (2) are separated from the gentry of 
the town of BarChester. When Miss Dunstable mentions the 
Ointment of Lebanon, out of which her great wealth was made, 
Mrs. Proudie hastily changes the subject. (3) They all like 
Miss Dunstable* s money; they even like Miss Dunstable; but 
they would rather ignore the source of her wealth as some¬ 
thing that it was better not to mention. Young Louis Scat- 
cherd ”had many companions at school who were glad enough to 
go up to Maidenhead with him in his boat; but there was not 
one among them who woulcjhave talked to him of his sister.”(4) 

Lady Scatcherd was not a fit companion for a doctor* s daugh- 

( 5 ) 

ter; yet she was said to be "letting herself down” (6) if 
she made a companion oijher own housekeeper. But the lowest 
and most unfortunate man in polite society was he who was 

(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 60-1 

(2) The Warden , 252 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 191 

(4) Ibid ., 289 

(5) Ibid ., 330 

(6) Framley Parsonage , 424 














. 






. . 

■ 



























. 














34 


both a tradesman and a Jew, as was Mr, Breghart, a rich 
banker who wanted to marry the proud Miss Longestaffe. (1) 
Within the ranks of business men there were the same distinc¬ 
tions as those found within other occupations. For example, 
a retail merchant was definitely not a gentleman, whereas 
a wholesale merchant might pretend to be one. (2) 

Other examples of class distinction can be found in 
Trollope* s novels: For instance, in the non-gentry society 
of a village an apothecary is barely suffered to be a mem¬ 
ber of a village club (3), while a butcher (4) is allowed to 
sit^ in another such club only if he does so at some distahce 
from the fireplace and the other members,— an attorney, an 
innkeeper, a farmer, and a brewer. A brickmaker* s widow, who 
had "been in service", could hardly be asked to drink tea 
with a chambermaid from an inn. (5) The daughter of a tenant- 
farmer, who had little station of her own, could weep at the 
humiliation of becoming a servant. (6) 

But, generally speaking, Esme^Wingfield-Stratford*s 
statement (7) that there was no strict and rigidly definable 
division of society in mid-Victorian England is largely true. 
It was a time of changes; and, among the changes, those 

(1) The Way We Live Now , I, 262 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 18 

(3) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 329 
i4) The American Senator , 24 

(5) Orley Farm , ii, 509 

(6) The Way We Live Now, II, 286 

(7) cf. supra , 2u. 


















3b 


caused^the decrease of landed wealth and the Increase of 

/) 

|commercial wealth were as active as any others; with the 

I 

iresult that no sure harrier could he erected between one 
station and another. The constant concern expressed hy the 
people in Trollope* s novels over such harriers is, in itself 
an indication of the barriers* inneffectiveness. 










\ 









































36 


CHAPTER THREE 

MORALITY AND PROPRIETY 


(a) Morality 


The mid-Victorians were a moral and a proper people* 
Very much in earnest about most things, their high sense of 
morality was an outgrowth of their intense earnestness; and 
their rigid propriety was a by-product of their moral atti¬ 
tude* Wingfield-Stratford*s inimitable book, The Victorian 
Tragedy , puts the finger on the causes of these mid-Victo¬ 
rian charactersitics:- 

"... And so it was with the Victorians. We laugh them 
to scorn on account of their earnestness, and yet 
it is by virtue ofi/this very earnestness that their 
greatest are sitting where so few of us can aspire 
to soar. 

"They were quite ludicrously in earnest; they 
took themselves with portentous seriousness. They 
were also moral; and not content with moralizing 
their own conduct, they must needs do the same to 
their arts and literature. (1) 

He goes on to say that out of the stress of fierce compe¬ 
tition of the times there grew a "Cult of work"*- 

"The whole training and circumstances of the middle 
class, in the early part of the nineteenth century, 
were calculated to create and foster the habit of 
concentration. The stress of a competition fierce 
beyond all precedent, kept its nose to the grind¬ 
stone ... This cult ... engendered that peculiar 
moral earnestness, common to all Victorians of the 
middle-class heydey..." (2) 


(1) Esme Wingfield Stratford, Op. Cit., 

(2) Idem . 


XIV. 












37. 


Trollope, himself, with his systematic and prolific 
I output of one hundred and twenty-six volumes in only thirty- 
nine years of writing, hears witness to this "Cult of 
work". In The Three Clerks he talks about this moral attituc£ 
of his times:- 

"But how often does it come to pass that the man 

.who will work is seen begging his bread? We may 
almost say never — unless, indeed, he be a cler¬ 
gyman. Let the idle man be sure of his wife* s 
bread before he marries her; but the workingman, 
one would say, may generally trust to God’s 
goodness without fear." (1) 

Wingfield-Stratford goes on to say:- 

"That the Victorians were moral, consciously and 
earnestly moral, to an extent scarcely to be 
paralleled before and certainly not since, will 
hardly be disputed. They were peculiarly rich in 
that faculty of concentration that is the indis¬ 
pensable foundation of all morality, and under 
the influence of a Middle-class Protestantism 
that affected those who believed in neither Q-od 
nor devil, this concentrated energy of will was 
directed to ends belieVed to be good." (2) 

That the mid-Victorian middle-class people were con¬ 


stantly conscious of morality is suggested by their habi¬ 
tual references to the deity in their ordinary conversation. 
For example, Dr. Thorne, speaking to his daughter about her 

unexpected inheritance, says, "May God, in his mercy, enable 

( 3 ) 

you to bear the burden, and lighten for you the temptation." 


(1) Trollope, Op. cit ., 391 

(2) Wingfield-Stratford, Op. cit ., XIV 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 552 





















- 






























' 




* 





38 


Mrs. Orme and Lady Mason speak to each other as follows:- 

"Of course I will ^ite to you," said Mrs. Crme. 

"I will do so regularly." 

"May G-od bless you forever. But it is need¬ 
less to ask for blessings on such as you. You 
are blessed." 

"And you too;— if you will turn to Him, you 
will be blessed." 

"Ah me. Well, I can try now. I feel that I 
can try at any rate." 

"And none who try.ever fail. And now, dear, 
good-byel" (1) 

This stilted conversation may be incorrect reporting 
on Trollope* s^part; but that is hardly likely: Trollope* s 
dialogue is so natural, so apt and so genuine, on the whole, 
that one would not readily accuse him of being unnatural, 
inept, or false in such instances of sanctimonious 
conversation. 

"May G-od Almighty bless him*. (Says Mrs. Woodward) 

How infinitely greater are truth and honesty 
than any talent, however brilliant*." (2) 

G-ertrude Tudor, in saying farewell to her husband, 
says, "And now go, and may G-od in $is mercy watch over and 
protect you and give you back to me*." (3) 

This moral sententiousness is the accustomed language 
of ordinary lay-people. Yet it seems as easy to their lips 
as it does to those of the curate, Mr. Saul, from whom we 
may expect such pulpit talk in his everyday speech:- 


(1) Orley Farm , II, 499 

(2) The Three Clerks . 348 

(3) Ibid ., 475 












39 


“Will you tell your husband from me tj&at I will 
accept, and endeavour not to betray the double 
trust he/ proposes to confer on me? It is much 
that he should give to me his daughter. She shall 
be to me bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh. 

If Sod will give me His grace thereto, I will 
watch over her, so that no harm will come nigh 
her.“ (1) 

Emily Hotspur”knelt down and prayed that the Almighty Father 
would accomplish this good work for her ... that he might be 
as a brand saved from the burning, not only hereafter but 
here also. 11 (2) Lord Fawn concludes a love-letter to Lucy 
Morris with, “I know fefeeet all that you will feel, and you 
have my fullest sympathy; but even such sorrows as that are 
cured by time, and by the mercy of God, which is not only 
infinite, but all-powerful.” (3) 

These are only a few examples chosen at random from the 
nany prayers, benedictions and invocations that fill Trol¬ 
lope’s novels. They are usually spoken sincerely by good 
people, and seem to slip out quite naturally in the most 
Drdinary places. 

Beside these frequent and habitual references to God, 
there is-a religiousness -- a sanctimony — in the attitudes 
of Trollope’s people that bears witness to^he moral tome of 
the times. More often than not, however, it is a low-church 
Anglican, or a dissenter who possesses such attitudes. The 

1) The Claverings , 508 

2) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 174 

3) The Eustace Diamonds , 450-1 


















. '■ 















































* 










. 












40 


idea of sin in small things was prevalent with such people* 
Mrs* Prime, who distrusted the High Church almost as she 


did the Roman Catholic Church, looked upon Luke Rowan’s 
hearty innocence as depp-dyed sin:- 

" • • ♦ she had resolved that Luke Rowan was a black 
sheep; that he was pitch, not to he touched without 
defilement; that he was, in short, a man to he 
regarded hy relfeious people as anathema,-- a 
thing accursed; A and of that idea she wa,s not able 
to divest herself suddenly* Why had the young 
man walked about under the churchyard elms at 
night? Why, if he were not wicked and abandoned, 
did he wear that jaunty look,-- that look which 
was so worldly? And, moreover, he went to halls, 
and tempted others to do the like'*" (1) 

The extent to which religion and morality coloure^all 
the thoughts of some middle-class people may he gathered frc§ 
the following "extract from Lady Eastlake*s well known 
review of Jane Eyre ( Quarterly Review , December, 1848)", 
whicfe "will show the sanctimony of which, even prior to 
1851, the national character was capable:- 

’Altogether the autobiography of Jane Eyre is pre¬ 
eminently an anti-Christian composition. There 
is throughout it a murmuring against the comforts 
of the rich and the privations|of the poor, which, 
as far as each individual i^concerned, is a mur¬ 
muring against God’s appointment; there is that 
pervading tone of ungodly discontent which is at 
once the most prominent and the most subtle evil 
which the law and the pulpit, which all civilized 
society, in fact, has at the present day to con¬ 
tend with . We do not hesitate to say that the 
tone of mind and thought which has overthrown 
authority abroad and fostered Chartism and rebel- 


tli- Mil-haul--3cu lll« gs, 



■ 9, footno te 


0) R *cV\eJ R&V Us *4- 

































41 


lion at home, is the same which has also written 
Jane Eyre /* 

This spirit, which, in 1848, was more exceptional than per¬ 
vading, came to supremacy in the early fifties." (1) 

It is the same spirit which insisted on the necessity 
of curch-going, and inveighed against the "sins" of card¬ 
playing, dancing, and certain forms of sport;— the spirit 
which is still alive in the breasts of many moral reformers. 
The prevalence of this spirit made it possible for one man 
to criticize another*s morals openly, loudly and with impu¬ 
nity; whereas, to-day, the man criticised would be inclined 
to tell his critic, with some violence, to mind his own 
business. When Mr. Moulder tells how he and Mrs. Moulder 
spent all of Christmas morning at home watching the turkey, 
the sanctimonious Kantwise asks, "How did you manage about 
divine service?” and then, **when he had spoken, closed his 
eyes and suckedjhis lips.” (2) A kindlie^r but similar spirit 
is found in some members of a higher social station; for 
example, in Lady Stavely: "Morning and evening prayers, 
church twice on, Sunday, attendance at the Lord*s table at 
least once a month, were to herself -- and In her estimation 
for her own family — essentials of life.” (3) And Miss 
Marrable, the true gentlewoman, "went to church once on Sun- 

(1) Michael Sadlier, Trollope: A Commentary, 9, footnote. 

(2) Orlev Farm I. 335 

(3) Ibid .. II, 244. 




















1 






















yy A. :V :• 


































■: r 










? 


. 











42. 


days in winter, and twicefcin summer, and shd|had a certain 
very short period of each day devoted to Bible reading.” (1) 

Sin, to such people, was very real, and easily defined.. 
They are the ones of whom Trollope says, "There are those 
who call cards the devil*s books." (2) Among such moralists 
belongs Mrs. Primes- 

"Ni©e things aggravated her spirits and made her 
fretful. She liked the tea to be stringy and 
bitter, and shefLiked the bread to be stale; — 
as she preferred also that her weeds should be 
battered and old. She was approaching the-, stage 
of discipline at which ashes become pleasant 
eating, and sackcloth is grateful to the skin. 

The self-indulgences of the saints in this res¬ 
pect often exceed anything that is done by the 
sinners." (3) 

She is horrified over the high church laxity of Dr. Hartford*£ 
two curates. "They go to cricket-matches," she exclaims,"and 
among young women with bows and arrows*." (4) Even Mrs. P * »»¥i 
Prong*s perfectly gentle and tender-hearted mother, Mrs. Ray, 
feels^ much the same ways- 

"The project of the party was also told to Mrs. 

Ray, and Rachel sitting now with her head on 
her mother* s lap owned that she would like to 
go to: it. * Parties are not always wicked, mam¬ 
ma,* she said. To this assertion Mrs. Ray ex¬ 
pressed an undecided assent, but intimated her 
decided belief that very many parties were 
wicked. 1 2 3 4 5 There will be dancing, and I do not 
like that,* said Mrs. Ray. n (5) 


(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 62 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 377 

(3) Rachel Ray , 66 

(4) Idem. 

(5) Ibid., 50 


I 













43 


To Mrs. Proudie, 

’’Balls and suppers were, of course, out of the 
question. She did not object to her daughters 
dancing all night at other houses — at least, 
of late she had not objected, for the fashio¬ 
nable world required it, and the young ladies 
had perhaps a will of their own -- but dancing 
at her house — absolutely under the sfeade of 
the bishop* s apron -- would be a sin and a scan¬ 
dal.” (1) 

This narrow, unrelenting idea of sin and of church 
attendance must not be taken as the attitude of all mid- 
Victorians; or even, for that matter, of the majority. 5-i rem¬ 
its strength was not due so much to the number of people 
who held it, but rather to the earnestness and insistence of 
tiiose who lived in that spirit. These were, chiefly, the 
staunchest of the low church worshippers, the most active of 
the dissenters, and, in general, the ultra-respectable lower 
niddle-class, who clung to their respectability and to their 
morality with the tenacity of people who had little else to 
ise as a mark of caste. Y7e meet many of the other, less 
sanctimonious kind$ in Trollope: The Hardings and the G-ran- 
tlys,-- church people who live graciously and think no evil 
Df their own indulgences in wine and cards and dancing; Felix 
Graham, a* hero* who”believes everything -- unless it is the 
Bible;” (2) Lord Chiltern, who brazenly says, ”1 mean to say 
that I shan’t go to Saulsby because I am told in the twentieth 


1) F ramley Parsonage, 183 

2) Orley Farm, I, 232 










' r 

. . •• , . 


. 

■ 

r 1. 
. 


. 



. 




















44 


chapter of Exodus to honour my father and mother,— and that 
I shoudln 1 2 1 believe anybody who told me that he did anything 
because of the commandments;" (1) and Mr. Quickenham, who 
walked to the mill on Sunday because "any such investigation 
as this which he had on hand was much more compatible with 
his idea of a holiday than attendance for two hours at Church 
Service. On Easter Sunday he would make the sacrifice,— 
unless a headache, or pressing letters from London, or 
Apollo in some other beneficent shape, might interfere and 
save him from the necessity." (2) 

(b) Propriety. 

Perhaps it is splitting hairs to distinguish between 
mid-Victorian morality and mid-Victorian propriety; but 
let us look upon Morality as the spirit of the times, and 
upon Propriety as the form of behaviour enforced by that 
spirit. The difficulty of maintaining even this distinction 
is manifest in the fact that I have already discussed " forms 
of behaviour" in the above section which was to have dealt, 
according to my definition, with the "spirit" only. 


(1) Phineas Finn, II, 118 

(2) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 300 














45 . 

Mary Belton shows this nicely when she objects to her 

brother 1 s hunting after word has come of the death of his 

cousin, whose estate he will inherit:- 

"That's humbug, Mary*" (Says Will Belton.) 

"No, Will; I do not think that* When any prac¬ 
tice has become the fixed rule of the society 
in which we live, it is always wise to adhere 
to that rule, unless it call upon us to do some¬ 
thing that is actually wrong. One should not 
offend the prejudices of the world, even if one 
is quite sure that they are prejudices." (1) 

The propriety of mid-Victorian times expressed itself 
in peculiar forms: Mrs. Roper and Miss Spruce (2) were 
jealous of their "respectability", and felt that the presence 
in the same house with them of the Lupexes must keep them 
constantly on guard to protect their poor, proper and ner¬ 
vous sense of humble righteousness. And this was so only 
because Mr. Lupex worked in a theatre; and because he got 
a little drunk whenever the amorous Mrs. Lupex did some 
harmless flirting. The same kind of lower-class -- or even 
middle-class — respectability is shown by Mr. Low in Phi - 
neas Finn : Mr. Low "had never said a soft word in his life 
to any woman but the wife of his bosom, had never seen a 
racehorse, always confined himself to two glasses of port 
after dinner, and looked upon smoking as the darkest of all 

the vices." (3) Admiral G-reystock was considered not quite 
6 ^ ___ 

(1) The Belton Estate , 256-7 

(2) The Small House at Allington . 

(3) Op. cit., 55 
















46. 

respectable because he "was a man who liked whist, wine,— 
and wickedness in general." (1) The really respectable 
people looked askance at those who did not choose to observe 
all the common rules of deportment, and called such rebels^ 
"Bohemians". Violet Effingham.said that she would like to 
settle down in a house of her own because " a girl becomes 
such a Bohemian when she is always going about, andjdoesn't 
quite know Where any of her things are." (2) Her husband- 
to-be, Lord Chiltern, "is at heart a Bohemian ... he likes 
the indecencies of life." (3) Lizzie Eustace and all her 
companions are very Bohemian in their artificialities, their 
strong language, and their disregard of the lighter sexual 
proprieties. (4) Of the same stamp are Miss Demolines, Mrs. 
Van Siever, Mr. and Mrs. Dobbs Broughton, and all such par¬ 
venu friends of Johnny Eames.(5) These Bohemians are nume¬ 
rous enough in Trollope's novels to suggest that, though 
respectability was the dominant note of the times, there 
were many English people of that day who paid little-heed to 
respectability 1 2 3 4 s requirements. 

The most frequent references to propriety in Trollope 1 s 
works have to do with the behaviour of women and men towards 

(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 1 

(2) Phineas Finn , I, 113 

(3) Ibid ., 143 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds 

( 5) The Last Chronicle of Barset . 
















- 

. 




' 




' 




































: • 






. 


















47 


jeach other. Although this may he the right place to discuss 
such proprieties, I shall leave them to the various sections 
on men, women, sex, and marriage. This leaves just a few 
odds and ends to he mentioned in this chapter. One of the 
most interesting of these has to do with the proprie/tes of 

i 

mourning. 

Generally speaking, the period of mourning over a rela¬ 
tive who had died was two full years. Trollope says:- 

"We think it wicked, or at any rate heartless, to 
put it (sorrow) out. If a man’s wife he dead, he 
should go about lugubrious, with long face., for 
at least two years, or perhaps with full length 
, for eighteen months, decreasing gradually during 
the other six. If he he a man who cat* quench his 
sorrow -- put out his fire as it were — in less 
time than that, let him not at any rate show his 
power'. n (1) 

In The Eustace Diamonds he says, “Two years of retreat from 

the world is generally thought to he the proper thing for a 

widow."(2) When Eleanor Bold's friends thought she might 

marry Slope only one year after her husband's death, they 

were horrified. (3) During her mourning she was wrong to 

receive visits from unmarried gentlemenj(4) and, after 

eighteen months of mourning, she was thought indecorous 

0 ) 

when she entertained a lover. There were some women, however, 
who looked upon themselves as perpetual widows; such a one 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 117 

(2) Op cit ., 124 

(3) Barchester Towers, 112 

(4) Ibid., 133 

(5) Ibid., 181 












. 

' 

. 




* 





















48 


was Lil/y Dale ((), and another was Mrs* Prong, (J|). They 
had a high example of this in the behaviour of their own 
Queen Victoria. 

During the period of mourning there was to be no 

visiting or receiving of visits; (^) and the mourner was 

to take no part/ in the affairs of society. ( ty) A man who 

(S) 

was in mourning could not even go hunting. Even though 
Clara Amedroz and Captain Aylmer were not close to their 
aunt, nor felt any real grief at her death, nevertheless 
good form demanded, "sad countenances, few words, a&d those 
spoken hardly above a whisper; an absence of all amusement 
and almost of all employment, and a full surrender to the 
trappings of woe." (6) These were items in the ideal atti¬ 
tude of mourners; but they were not always observed; and a 
changejin the rigidity of attitude is observed by Trollope 
when he says:- 

"There will be some to say that a young widow 
should not be happy and comfortable,-- that 
she should be weeping her lest lord, and sub¬ 
ject to the desolation of bereavement. But as 
the world goes now, young widows are not mise¬ 
rable; and there is, perhaps, a growing ten¬ 
dency in society to claim from them year by year 
still less of any misery that may be avoidable. 

Suttee propensities of all sorts, from burning 


(1) The Small House at Allington , I, 458 

(2) Rachel Ray , 121 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 114; The Prime Minister , II, 287. 

(4) Phineas Redux , I, 329 

(5) The Belton Estate , 255; The American Senator , 505* 
(6.) The §elton Estate, 108. 





















49 


• alive down to bombazine and hideous forms of 
clothing, are becoming less and less/popular 
among the nations, and women are beginning to 
learn that, let what misfortunes will come 
upon them, it is well for them to be as happy 
as their natures will allow them to be." (1) 

This lenient attitude is rj^eated:- 

"The world has seemed to decide that a widow 
should take two years before she can bestow 
herself upon a second man without a touch of 
scandal. But the two years is to include every¬ 
thing, the courtship of the second as well as 
the burial of the first,-- and not only the 
courtship, but the preparation of the dresses 
and the wedding itself." (2) 

Thejpropriety of the times is also reflected in the 
people’s speech. Some things could be said, and other things 
were considered most improper. That habit, which persists 
to this day, of printing only the first letter of a violent 
word — or of omitting it altogether — was prevalent' in 
Trollope’s time. It is not true that people did hot “cuss", 
but rather that they did so a great deal, as is shown by 
the frequency of omitted profanities in Trollope’s novels. 
All through his books we find the Tf dash”, to indicate an 

unprintable (though not unutterable) word:- "What the d-l 

D-— him’. Truth be d—■—By G—” Women seemed to exert 
a strong influence in purifying men’s language. Poor old 
Captain Cutwater could not even say, "What the deuce*." with¬ 
out immediately adding, "Caving the ladies’ pardon." (3) 

(1) The Bustace Diamonds, 138 

(2) The Prime Minister , II, 283 

(3) The Three Clerks , 45 





























I 


















50 


When Archdeacon Grantly refers to Mrs. Proudie as'*t|iat she- 
Beelzebub", Trollope says in his excuse, 

“it must he recorded on his behalf that he used 
the phrase in the presence only of the gentle¬ 
men of the party. I think he might have whis¬ 
pered the word in the ear of his confidential 
friend old Lady Lufton, and perhaps have given 
no offence; but he would not have ventured to 
use such words aloud in thejpresence of ladies." (1) 

An illuminating and amusing revelation of primness is given 

in the following incident:- 

“ f That*s dtp^ nonsense, 1 2 said the lari. Miss 
-Cassewary (an elderly lady®s-companion) gave 
a start,-- not we may presume, because she 
was shocked, for she could not be much shocked, 
having heard the same word from the same lips 
very often; but she thought it right always to 
enter a protest." (2) 


Wingfield-Stratford sums up his discussion of mid-Vic¬ 
torian prudery in these words: - 

“The subject of Victorian prudery has, perhaps, 
been a little overworked.... Victorian morality 
did ... repose upon the ostrich-like faith that 
you could best conquer evil by shutting your 
eyes to its existence. More important than the 
truth itself was the purity, or rather the res¬ 
pectability, of family life. And the family was 
a rigidly closed circle, presided over by the 
Lord, and his deputy, the Paterfamilias, and into 
that circle not the least suggestion of evil, or 
carnal affection, or anything unrefined was allowed 
to penetrate ... But the Victorian standard! of 
righteousness approached much more nearly to that 
ofjfbhe Pharisees that* that of Christ ... “Respec- 


1) The Last Chronicle of Barset , 101 

2) The Duke® s Children, II, 89 
















































51. 


table** was, in fact, the word by which it may 
best be described, and it was a reign of res¬ 
pectability that the middle-class triumph imposed 
upon society ... As an ideal of life, Victorian 
respectability, with all^its limitations, must 
be owned, when judged by its fruits, to be at 
least worthy of respect ... Perplexed in faith 
a man might be, provided he were pure in deeds.'* (1) 


* 



(1) Esm/ Wlngfield-Stratford, Op. clt ., 135-7 









' 








, 

. 








« . * 

* 

, • 















. 










































52 


CHAPTER FOUR 

LANGUAGE AND EDUCATION 

(a) Language, 

A part of the last chapter dealt with the propriety of 
language in mid-Victorian England. This section will deal 
only with some language usages of the times. No attempt will 
be made to discuss the manner in which people spoke, because 
such an attempt would lead this thesis astray into a critical 
study of Trollope*s style^and a discussion of his approxi¬ 
mation to truth in his reporting of people’s speech. Rather, 

I shall simply confine this section to the noting of some 
peculiar usages, and to listing the slang expressions found 
in the novels under consideration. 

Listed below are some of the peculiar usages I have 
lappened to notice in the novels read. Some of them are odd 
spellings, others odd gramatical combinations, and others 
just the use of words or phrases in a way different from 
the usage in this day and this country. In some cases, for 
all I know, these apparently odd expressions may be current 
even now in some parts of the English-speaking world. Rather 
chan list them in groups, I shall just note them in the order 
:Ln which they occur among the twenty-onb novels being here 
considered: - 


























■ 





- 

' , 


■ 



. 


c 




. . 

. 

. 

. 

. 

— . 








53 . 


Travestie: travesty (1) 

An* t: am not (2) 
landskip: landscape (3) 

Ain't: am not, are not (4) 

Wonderful: amazing, surprising (5) 

Idiotcy: idiocy (6) 

Indifferent to: disliking (7) 

( 8 ) 

To mind doing something: to bother about doing something, 
To have a dislike to: to have a dislike for (9) 

He remembered himself of: He reminded himself of (10) 
Crowner*s quest: coroner's inquest (11) 

These news: this news (12) 

Musquito: mosquito (13) 


(1) BarChester Towers , 45 

(2) Ibid ., 339 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 394: (Used by an educated lady.) 

(4) Used by educated people in:- 

The Claverings , 112 
The Vicar of Bullhampton , 87 
The Eustace Diamonds , 382, 554 
Fhineas Redux , II, 372 
The Way We L i ve Now , II, 221 
The Prime Minister , II, 322 
Used by comparatively uneducated people in:- 

The Claverings , 36.& The Vicar of Bullhampton , 23. 

(5) Rachel Ray , 332; The Prime Minister , I, 142. 

(6) The Belton Estate , 20 

(7) The Last Chronicle of B arse t, I, 292. (8) Ibid , 298, 363. 
(9) Ibid ., II, 110T~Tlffr fbid ., 282. 

(11) Phlneas Finn , I, 96 

(12) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 506 

(13) The Way We Live Now , II, 69 





























54 . 

"The Duchess v/as known to he heav y ft : (Evidently 

this earthy way of saying it was not 
thought to he improper.) (1) 

The first person singular pronoun is placed before 
the third person noun, instead of the opposite as 
in to-day's usage. (2) 

Plaister: plaster (3) 

Himself: him; Herself: her. (4) 

Bad: badly; Quick: quickly. (5) 

Any other else: anyone else. (6) 

High-foluting: high-faluting (7) 

To leave this: to leave here (8) 

To boody: to brood (9) 

Eat: ate. (10) 

Advertised: informed (11) 

Oeconomics: economics (12) 

Distaste to; distaste for (13) 

Diplomate: diplomat (14) 


(1) Phineas Finn . I, 96.; Ibid: II , 29 

(2) "I and‘my father", Phineas Redux , I, 69 

"I and Mrs. Pipkin,^ The Way We Live Now , I, 390 
"I and Reginald Dobbs, ff The Puke ^Hcfh lldren , I, 340 
"I and Lady Bracy," Doctor Wortle T s ISchool , 60 

(3) The Way We Live Now , II, 208 

(4) The Prime Minister , I, 29, 44; The Way We Live Now , II f°7- 
1(5) The Way We Live Now , II, 220, 2 76. (6) Ibid ., 380 

(7) The Prime Minister , II, 124 
:(8) Ibid., 354 

(9) Ibid ., 424 

(10) Ibid ,, I, 66 

(11) Ibid,, 254 

(12) The American Senator , 8- 

(13) Ibid ., 117 

(14) Ibid ., 190, 236 





































55. 

“Now we* re two": Now we disagree (1) 

A clenching answer: a clinching answer (2) 

Almanac: calendar (3) 

To stand to someone: To stand by someone (4) 
Inveterably: inveterately (5) 

In fault: at fault (6) 

To loafe: to loaf (7) 

One of the most enjoyable qualities of Trollope* s 
writings is the lively, natural, forceful conversation of 
his characters* A great many slang expressions spice the 
talk of his people, rich and poor, cultured and vulgar,— 
particularly the talk of his nonchalant "men-about-town“• 
Perhaps the frequency of such slang has as much anything to 
do with the raciness of Trollope* s writing. 

For want of a better arrangement, and to avoid too many 
tedious footnotes, I shall note down the slang expressions 
as they occur, book by book, giving, opposite each expres™ 
sion, the number of the page on which it first occurs. Many 
of these expressions occur in several different places; but 
only the first instance will be recorded for each one:# 

(1) Ibid., 209 ; The Duke's Children, II. 170 

(2) The Duke's Children . II, 335 

(3) Ibid., II, 98 

(4) Ibid., II, 235 

(5) Ibid ., II, 249 

(6) Ibid .. II, 247 

(7) Doctor Wortle 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 s School , 231 






























• - 





56 


Doctor Thorne : - 

Rhino, ready (342); tin (529): synonyms for "money". 

To cut a dash (342): to make a good showing. 

To go more regular; to go within the posts (343): to 

behave properly. 

To pop (345): to propose marriage. 

Doing the civil (345): acting politely. 

Up to snuff (345); up to trap (427): in good condition. 
Down on his luck (426): unfortunate. 

That* s the ticket (427): that is the exactly siultable 

thing. 

A trump( 56 O): an excellent person. 

Turned off (564): married, 

QRLEY Farm :- 
Volume I:- 

That 1 s the chat (76): That is what you should say. 

■To fly at someone*s cup (102): To be violently angry 

with someone. 

Pretty bobbish{215): Feeling rather well. 

Dash my wigs (339): An expression of annoyed surprise. 
Right as a trivit (4C5): In perfect health. 

Volume II: - 

To be off the hooks (35): To be in poor health. 

A swell (292): A person of actual or/pretended high 

social standing. 
















57 


To think no end of something (292): To think extreme¬ 
ly well of something. 


I 


Framley Parsonage :- 

To throw in one 1 s shells (85): to ostracize; (The slang 

expression, it will he noticed, 
has the original Greek-root 
meaning.) 

To go to the shop (86): To occupy one’s seat in the 

House of Commons. 


Faws off (91): Hands off. 

Tuft-hunters (113) Those who seak to entertain, or to 

meet celebrities. 

Toad-eater (113): one who toadies up to another. 

To be green (134): To be gullible, or over-innocent. 
Taradiddle (172): a fib. 

To quiz (219): To tease — equivalent to the modern 

slang terms: to kid, to rib. 
Ruined, horse, foot, and dragoons (257): completely 

ruined. 

Missish (282): sleppily-sentiaentalT prudish. 

Spoony (282); sloppily sentimental. 

To fly a bill (295): To sign a promissary note. 
Determined to have money or marbles (296): determined 

to collect a debt, or punish 
the debtor. 









' 

- 









■ 





■ 












. 



58. 

To rat (310): to desert. 

Dibs (355): money. 

The Three Clerks :- 

A screw of bird 1 s-eye (16): a small paper package of 

curly-cut tobacco. 

To swap (85): To trade, or exchange. 

To go to one*s downy (98): to go to bed. 

Hoity-toity. (142): an exclamation showing one's sur¬ 
prise at another* s airs. 

As sound as a roach (172); in perfect physical condition 

Here's a regular go (204): Here's an unusual state of 

affairs. 

It's all up with someone (204): Someone has no further 

chance of success; someone has 
been brought to task. 

¥hat's the cheese? (204); What is the correct infor¬ 
mation? 

To go into the green line (207): To establish a green¬ 
grocer 1 s shop. 

To fal-lal (227): To lead another person on. 

To be thrown on one's beam ends (229): To be at a com¬ 
plete loss. 

Here's a start (231): This is a surprise. 

As sure as eggs (265): most sertainly. 

Slip-slap (266): innefficient; inept. 

















- ? . 




. 



' 














59 


The needful (288): money. 

To put something up the spout (358): to pawn something. 
Blue (340): gloomy; discouraging. 

Quod (343): Jail. 

My birdie (387): a vulgar term of endearment. 

The Small House At Allington :- 

Volume I:- 

Jolly ( 26): pleasurable; attractive; fortunate. 

Stunning (26): very beautiful or handsome. 

A duck (71): a dear person. 

In the family way (313): pregnant; with child. 

That 1 s the time (550): That is the state of affairs. 
Volume II: - 

To put a stick under the pot (32): To assist the develop 

ment of a scheme. 

To cast a sheep’s eye (33): To covet someone in love or 

marriage; to look sentimental- 
ly at someone 'of the opposite 
sex. 

To be under the line (55): To arrive late at work. 

That’s tellings (97): That is divulging a secret. 

Chaff (103): light-spirited sarcasm. 

To be up the spout (106): To be in trouble. 

A pickle (115): a predicament. 

Tell it to the marines (210): What you say is difficult 


* 






60 


to believe. 

And I don*t mean (384): I agree with you heartily. 

(Modern equivalents: And I don't mean 
maybe; I should say so; You're telling 
me) 

Fancy-girl (542): lady of easy virtue; fiancee. 

RACHEL RAY :- 

gartridge (70): a term of endearment (used of women). 

Bird (70): a term of endearment (used of women.) 

To put one's feet under the mahogany (135): to sit down 
to dinner. 

Sonsy (161): youthfully frank and attractive. (Used of 
men and boys.) 

I'll give my head for a cream cheese (302): A manner of 
expressing certitude. 

The Belton Estate *^ 

It would be teaching the ostler to grease the horse* s 

teeth: It would be doing southing unnecessary. 

Darned (88): politer form of 11 damned". 

To cry for the top brick of the chimney (164): To yearn 
for something unattainable. 

To pull out (430): To act with energy. 

The Claverings: - 

A Jad of wax (64): a good fellow. 







- 














































c 












61 


A brick (64): a good fellow. 

To stick to a shop (107): To remain in a certain line 
of effort. 

Fag (107): boredom; fatiguing or uninteresting work. 

To be quite the thing (185): To be in good health. 

To be as safe as wax (384): to be implicitly trust¬ 
worthy. 

The Last Chronicle of Barset :- 
Volume I : - 

To dress oneself in another's glass (59): To conduct 

oneself according to another's attitudes. 

You may say that*. (64): What you say is quite true. 

(Modern equivalent: You can say that again] 

Shandy-pated (331): forgetful; muddle-headed. 

To put one's finger into another's eye (334): To 
deceive another. 

To make a mull of something (364): to spoil something. 

A queer go (84): An unusual situation. 

Hold your jaw (122): Stop talking. 

To have the run of one's teeth (122): To receive a 
free meal. 

Faix (123): a vulgar form of "Faith"; 

Puzzle-pated (196): confused in thought. 

A little touched in the upper story (204): slightly 
eccentric. 














To upset the whole coach (205): To throw something 
into confusion. 

Hand-and-glove (246): (hand-in-glove) on terms of 
intimacy. 

To comb another’s hair (276): To strike another on the 
head. 

Doosed (276): a mispronunciation of "deuced. 11 

To skedaddle (312): to run away; to abscond. 

There isn’t a sick chick among the boiling (326): There 
is not a sick child in the family. 

Pretty toll-loll (327): rather satisfactory. 

To tackle to (327): To begin with a will. 

Heave a-head (327): Proceed with despatch. 

Volume II:- 

To levant (28): to run away from ( as from a crime). 

To peach on someone (57): to inform on someone. 

A good time (103): a pleasant experience. (Called, in 
this place, an American expression.) 

To retire into one’s shoes (132): To keep quiet. 

To slope off (141): To run away secretly. 

To be tiled (157): To be on terms of intimacy. 

A rum *un (356): An odd person. 

A good *un to go (356): A wide-awake and energetic 


person 






63 


Phineas Finn: - 

A warm woman (I, 248): a woman confortable circumstanced. 
An old dust (II, 114): a pompous old man, 

' 

Phineas Redux :- 

Have a * baccy (I, 77): Have a cigar. 

As fresh as paint (I, 225): Of a healthy appearance. 

Ihe Way We Live Now :- 

Tight (I, 25): drunk. 

An oldjscrew (I, 268): an old miser; an old usurer, 

rhe Prime Minister : - 

Cheek (II, 121): sarcastic pleasantry. 

Ihe American Senato r:- 

Muff (114): A * stick-in-the-mud 1 ; an over-dependent, 
helpless person. 

To cocker someone up (359): To flatter someone; to make 
someone feel above his proper station. 

To be outside a horse (444): To ride on horseback. 

The Duke’s Children ;- 

Volume I:~ 

There was no knowing where to have him ( 58): There was 
no Way of knowing how to deal with him. 

Volume II:- 

Rumpus (242): a disturbance. 




































' 





■ 



















■ 








l 







64 


The governor (242): one*s -father. 

To crane (242): to hesitate. 

Tip-top (242): the "best. 

Dander (242): temper. 

To lay it on (243): To preach forcefully. 

To rush at one 1 s/fences (243): To act precipitately. 

To set up one*s back (243): To be angry. 

Doctor Wortle 1 s School : - 

To be cut (67): to be drunk. 

To mizzle off (72): to go away .surreptitiously. 

Hipped (218): annoyed; disgruntled; restless; gloomy. 

! 

(b) Educat ion. 

In his novels Trollope does not give us much infor¬ 
mation on the education of his times; and the little he does 
give us touches only upon the teaching of well-to-do families 
at- home, in private and public school^,and at the univer¬ 
sities of Oxford and Cambridge. He says next to nothing 
about the subjects of study, teaching methods, or the ope¬ 
ration of schools. 

The history of education in.Victorian times is the 
story of a gradual assumption by the state of the responsi¬ 
bility formerly assumed by privately endowed and by chari¬ 
table institutions. It is also the story of a slow and not 
very substantial Increase In literacy among the middle and 























« 














. 


































65 


the lower classes. 

In 1830, in Leeds, "one hundred and fifty-six rudi¬ 
mentary schools provided for 7,000 children; the Sunday- 
schools took in 11,000; 15,000 went altogether untaught ... 
There were 451 public-houses, 98 brothels, 2 churches, and 
39 meeting houses." (1) 

Increase in literacy is attested to by the following 


figures: - 

"In 1038, in Southward, 40 per cent, of the population 
could not read. In Manchester, in the same year, 

55 per cent, signed the marriage register, 45 
per cent, made a mark. In Hull, a census of 4,735 
ex-scholars showed that 823 could not read a 
complete sentence, and 1,870 could not write. 

Nor is this surprising; for in the census of 
1851, out of the 29^3425 private schoolmasters 
and mistresses, 708 signed their returns with 
a mark. In 1845 it was computed that ( for the 
United Kingdom) 33 per cent, of the males were 
illiterate and 49 per cent, of the females. But 
in 1851 these figures fell to 31 and 45 respec¬ 
tively; in 18ol to 25 and 35; in 1871 to 19 and 
26." (2) 

Education was formerly almost entirely in the hands of 
private enterpreneurs; and students of a kind were turned 
out in masses by comparatively few teachers assisted by 
comparatively many monitors, whose chief duty it was simply 
to hear lessons rather than to teach them. But by as early 
as 1846 trained teachers under public control were already 


(1) G-.M.Young, ed.. Early Victorian Eng l and , (London, 1934). 

I, 167. 

(2) Ibid., II, 3. 

















( 







- 








































66 


well in charge of education. During the 'thirties schooi- 

Duildmgs were mostly bad; the average school-life was only 

about two years at the longest. The best training or the 

time was given by the Society Schools; a) and the worit 

of these was helped out by the Sunday-schools, which gave 

a little instruction in the three R 1 s as well as in religious 

matters. These and a great number of, more or less honest 

but small private ventures cared for the education of the 

lower and middle class people wno could not afford the old- 

established great public-schools. The products of such 

training were, however, more than one-third illiterate. Alt 

attempts at reform of education under public control, in the 

# 

’thirties, failed. 

However, voluntary training colleges sprang up; and, 

in this way, the foundations of a teaching profession were 

laid. The ’’Minute of lb4b r ’ established apprenticeship of 

new teachers to masters, courses in Training Colleges, the 

Certificate, and increased pay for teachers. This Minute was 

the first great step in the recognition of education as a 

primary function of the state. By Ibpb the school-leaving 

age. had been forced up to eleven and the school-life 

lengthened to four years; but only a small fraction of the 

school children got beyond the level of learning now to 

write. In the ’ seventies compulsory school attendance was 
(1) Notably: The British^and Foreign School Society, and the 
National Society for Promoting the Education th8 ^ oor ! 

I”V\ Pfi wcip S of f b hih ei d h 




















. 

. 














j 
















. 






' ' '‘Si* ' > ■ '' 






. . . ' 




; 




■ . 




. 

■ 





. . .• . ' 












* 


y 


, . ; 











oY • 

instituted. 

Tne more rortunaue miadie-c±ass cruiaren were educated 
in grammar schools. But these A were not so numerous as they 
had been formerly; and most of them were allowed to run 
down in Victorian times. 

The Taunton Commission of 1861 showed that: 

“Below t..e schools which were in touch with the 

.Universities all was chaos; those which aimed 
lowest seem to have done bests they could pro¬ 
duce good clerks, though hardly better than the 
best National Schools. Above them the rank and 
file of the secondary schools, under-staffed by 
untaught ushers, were turning out at fifteen or 

so the boys who were to be executives of the late 
Victorian industries and professions, the ascen¬ 
dant element in the late Victorian electorate, 
in a word the worst educated middle-class in 
Europe." (1) 

Four years after this Commission’s report, Trollope 

x 

himself wrote a most interesting article on educational 
reform, from which I quote:- 

“Among all the questions of public importance 
which are now being mooted in England, I do 
not know that any one transcends in interest 
that which has lately arisen respecting the 
management of our great public schools. 

“We attribute to them much of that^ high 
spirit among our gentry which we regard as the 
well-spring of English honour; and much, also, 
of that ignorance by which we feel that we are 
oppressed, and makes us painfully aware that 
so many of our early years have been wasted. 

“We so love that in them which is pictu¬ 
resque, that we are half unwilling to sacri¬ 
fice the picturesque to the useful. And yet 
we are aware that it is imperative upon us 


(!) G-.M.Y ou ng, Qp. cit ., 490-1. 













68 


to cure the evils which exist. 

11 it is the same with us Englishmen in all mat¬ 
ters. At last, after long internal debate and 
painful struggle, reason within us gets the bet¬ 
ter of feeling. In almost every bosom there sits 
a Parliament in which a Conservative party is ever 
combating to maintain things old, while the Libe¬ 
ral side of the house is striving to build things 
new. In this Parliament, as in the other, the Libe¬ 
ral side is always conquering, but its adversary is 
never conquered." (1) 

In this. same essay Trollope tells us of a Commit¬ 
tee appointed July 18, 1861, to enquire into the Public 
Schools, as the result of an article written against Eton 
in Cornhill Maga z ine by one signing himself "Paterfamilias". 
The Cornhill article urged a double reform: First, in the 

management of endowments, which go, not as originally inten- 

s <£.cond 

ded to the really poor, but to the gentry; and in 

the quality of the teaching, the deficiency of which was 
said to arise out of the lack of sufficient masters. The 
Report of the resulting Committee showed that, for all 
studies, Eton had one master for each 25 boys, Harrow and 
Shrewsbury one for each 22, and Winchester one for each 20. 
This does not seem to be a very heavy teacher-load to us 
who are accustomed to see in our own elementary and high 
schools loads of thirty to fifty pupils to each teacher. 

But at Eton, in foreign languages ( French, German and Ita¬ 
lian) one man tried to teach 806 boysl 


(1) Anthony Trollope, "Public Schools", Fortnightly Review , 
October 1st, 1865, 476-87. 
















. 















. 

' 





. 










. 








i 










































69 


Trollope, in the essay referred to, agrees that the 
need was not "better, "but a greater number of masters; and 
he insists that this greater number could be had if better 
pay were offered them. He cites a new school, Mr. Stevens’s 
St. Andrew's, as a good example, where there was one master 
to every thirteen or fourteen boys; and where it cost only 
130 pounds per boy ^per annum for all schooling and living 
expenses. He recognizes, however, the difficulty of persua¬ 
ding the masters in the large public schools, where the 
endowment income was fixed, to share their salaries with an 
increased teaching staff; this in spite of the fact that he 
places the average master 1 s income at Eton at 1845 pounds 
per annum'. He looks upon this stipend as being no more than 
the amount needful for the|maintenance of a gentleman-master. 

But Trollope disagrees with ’’Paterfamilias” in the 
matter of endowments, and would not have such gifts devoted 
t& the education of anyone but the children of the gentry. 

In this he agrees with the Commissioners, who decided that 
such endowments should fee continue to be interpreted as a 
means of providing the same education to the poorer gentry 
as that which the richer gentry could pay for out of their 
own pockets,— thus allowing the parson's son to take his 
rightful place among the sons of the squires and the nobles. 
"This is what the old endowments do for us," he says, "and 
this inestimable benefit, let us hope, we may preserve." 




- 














. 

' 




. 

. 

' 










* 













■ 

■ 



















- 

t 

. 
















■J ' 




. ' 

■ 


















• 




















. 












70 


Before advancing his ideas of reform, in the essay 
referred to, Trollope describes his own schooldays at 
Winchester and at Harrow, which began in 1831* At the time 
this essay was written (1865) conditions in these schools 
were very little changed. Simply because I am particularly 
interested in education; and because Trollop^* gives us 
here a very lively picture, I shall quote his essay rather 
fully:- 

At Winchester:- 

“Beer was the only beverage provided,— or indeed 
permitted,— for breakfast, dinner, or supper. Tea, 
as the foundation of a meal, was ignored, and as a 
luxury was held in such abhorrence that the master 
when inspecting the chambers would cruise with violence 
among the crockery of the few big boys who could 
furnish themselves with such wickednesses, and would 
insist that every teapot, cup, and saucer which might 
meet his offended eye should be smashed and trodden 
underfoot. Mutton was given to the boys daily in 
lumps weighing a pound each, actually in lumps, which, 
with much propriety of language, were called 8 dis- 
pars*, or unequal divisions ... And for the eating 
of this neither plates, knives, or forks were pro¬ 
vided. Wooden trenchers there were,— but to the 
smaller boys even these were utensils of comfort 
very difficult to obtain. A boy might have his own 
knife and fork,-- but he had no place for keeping 
such things, nor was the possession of such articles 
ever regarded as a necessity. They simply were not 
forbidden. It was presumed by the constitution of 
the school that he would^eat his lump of meat with 
the assistance of a small wooden skewer ... Caps were 
not allowed. Hats were used on the three days in a 
week on which the boys left the college walls. At 
all other tidies they went with their heads uncovered. 
They wore long, black cloth gowns, using the sleeve 
as a pocket,-- gowns unavoidably so foul with dirt, 
that the mind of the man shudders as he thinks of 
his vestments as a boy. A conduit was provided for 
ablutions,— out of doors, but under cover,— and it 








71 


was considered among the hoys to he a point of honour 
that they should wash their hands and faces once a . 
day. As for their feet,— hot water could he procured 
with some trouble; and was procured, hy the very care¬ 
ful, once a week, and hy the very careless once a 
quarter. They slept in long, low dormitories, seventy 
hoys having seven between them, and in each of these 
there were two or three kings,— there being eighteen 
such kings altogether,— called prefects. ... The 
provision made for the bodily comfort of the hoys was 
indeed inadequate, hut for their soul*s welfare was 
very full. Taking into calculation their extra ser¬ 
vices on saint 1 s days and in Lent, they attended public 
worship in cathedral or chapel something over twenty- 
one times a week. ... And the mode of those services 
shocked no one there,-- though now we can hardly think 
of them, or of the old-fashioned chaplains, without 
something of a shudder. The same clergymen were chap¬ 
lains at the college chapel, and were minor canons at 
the cathedral, and had livings also in the city,-- and 
were therefore driven to get through daily a great 
mass of clerical work. There was he who had boasted 
that he would give any one of his brethren to Pontius 
Pilate in the Belief, and yet heat him; and there was 
the other gentleman, sonorous, diligent, stout-hearted, 
who worked his way daily through, perhaps, as many churcl 
services as any priest in England; hut who rebelled at 
last when too much was asked of him, and was heard to 
protest vehemently against an unreasonable demand, as 
he walked up the chapel nave, 11 1 have read the Litany 
thrice this day; and 1 1 m d——d if 1*11 read it again*. 3 

”..... We were sent there ... for education, hut 
in truth for so much of education as can he conveyed 
hy the learning of Latin and Greek. As to any other 
education, no attempt of any kind was made. This 
school of which I am speaking has had and has a great 
reputation,—* and its normal work was the teaching of 
Latin and Greek. During all the years that I was there, 

I never once underwent any attempt at instruction from 
any master, either in Latin or Greek, or on any other 
subject 1 . When I think of this, the assertion seems to 
me myself to he marvellous; hut it is not the less 
true. Twice or thrice a day we went up in a class before 
a master to say our lessons,-- and the master would 
call upon one hoy after another to prove his knowledge* 
Those who could construe the passages before them, or 
who had learned hy w^rote the required lines, would 
find their way to the top of the class, and those who 
had not done so would find their way to the bottom. 
























. 





























72 


But this was all that the masters did "before our 
eyes or to our knowledge,— except that breaking 
of teacups. ... On^fother task, indeed, they had, 

— a task well recognized by us,-- and in the per¬ 
formance of that task only, was my acquaintance 
with them ripened into intimacy. They scourged us, 

— one at the one end of the school twice a day, 
and the other at the other end of the school thrice 
a day*. And was there no tuition? Yes; there was a 
great theory of tuition and some little practice. 

The big boys were held to be big enough to teach 
themselves, and to be wise enough to teaCh the 
lesser boys. The prefect had pupils,-- for which 
they were paid two guineas a year each,-- and they 
were the instructors. And the instruction given by 
them was nearly always in this wise,—• they took 
care throughout the year that a sufficient number 
of Latin verses were duly made, and at a certain 
period of the year they instigated their pupils, 

by counsel and by cudgels, to learn by heart as 
many lines of Latin and C-reek as the memory could 
be made to carry. This learning by heart of verses 
was the great literary feat of the school. Boys 
would be able to repeat all the 'Aeneid,® the odes 
of Horace, four books of the 'Iliad,® and four of 
the 'Odyssey*® This was the glory of Winchester, 
and to this end did a conscientious prefect apply 
his energy. Alas me, how easy it is to gorget an 
®Aeneid,( and how hard to learn one®.) 

"Much of that which is here described, and 
which seems /to be almost incredibly absurd, has 
been already reformed. The boys, I believe, have 
tea and tubs, and I am told that the meat is cut 
for them into slices ... A certain modicum of 
French is now taught, and the system of fagging 
has been so far reduced that midnight searches for 
snuffers (by the fags for their seniors) beneath 
the chapel tower are no longer required. 

"..... It is essential that the schools to 
which the choicest of our lads are sent should be 
places at which they may really be educated. But 
as we feel and acknowledge this, the absurdity of 
such a picture as that J have just drawn grows dim, 
and we remember chiefly, if not only, all that these 
schools have done for us. Whilst there we made our 
friendships. There we learned to be honest, true, 
and brave. There were trained to disregard the 
softnesses of luxury, and to love the hardihood and 
dangers of violent exercise. There we became men; 










. 




































1 














✓ 






73. 

and we became men after such a fashion that we 
are feared or loved, as may he, hut always res¬ 
pected,— even though it he in spite of our ig¬ 
norance. " 

At Harrow:- 

M In the sixth form at Harrow we were presumed to 
be fairly advanced in classical studies. We read 
the G-reek plays, Thucydides, Pindar — if I remem¬ 
ber rightly -- Juvenal, or Persius,— and the works 
of other authors which would he classed with those 
I have named. Herodotus and Homer we took up that 
we might enjoy the chronicle and the charm of 
poetry; hut in regard to the study of language, 
being no longer babes, we were put to stronger 
food. Any lad of eighteen who can really master 
Thucydides and Juvenal is, as regards classical 
attainments, not doing badly; ... Dr. Longley 
would doubtless say that his business, when the 
sixth form was before him, consisted simply in 
hearing, and not in teaching, and that he endea¬ 
voured to communicate to the work in hand as much 
of/ the nature of a lecture as the time would 
permit. He would say also that the boys were sup¬ 
posed already to have studied the subject of that 
hour* s a t lesson with the assistance of their 
tutors in the pupil-rooms. All this he would say 
with perfect truth. But the studying with the 
tutors in the pupil-rooms was a process exactly 
similar,— except that it was done still more 
quickly,-- to that which took place afterwards in 
the school-room. There was no teaching,-- nor was 
there any possibility that the masters should 
teach ... How should there have been teaching when 
the master was sorely tasked to hear all the les¬ 
sons he was called upon to hear, and to read all 
the exercises he was called upon to read? 

"I shall of course be told, and I admit, that 
things are changed for the better since my time. 

The Commissioners in speaking of Eton, Winchester, 
and indeed of other schools, tell us of private 
tuition. At Eton a separate payment is made for it; 
and at Harrow a special payment is made to the 
tutors; but the fact remains that the masters and 
tutors are the same persons, and that the work Mi's 
too heavy to be done . 11 

Another glimpse of Trollope as the liberal-minded 
reformer of education is to be had in Doctor Thorne’s dictum:* 









74 . 


“Why struggle after future advantage at the ex¬ 
pense of present pain, seeing that the results 
were so very doubtful? Many an opponent had 
thought to catch the doctor on the hip when so 
singular a doctrine was broached; but they were 
not always successful. 1 2 3 4 What*. 1 said his sensible 
enemies, 'is Johnny not to be taught to read 
because he does not like it?’ 1 Johnny must read 
by all means,’ would the doctor answer; ’but is 
it necessary that he should not like it? If the 
preceptor have it in him, may not Johnny learn, 
not only to read, but to like to learn to read?" (1) 

In striking contrast to Trollope's experiences at Win¬ 
chester and Harrow are the conditions existing at the school 
he creates in his novel at Bowick, under the benign auto¬ 
cracy of the Reverend Jeffrey Wortle, D.D. It is to be 
regretted that Trollope does not give us a fuller descrip¬ 
tion of this school in this book (2); but the following 
excerpts are worth quoting:- 

The school was called by the "newfangled and unpala¬ 
table word, ’seminary.’" (3) 

"He now limited his number to thirty boys, for 
each of which he charged two hundred pounds a 
year." (4) 

"Now the popularity of his establishment no doubt 
depended in a great degreee on the sufficiency 
and comfort of the good things of the world which 
he provided. The beer was of the best; the boys 
were not made to eat fat; their taste in the selec¬ 
tion of joints was consulted. The morning coffee 
was excellent. The cook was a great adept at cakes 


(1) Doc tor Thorne , 38 

(2) Doctor Wortle’s School . 

(3) Op. cit ., 1 

(4) Ibid., 2 
















75 . 


and puddings.” (1) 

At this school were employed: 

n a French master, a German master (2), a master 
of arithmetic and mathematics with the adjacent 
sciences, besides Mr. Peacocke, as assistant 
classical master.” (3) 

Beside the regular all-day sessions, 

”there was an hour of school before breakfast.” (4) 


As for the Universities, G-.M.Young tells us that they 
had nothing to offer students outside the circle of the 
church, the bar, and the landed gentry:- 

”ln their internal discipline they were overgrown 
with a picturesque tangle of privileges, distinc¬ 
tions, and exemptions; founders 9 kin and local 
fellowships, servitors and sizars, gentlemen com¬ 
moners and fellow commoners ... Compared with the 
eighteenth century the intellectual life was 
intenser, manners and morals were more refined. 

Compared with the later nineteenth century, stu¬ 
dies and sports were far less standardized, manners 
and morals were still barbaric. There was much 
unscientific cricket and rowing, a fair amount 
of riding and hunting, some wenching, and much 
drinking.” (5) 

Students could not graduate nor matriculate without 
signing the Thirty-nine Articles; but a new private venture, 
London University, was at the service of dissenters. 

”0n the world outside their walls the ancient uni- 

_ versities exercised an exasperated fascination; 

(1) Ibid., 5-o. 

(2) Cf., 7b above: Eton with 8Gb pupils learning three modern 

languages from one teacner * 1 2 3 . 

(3) Doctor wortle*s School , 35. (4) Ibid ., b4 
(5) G.M. Young, Op. cit ., II, 494 et seq. 











76 


they were clerical; they were idle; they ,were 
dissipated; they reflected those odious class 
distinctions by wnicn merit is suppressed and 
insolence fostered; their studies were narrow, 
tneir teaching ineffective. (1) 

Trollope's references to the universities are few and 

uninformative, dealing with nothing more than the troubles 

and escapades of some of his characters while at Oxford 

or Cambridge. 

In Bar chester Towers {$21), Trollope refers to the 
‘‘new parochial universal school committee," which attended 
to the welfare of parish schools, and tried to supply them 
with qualified teachers. But most of these schools, in 
Trollope's booms, seem to have been run chiefly by the 
parsons 1 wives and daughters, and to nave been supported 
by the contributions of local gentry. Lady Lui'ton, for 
example, taxes it upon herself to employ one,Saran Thomp¬ 
son^ as the teacher of Framley parish school. (2) Fanny 
Clavering,the rector's daughter, and the curate, Mr. Saul, 
seem to have full charge of all the worn in the Ciavenng 
parish school.(3) Lady Ongar, when sne came into her inheri¬ 
tance, determined ''that she would assist the poor; that she 
would have a school; and above ail that she would maxe all 
the privileges of ownership her own."(4) "Government aid", 

and a "cert ifle d teacher" are referred to in connection with 

(i) Idem. (2) Framley Parsonage, 7. 

(3) The Ciaverings . 

( 4) Ibid ., 122 













7Y 


tne HogglestocK parish-school.il) In Builnampton parish , 
scnool-restivals were Held, "in the great home rield oemnd 
Farmer Trumbull's nouse."(2) 

Tne only other type of education left to discuss is 
private tuition within the home. This, of course, was pecu¬ 
liar to wealthier families, or, in rare cases, to trie chil¬ 
dren of such a poor gentleman as the Reverend Mr. Crawley, 
wno could not afford to send ms children through school.(3) 
Usually children went directly from the nursery into the 
nome schoolroom, where boys and girls studied together 
for a year or two before the boys were sent away to a public 
or private school. 

"... the education of a girl in a good home, wnere 
the parents tooic an interest m their children, 
and where the governess was well-chosen and well- 
treated, was probably as good as it has ever been. 
Otherwise it was a poor affair. In many fashio¬ 
nable houses the children rarely saw their eiders: 
the governess was a poor, down-trodden creature 
to whom her employers and ner charges were oi'ten 
scandalously rude; and the most esteemed text- 
booms, Blair’s Preceptor , Pmnoci' s Catechisms 
(9 d. each), Butler's ftuide , and Hangnail's 
Questions ... were hardly calculated to maite their 
victims 'agreeable companions to man 1 * 3 ... In such 
a home the schoolroom was often a dreary apartment 
behind baize doors, sunless and airless. Tne young 
ladies nad tneir 'walking exercise 8 at regular 
hours and ir long hours m semi-darxness and bad 
air produced 'poking' heads, rounded mm snouiders, 
anaemia, and constipation, tne snouider yone, tne 


(l) Tne Last Chronicle or Barset , I, 131 

12) The Vicar of Builnampton , ±lo 

(3) The Last Cnronicie of Barset. 





















- 













. 

- 








■ 

■ 

. 













73 . 


bacKooard — an unpadded pianK tilted upward 
with a hollow cut to accommodate the head -- 
and Dr. Dose were always there to put things 
right." ( 1 ) 

With the young ladies of Greshamshury, Mary Thorne 
was allowed to study:- 

"And so Mary Tnorne learnt- music at Gresnamsoury, 
and witn ner music she learnt otner tilings also: 
now to Denave nerself among girls of ner own age; 
now to speax and tails as otner young lames do; 
now to dress nerself, and now to move and waix.. 

... Something also she learnt of French.“ (2; 

Mr. Crawley taught ms six-year old boy and ms nine-year 
old daughter the “early mysteries or grammar.“(3) At this 
age the daughter was also M in Green; Delectus and the irre¬ 
gular veros,“ and Knew an ode of Horace Dy heart.(4) But, 
of course, she was tne exceptional pupil of an exceptional 
father-teacher. Lucy Morris was treated as one of Lady 
Fawn 1 2 3 4 s family while sne was governess to tne seven Fawn 
daughters, and taught them “English, French, German, and 
something of music .' 1 ( 3 ) 

Girls, as Mary Paliiser tells us (oj, could not go to 
college as tneir brothers did; out there were private schools 
for them,— some good, some bad, conducted usually Dy spin¬ 
sters or widows, and catering to a few ‘young ladies* . Tne 


(1) G.M.Young, Op. cit ., liu-i 

( 2 ) Doctor Tnorne , 41-2 

(3) Framiey Parsonage , 233 

(4) Ibid ., 233 

(3) Tne Eustace Diamonds , 16 
( o ) Tne Dune 1 s Cni 1 dren. 
















only inklings we are given by Trollope as to the cost of 

a girl’s education (whether at home or in a school, we are 

not told) are: First, that Mr. Toogood had to pay 80 pounds 

( 1 ) 

a year each to educate his daughters; and, second, that it 
cost Felix Graham 70 pounds per annum to educate Mary Snow 
at Mrs. Thomas’s private school, which, typical of many such 
tiny private establishments, was little more than a place 
in which Mrs. Thomas acted as a kindjof governess to the 
daughters of different families. (2) 

’’Mrs. Thomas was a lady who kept a school consis¬ 
ting of three little girls and Mary Snow.” (3) 

”And then she (Mary) went on with the history of 
Ras selas in hisbappy valley, by which study Mrs. 
Thomas intended to initiate her into that course 
of novel-reading which has become necessary for 
a British lady.” (4) 

The products of the ’private’ and 'home’ schools were 
all pretty much the same: Their deportment and their lady¬ 
like accomplishments were more important than their deep 
learning. Mrs. Grantly says, ”¥hat you call cleverness is 
not at all necessary in a girl;” and she is satisfied that 
her daughter is ’’completely lady-like.” (5) Gertrude Wood¬ 
ward "could write French and nearly speak it ... She could 
play difficult pieces from sight ... She could fill in and 


(1) The Last Chroni cl e of Barset , I, 327. 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 465 
( 3) Idem . 

( 4) Ibid ., 466 
(5) Framley Parsonage , 431 

















• - . : 

’ 

' 

■ 

* 

. 

- 

- 

. 

. 









80 . 


finish a drawing."(1) As I have said before, G-race Crawley 
was an outstanding exception: Of very few, if any, other 
girls could it be said that "she talks Q-reek just as well 
as she does English, and that she understands philosophy 
from the top to the bottom."(2) DZzie Eustace was much 
like any other young lady of her part&ular class:- 

“She spoke French, understood Italian, and read 
(German. She played well on the harp, and mode¬ 
rately well on th^piano. She sang, at least in 
good taste and in tune. Of things to be learned 
by reading she knew much, having really taken 
diligent trouble with herself. She had learned 
much poetry by heart, and could apply it. 11 (3) 

That the learning of young ladies was not very deep 
is implied in the remark that "Miss Palliser was so much 
better educated than young ladies in general that she was 
able to express herself intellibibly in her own language. "(4) 

Only in one place have I found a reference to the 
education of girls of the lower class: Describing the 
daughter of a tenant-farmer, Trollope says:- 

"Her education has been much better than that of 
the man ( of the same class). She can read, where¬ 
as he can only spell words from a book. She can 
write a letter after her fashion, whereas he can 
barely spell words out on paper. Her tongue is 
more glib, and her intellect sharper. But her 
ignorance as to the reality of things is much more 
gross than his.” (b) 


(1) The Three Clerks , 24 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, I4i 

(3) Tne Eustace Diamonds , lb 

(4) Phineas Redux , I, Ibp 

(b) The Way We Live Now . I, 170 




















■ 







■ 








. 




■ 




































til 


G-.M.Young sums up, as follows^the education of girls: 

“If the education of the middle-class hoy was 
had, the education of the wy was worse. For 
the better classes it was a domestic industry 
staffed in the first place by th^mother, who 
might delegate the routine to a governess, and 
hy visiting masters. Those families who could 
afford an annual stay in London added some in¬ 
tensive teaching by specialists in music, draw¬ 
ing, and the languages. The domestic system 
involved the employment of untrained gentle¬ 
women a^teacners, and the figure of the gover¬ 
ness, snubbed, Dullled, loving, and usually 
quite incompetent, is a standby of Victorian 
pathos ... The silliness and shallowness of 
the boarding school is an equally constant 
topic of Victorian satire, but like the boys 1 
schools, they were of all degrees ... Below the 
boarding-school class was that unfortunate 
stratum just too high to make use of the charity 
school, the National school, or Lhe British Day. 
For i,hem there was scarcely anything better than 
a superior dame* s school in a parlour or a very 
inferior visiting governess.“ (1) 


G-.M.Young, Op. clt ., p.lll 














. 

. 






















82 


CHAPTER FIVE 
WOMEN. 

(a) Costume. 

Just before, and for a few years following the 
accession of Victoria to the throne, women’s dress in 
England was not very attractive. In this romantic period 
(1830-1840) repetitions of billowing curves were empha- * 
sized, with the sleeves of garments overshadowing all else. 
Sometimes the balloon-like puffs of these sleeves were so 

large that they rubbed against each other behind, giving 

. 

the figure a grotesquely wide appearance, which the full 
skirts emphasized. The excessive width of shoulder was 
further emphasized by ruffles, shoulder caps, and crescents. 
The extremely low shoulder line of the bodice was also 
papular during this period, with the ’necjz-line’ of the 
dress coming down to the very point of the shoulder and 
sometimes even onto the upper part of the arm. Very loose 
cloaks were popular, so that they might be easily draped 
over the full wide sleeves of the dress. The ca,shmere shawl 
came into popularity, and continued to be in great demand 
for thirty years. Hair styles were those of the previous 
reign: parted in the middle and smoothed back over the 
ears, with a Jewelled band about the forehead, and a filmy 





























: 

' 






. 













■ * 

■ 









, 














♦ 











bj> 

veil draped over the back of the head. Hats of cloth, 
velvet, silk and straw were very broad-brimmed with very 
large and elaborate decorations* From the previous reign, 
poke bonnets and turbans continued to have their vogue. 

Caps were still worn, but only for indoor use* Vivid and 
inharmonious colours were fashionable. "A lady without a 
silk dress felt she had lost her self-respect. In 1824 
the prohibition on foreign silks, long rendered almost 
nugatory by smuggling, was withdrawn, and subsequently 
the ad valorem duty of 30 per cent, on foreign silks was 
reduced to 15 per cent, and ultimately abolished.” (l) 

The vogue of the tight waist reached its cruelest 
extreme in the period of 1840-1850. ”All dresses pretending 
to fashion laced up the back, where the lady’s maid could 
bring any amount of muscular force to bear upon the unfor¬ 
tunate victim.* (2) Sleeves during this time subsided to a 
more modest proportion; and toward the end of the decade 
an oversleeve appeared, open oelow the elbow to show a 
full white undersleeve. Shoes were generally narrow with 
blunt tips; and the varnished leather footwear came into 
fashion at this time. The hair, still parted in the middle, 

(1) Mary Bateson, in s'o^alT^i^lancrr^^d^r^H.D.Trai 11~1T~ 

J.S.Mann (London, - 1904) 3l9. 

(2) ibid., 854. 









. 


.. ■■ . 

. • • ■■■'•-' * .. ' 

. 

X 


...' . -J . J ... : • - ••• '■ ••• - . ' 

* 

. . ... 

V. 

. •• . . : •••■ ' - ■ 

. e ; . ■ - 
..... . . ' c . •_■; . - . « •• : ' . ."•• • ' : - 


.. 




* 
























«■ 


,.r. o 

. . 

. ... ' - - ’ * : ■' ■ ' 


» 










04 


was smoothed down over the temples and puffed slightly at 
the sides and fastened in a knot low on the nape of the 
neck. Sometimes two or three curls were worn at either side 
of the face f especially for evening wear. The side puffs 
and neck knot were covered with hair nets. The poke bonnet, 
now shaped liked a coal scuttle, continued in favour. It 
was usually tied with wide ribbons under the chin, at the 
side. Caps of many shapes were worn far back on the head 
with streamers hanging down the sides. The queen favoured 
these caps, and they came to be greatly in demand. 

The crinoline was invented at this time (In Paris, 
1854); and it helped to do away with the extremely tight 
waist: 


w It made the dress appear sufficiently full 
and in proper contrast to the waist,* there¬ 
by sparing the necessity and agony, as well 
as injury, of tight-lacing.* The term crino¬ 
line was applied to the stiff material of 
horse-hair used to distend skirts, and then 
to the ribbons of steel which took its place. 
To make a crinoline four narrow steels covered 
with tape were run into a calico slip or pet¬ 
ticoat; the steel nearest the waist should be 
distant If nails from it, and should be If 
yards in length. The other three steels should 
be yards long, and at 6 nails distance 
from each other. The ends of only the top 
steel should meet in front* Before this inven¬ 
tion was made, and while skirts were merely 
stiffened or held out by a dozen or more pet¬ 
ticoats, true gentility was best shown by 







. 













. 











* ***** 
















05 

the way in which the arms were drawn 
down to keep the voluminous mantle 9 
Paisley or cashmere shawl# in its proper 
folds# while the hands# clasped in front# 
held a lace pocket-handkerchief or reti¬ 
cule.” (1) 

A good summary of women’s dress is to be found in 
Social England #-— a brief description of styles to the 
year 1885.(2) The following notes are taken directly from 
that source:- 

"In 1860 tie skirt over the crinoline was trimmed 
with three deep flounces... A long loose jacket bodice 
was worn with sleeves made en pagode ... In 1864 there was 
a short rage for scarlet 'Garibaldi bodies' held in by 
tight waist-belts. Boots to the ankle# white stockings, 
little round hats with a single pen-feather at the side# 
complete the costume. 

"The changes in the shape and size of bonnets were 
rapid; within the space of a few years there were velvet 
and beaver bonnets with lace curtains at the back# filled 
with lace quilling and artificial flowers under the brim 
which surrounded the face# tie coal-scuttle bonnet# the 
bonnet of drawn white silk# the bonnet fitting close in 
front# and bonnets with long veils hanging from a string. 
While very large bonnets were worn# tiny fringed parasols 
were in fashion. The hair showed very little out of doors# 

(1) ibid. 856. 

(2) ibid. 856-60. 





























c 



















oo 


and from 1840-50 the heat effect was made by those who 
had well-shaped heads, with only a small quantity of 
straight hair. In 1846 came the smooth bandeaux plastered 
down with bandoline. At the begining of the crinoline 
period the hair..was covered with a net spangled with jet 
beads. In 1865 the Alexandra curl and the chignon were 
fashionable, necessitating much false hair, for the bonnet 
was worn tip-tilted at the back to display as much hair 
as possible. 

11 In 1865-70 Dolly Varden dresses of gaily-flowered 
muslin were fashionable for summer wear. The crinoline 
had gone, leaving only the bustle. In 1875 the alpaca 
skirts were trimmed with a quantity of small frills of 
kiltings and tightly tied back across the knees, the 
polonaise being looped with bows and buckles. The dress 
was worn partially open at the neck, and the bell-sleeve 
exposed the lower part of the arm. This was the period 
when much jewellery was worn in the daytime, and when it 
was the fashion for all young married women to wear caps 
indoors. In the period of ’Princess 1 robes, 1875-80, 
the skirt and bodice were cut in one piece, and made very 
plain. The skirt clung closely to the figure, and was 
made with a train. To the same period belongs theb ’fringe’. 
From 1880 date the ’aesthetic’ and other ’dress reform* 

i 

movements, and from this time there are signs that fashion 





... Jj . :.. o ’ •' 

.. . ...... . . 10 


o m L; o > 




. • 

c . ■ : . . ... ... - . V • - 

; . ...... 

. . ■ • ... j 





... , ..... 




v 


........ • • ■ . . ■ . . 






* .. 


. 






■ \ : i. -vy.w: ■ .: . 


... > 




J ; . '. ;... ■ . :.. ... ,; u 


:: . . 








. • 


. ,. ., ... ■ . '.. >■.• .- 

. ....... 

* '..o 

' 

, ■ : :• 



















j ^ o 








: . i.- • i- 






b7 

begins to rule over a smaller number of subjects, and 
fails to exercise such unchecked tyranny as in the 
periods which precede* The democracy movement seems in 
the matter of dress to have worked rather towards variety 
than towards uniformity*” 


Trollope makes innumerable references to women*s 
dress; but he very seldom goes into any detailed descrip¬ 
tions* It is my purpose now to list these references, 
using, for want of a better arrangement, the names of 
various costume parts as headings* The periods at which 
the different styles were in vogue may be determined 
by referring to the publication dates of the novels in 
which such styles are mentioned* 

Trollope describes a very well-dressed lady as 

being 


”rich in apparel, but not bedizened with 
finery; her ornaments were costly, rare, 
and such as could not fail to attract notice, 
but they did not look as though worn with 
that purpose,” 

and he concludes the description with this excellent bit 
of- philosophy:- 

”She well knew the great architectural se¬ 
cret of decorating her constructions, and 
never descended to construct a decoration.” (1) 


Barchester Towers, 65 











,;U. 0v; 



, : 



. . ' .. 


; . „>c 


.a : 








































88 


The general appearance of women may he gathered from 

S# 

i Trollope's comment that "Mrs. Rowan and Mrs. Tappitt 
| were large and stiff in their draperies, and did not fit 
themselves easily in among Mrs. Ray f s small belongings. n (l) 
Mid-Victorian regard for propriety in dress is suggested 
in the following remark on the costume of a ’Bohemian 1 2 3 


womans- 

"Her dress was always perfect -- as far as fit 
and performance went. As to approving Mrs. 
Carbuncle’s manner of dress,-- that was a 
question of taste. Audacity may, perhaps, be 
said to have been the ruling principle of her 
toilet;-- not the audacity of indecency, which, 
let the satirists say what they may, is not 
efficacious in England, but audacity in colour, 
audacity in design, and audacity in construc¬ 
tion, • • • 

and here is an inkling into styles that were not accep¬ 
table: 

11 She would riie in the park in a black and 
yellow habit, and appear at the opera in 
white velvet without a speck of colour. Though 
certainly turned thirty, and probably nearer 
to forty, she would wear her jet-black hair 
streaming down her back, and when June came 
would drive about London in a straw hat. But 
yet it was always admitted that she was well 
dressed. 11 (2) 

CRUJOLIHE: Ladies* crinoline was so bulky that no 
more than one lady could sit comfortably on a sofa. (5) 

(1) Rachel Ray, 193 ~ 

(2) The Eustace Diamonds , 270 

(3) Barchester Towers , 89 












89 


In a carriage, "It was wonderful to see into how small 
dimensions the Misses Heverbend (four of them) had con- 

! 

trived to pack, not themselves, but their crinoline." (l). 

| Mrs. Lupex "depended greatly upon her stays and crinoline 

! for such figure as she succeeded in displaying." (2) 

Young Cradell was very much afraid of the seductive Miss 

Roper when she asked him to take a seat beside her;"but 

he did take it, and was soon secured from any positive 

physical attack by the strength and breadth of Miss 

Roper*s crinoline." (3) And, to conclude, there is 

Trollope’s comment on weddings:- 

"We must have the spaces round our altars 
greatly widened if this passion for bevies 
of attendant nymphs be allowed to go on 
increasing — and if crinolines increase 
also. If every bride is to have twelve mai¬ 
dens, and each maiden to stand on no less 
than a twelve-yard circle, what modest temple 
will ever suffice for a sacrifice to Hymen?" (4) 

DRESS MATERIALS: 

The most frequently-mentioned dress materials are 
muslin, merino, and silk. Muslin was apparently the material 
; for the more stylish morning dresses; (5) and was also 

! used in outdoor party dresses, which were largely of orna- 

' 

mental white with many ribands, and stiffly starched. (6) 

1 1)The Three Clerks, 42 9 

2) The Small House at Allington, vol. 1, 72 

3) ibid, vol.2, 328““ 

4) The Three Clerks , 180 
5)ibid., 253; & Rachel Ray , 67 
6) The Eustace Diamonds , 524 








































90 


Merino is seldom, if ever, mentioned as toeing a material 
used in anything tout morning dresses,— and is associated 
usually with the household* The colour most frequently 
used seemed to toe brown,-- and a quite unattractive, 
dark torown at that; although a young girl is described 
in one place (1) as looking extremely attractive in a, 
pretty grey merino frock* Silk seems to toe worn mostly 
toy Trollope’s more elderly ladies, who favoured a thick, 
black silk for afternoon wear (2), and a torown silk for 
morning wear (5). One old lady was addicted to wearing 
lace costing fifty guineas a yard. (4) Poplin is another 
material, and velvet another, ieq frequently mentioned. 

A stuff called tatoinet was popular with comparatively 
well-to-do women of the lower middle-class*(5) This must 
have been a heavy material to wear, because it is really 
a watered upholstery fabric with a silk warp and a wool 
filling. 

PARTY DRESSES: 

Almost the only material mentioned for the party 
and dance frocks of young ladies is muslin, usually quite 

I I) The Last Chronicle of Barset , vol. 1,. 93 

2) The Belton Estate , 11; & The Vicar of Bullhampton , 61 

3) The Last Chronicle of Barset , vol. "l, 388 

4) The Prime Minister , vol.l, 163 
(5) Orley Earn , vol.2, 34; & The Three Clerks , 385 













■ 






. . : 




















91 


gauzy.(1) Very often, young ladies were kept busy before 
a dance or a party, making their own dresses. (2) Older 
ladies wore silk dresses for evening society as well as 
in the afternoon, the evening dresses usually being of 
finer material,-- sometimes of rich brocaded silk. (3) 

The fact that Mrs* Lookaloft was very anxious to be taken 
for a *lady * might indicate that the style of dress she 
affected at an afternoon lawn-party was the accepted 
fashion of that day, namely, "a low dress, short sleeves, 
and satin at eight shillings a yard." (4) Mrs. Lookaloft 
is described by a jealous neighbor as being "dressed finer 
by half nor any of the family (the Squire’s family) with 
all their neckses and buzoms stark naked as a born baby.”(5) 
La, Signora Vicinironi wore a most becoming dress at Mrs. 
Proudie’s reception: " It was white velvet, without any 
other garniture than rich white lace worked with pearls 
across her bosom, and the same around the armlets of her 
dress. Across her brow she wore a band of red velvet."(6) 

A theatre frock is described as follows:- 

"There are times at which a man going to a 
theatre with a lady wishes her to be bright 
in her apparel,-- almost gorgeous; in which 


(1) The Warden , 73; & Barchester Towers , 199 

(2) Rachel Ray , 71. 

(3) The Warden , 73; & The Three Clerks , 313 

(4) Barchester Towers , 344 

(5) ibid., 378 

(6) ibid., 83 













„ . .. - - 












. 

. ... ..... .) ‘ 

* 


' 

) .. . ■ ; ... • •• .■ ■ . ■ 






- ' ■ . : . . ... .. 

' 

.... . . 

. .... . . ... e'i 

l\ ■. . j '.i. .... ... v. s !.■ .■ ' . ’ > L. ; i! . ... \S ... 


.. . ; .... 


■ 


. -V..' ■ 


v l it 

■. ; . .■ ■ • • ' •. 

..... . .. ... . ; e ,. . ... .-;i; .. 

. 


. 



. 









92 


he will hardly he contented unless her 
cloak he scarlet, and her dress white, 
and her gloves of some bright hue,—* 
unless she wear roses or jewels in her 
hair. It is thus our girls go to the 
theatre now, when they go intending that 
all the world shall know who they are. (1) 

OUTDOOR DRESS 

It seems that whenever a woman so much as stuck her 
nose out-of-doors she had to wear a shawl or some such 
outer covering. Wherever a girl or woman went outside her 
own home she put on a ’bonnet-and-shawl *5 and to these 
WFpe sometimes added an umbrella, walking shoes, winter 
gloves, cloaks and furs. In a carriage a woman might Wear 
a gauze shawl and fur robes ( 2 ); at church, a shawl and 
boa (3); even when going out onto the front porch to meet 
her husband, she would put a silk shawl over her head. ( 4 ) 
Her cloak or mantle might be of silk (5), of fur (6), 
of velvet (7), or just a "cloth cloak, very warm, with 
pretty buttons and gimp trimmings. 11 (8) Old Mrs. Clan tan¬ 
trum wore a roquelaure, a kind of short cloak, named after 
the Due de Roquelaure, worn first by men in the early part 
of the 18th century, and popular with women in the early 
years of Victoria’s reign. (9) The material in this par¬ 
ticular roquelaure cost 25 shillings a yard. (10) 


(l)The Way We Live How, vol.l* 2 59.1 

[6] 

> ibid. £30 

(2iBarchester Towers,“334 ( 


) Last Chron. of B.173 

(3) Doctor Thorne, 383 \ 

! 8 

1 ibid., 94 

(4) Framley Parsonage, 96 1 

[9] 

| Barch. Towers, 343 

(5) Phineas Finn, vol.l, 164 i 

k 10) ibid. 344. 





















93 

The only mention I can find of any particular kind of 
fur then fashionable, is the sealskin jacket worn by 
Arabella Trefoil. (1) And the only mention of a muff is 

' 

that worn by Lucy Robarts. (2) 

It was proper for ladies to wear veils over their 
hats and their faces, particularly when going out in 
public. (3) 

Ladies 1 riding habits must have been rather cumber¬ 
some, for Trollope remarks upon the fact that the two 
Miss Tristrams "both went off to their horses, walking 
as though their habits were no impediments to them* 11 (4) 
The skirt was very long and full, and the hat tall and 
straight.(5) Underneath the skirt, trousers were worn. (6) 

HOUSE DRESSES: 

If ladies were punctilious about their appearance 
when away from home, they were sometimes rather careless 
about the house. At breakfast time, for example, Mrs. 
Proudie 

tt had on a large loose cap with no other strings 
than those which were wanted for tying it be¬ 
neath her chin, a cap with which the household 
and the chaplain were well acquainted, but which 

1 1) The American Senator , 138 

2) Framley Parsonage , 236 

3) Barchester Towers , 408 

4) Orley Farm , vol.l : 392 

5 ) The Small House at Aldington , vol.l: 419 
(6) The Eustace Diamonds , 300 














... . .. 


































94 


seemed ungracious in the eyes of Mr. Robarts 
after all the well-dressed holiday doings 
of the last week. She wore also a large, 
loose, dark-coloured wrapper, which came 
well up round her neck, and which was not 
buoyed out, as were ner dresses in general, 
with an under mechanism of petticoats. It 
clung to her closely, and added to the inflexi¬ 
bility of her general appearance, And then she 
had encased her feet in large carpet slippers, 
whicn no doubt were comfortable, but which 
struck her visitor as being strange and un¬ 
sightly. H (1) 

The Countess de Courcy must have been more attractive 
in her "elaborate morning wrapper of figured silk," and 
also her daughter in a "plain white muslin peignoir, fas¬ 
tened with pink ribboh." (2) 

Another unsightly woman at breakfast time was Madame 
Gordeloup: 

"On her head she wore ... a nightcap, though I 
will not absolutely undertake to say that she 
had slept in that very head-dress. There were 
frills to it, and a certain attempt at pretti¬ 
ness had been made; bjtt then the attempt had 
been made so long ago, and the frills were so 
ignorant of starch and all frillish propensi¬ 
ties, that it hardly could pretend to decency. 

A great white wrapper she also wore, which 
might not have been objectionable had it not 
been so long worn that it looked like a uni¬ 
versity college surplice at the end of the 
long vacation. Her slippers had all the ease 
that age could give them, and above the slip¬ 
pers, neatness, to say the least of it, did 
not predominate*" (5) 

Of course, we must remember that Trollope is not 
given to describing women as they appeared in the privacy 
of their homes; and such descriptions as we do find should 

Tl) Framley Parsonage, 71 ~ ~ 

(2) Tfate Small House at Allington , vol.l: 454 

(3) The Claverings , 192 


















\ 






t 





























95 


"be regarded as individual caricatures rather than as 
descriptions of the prevailing habit among women of the 
| time. 

CHILDREN'S AND GIRL'S DRESS: 

When they were ’all dressed up* , children were clothed 
in white muslin frocks and pink sashes, or the like. (1) 

When girls ceased to be girls and became youiqjf ladies, their 
dresses became longer, and their trousers a little shorter. 
The miss Woodwards, for example, were still girls when 
"their drawers came down below their frocks, instead of 
their frocks below their drawers," (2) At this age girls 
usually wore "bows on their bosoms"• (3) 

HATS AiJD CAPS: 

Straw hats ¥/ere very popular, particularly for walking, 
and gardening 0 and informal wear. These are described as 
" a broad-brimmed straw hat" (4), a "straw bonnet" (5), 
and a 11 sun-bonnet" (6). Other hats mentioned are: "a very 
high bonnet" , then going out of style, (7), a French bonnet, 
so small as to be almost invisible (8), "a jaunty hat with 

(1) The Warden , 94 

(2) The Three Clerks , 26 

(3) Barchester Towers , 81 
(41 i£id.> 408 

(51 The Three Clerks , 517 

(6) The Small House at Ailington, vol. 2: 479 
m ibid ., vol, 1: 28 ’ 

(8) Doctor Thorne , 138 


























96 


small fresh feathers,” (1) and the ’Tom and Jerry*, -- 
"turned up at the sides, with a short hut knowing feather, 
velvet trimmings, and a steel huckle blinking brightly in 
the noonday sun.” (2) 

The habit of wearing caps indoors was confined, as 
far as I can find evidence in Trollope’s novels, to married 
women. In almost every novel, some married woman or other, 
young or old, is usually to be found putting on or taking 
off her cap while in the house. Mrs Ray (3) and Mrs* Brattle 
(4) put on clean caps when company comes. 

HAIR STYIES: 

Trollope loves to describe the beauty of women; and 
in such descriptions he dwells upon the appearance of their 
hair. Brown hair seems to be his favourite colour; and he 
is wont to excuse this colour in his heroiness(lt seems 
that fair hair #^ s the standard of beauty.) There follow 
some of his hair-style descriptions 

Old Miss Thorne wore her grey hair ” in short crisp 
curls peering out all around her face.” (5) 

Mrs. Woodward had her hair,”now slightly grey, parted 
in front, and brushed very smoothly, but not too carefully, 
in bandeaux over her forehead.” ( 6 ) 

(1) The Duke’s Children , vol.2; 4 (5 

(2) The Three Clerks , 255 

(3) Rachel Ray , 142 v 

(4) The Vicar of Bullhanrpton , 288 


) Barch. Towers, 198 
) The Three Clerks, 23. 













. .. . 


. 


.. .J 


'J' • J 







97 


Another head of hair was dressed k 1*imperatrice * 
and "redolent of the sweetest patouchli, disclosing all 
the glories of that ingenuous* hut perhaps too open brow.'* 
(1) This habit of wearing greases of various kinds in 
the hair did not always make the wearer more attractive* 
as* for example* in the following instance:- 

"He put his arms round her waist and kissed 
her; and as he carressed her, his olfactory 
nerves perceived that the pomatum in her 
hair was none of the best® He thought of 
those young lustrous eyes that would look 
up so wondrously injto his face; he thought 
of the gentle touch* which would send a 
thrill through all his nerves; and then he 
felt very sick. 11 (2) 

Again:- 

"He had begun to think that the odour of 
patchouli was unpleasant* and that the# 
flies were troublesome*" (5) 

False hair was fashionable* chiefly among older women, 
but also among younger ones who seemed to wish to suggest 
a more abundant growth. Some women, whose hair was falling, 
wore thin braids of false hair on their brows;(4) this 
was the common form of the ’front*. Lady Aylmer had two 
*fronts 1 * 3 4 : 

"According to the theory of her life, she was 
never to be seen by any but her own family 


I I) The Three Clerks * 254 

2 ) ifcid *, 232 

3) The Way We Live How , vol.l: 173 

4) The Belton Estate * 12 






















98 


in her old ’front*. At breakfast she 
would appear with head so mysteriously 
wrapped,— with such a bewilderment of 
morning caps,— that old ’front* or 
new ’front* was all the same.” (1) 

Another old lady had not only a false’front’, but also 
long false curls, "as to which it cannot be conceived that 
she would suppose that anyone would be ignorant as to their 
falseness."(2) 

Lady Linlithgow complains of the false-hair habit 
among younger women: - 

"It’s all altered now since I was young. 

Girls make monsters of themselves, and 
I’m told the men like it;-- going about 
with unclean, frowzy structures on their 
head, enough to make a dog sick. They used 
to be clean and sweet and nice,—* what 
one would like to kiss. How a man can like 
to kiss a face with a dirty horse’s tail 
all whizzling about it, is what I can’t 
at all understand. I don’t think they do 
like it, but they have to do it." (3) 

Unlike other girls, Lizzie Eustace did not wear 

"an unclean horse’s tail. There was no get 
up of flounces, and padding, and paint, 
and hair, with a dorsal excrescence appen¬ 
ded with the object surely of showing in 
triumph how much absurd ugliness women can 
force men to endure." (4) 

Arabella Trefoil was a fairly young beauty, "whose copious 
hair was managed after such a fashion that no one could 
guess what was her own, and what was purchased. (5) 


! 1) ¥ke-Eus%aee-B The Belton Estate , 340 

2 ) The Last Chronicle of Barset , vol. 1: 251 

3) The Eustace Diamonds , 256 

4 ) fbicU » * 2 3 * 5 64 

5) The American Senator, 79 





















99 


Sometimes the hair was padded out at the back of 
the head; sometimes at the sides: 

“She had hair ... which she wore, as all other 
such girls do, propped out on each side of her 
face by thick round velvet pads, which, when 
the waltzing pace became exhiliarating, occa¬ 
sionally showed|themselves, looking greasy.** (1) 

Curls were often worn hanging down low beneath the 
face, covering the cheeks. (2) 

The centre-part was fashionable: Miss Gushing would 
have been considered pretty “could she have parted her 
hair in the centre.” (3) 

The simplest fashion (and the most attractive to 
Trollope) was that of "brushing the hair simply smooth 
across the forehead, and then collecting it in a knot 
behind.” (4) 

The more daring, or more ’Bohemian 1 2 3 4 * 6 7 , young women 
sometimes wore th«.tr hair loose: Amelia Roper "threw her 
long black hair over her shoulders." (5) Madalina Demo- 
line f s hair "had been very carefully arranged so as to 
fall with copious carelessness dovrn her shoulders." (6) 
Mrs. Carbuncle’s hair "streamed down her back." (7) 


(1) The Three Clerks , 188 

(2) Bhineas Finn , vol.2: 30 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 386 

(4) The Claverings , 78; & The Vicar of Bullhampton , 8 

(5| The Small House at Aldington , vol.l: 553 

(6) The Last Chronicle of Barset , vol.2: 360 

(7) The Eustace Diamonds , 270 






























r 

t 


















100 


MAKE-UP: 

In all the novels being discussed in this thesis 
I have found only some half-dozen references to the use 
of cosmetics. Most girls must have had resort to the same 
simple measures as those practised by Eleanor Harding 
when they felt the need of repairing the beauty of their 
complexions. After a good cry, she would dampen her eyes 
to remove their redness, and bite her lips to restore their 
colour. (1) Emily Wharton, even after she was married to 
Lopez, could not have used cosmetics, for she had no fear 
of rubbing her face against her husband’s sleeve. (2) 

Aside from ’pearl powder’(3), there is no specific refe¬ 
rence made to any kind of face make-up: All other pj/ders, 
rouges, or colourings that may have been used are only 
somewhat contemptuously referred to as ’paint® (4). 

MISCELLANEOUS: 

Long gloves were worn for dancingi^A lady was never seen 
of an afternoon or an evening without gloves. (6) 

(1) . The Warden . 134 

(2) The Prime Minister , vol.l: 285 

(3) The Way We Live How , vol.l: 110 & 241 
The American Senator , 337 

(4) Barchester Towers , 557 
The Eustace Diamonds , 596 

(5) Barchester Towers , 344 

(6) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 62 
























101 


Around her own garden or farm-yard a lady could 
wear "high-heeled clogs" (1). Dancing shoes, dainty ones 
often imported from France, only peeped out from beneath 
the frock; and they were often carried home for the young 
lady by some favoured swain (2), *Balmoral boots* were 
popular with girls.(3) In one young lady's trousseau were 
included "certain golden-heeled boots with brightly- 
bronzed toes, which were a great feature among the raiment. 
(4) As a protection against wet weather, some women wore 
boots with cork soles (5). 

Like most things mid-Victorian, jewellery was usually 
heavy and ornate,-- such as that bought by Lord Dumbello 
for his wife, 

"a wonderful green necklace, very rare and 
curious, heavy with green sparkling drops, 
with three rows of shining green stones em¬ 
bedded in chaste gold,-- a necklace amounting 
almost to a jewelled cuirass in weight and 
extent." (6) 

Pencil-cases were worn on watch-chains (7). Jewels worn on 
the forehead were popular (8). Watches were hung on chains 
or pinned to the dress (9). Gold chains with jewelled pen- 

(1) BarChester Towers , 536 ~ 

( 2 ) The Three Clerks , 254 

(3) The Small House at Ailington, vol.2: 529 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds , 517 

(5) The Prime Minister , vol.l: 307 

1 6 ) The Small House at Allington , vol.2: 480 

7) The Claverings , 432 

8 ) ibid., 436 

9) The Last Chronicle of Barset , vol.2: 20 















. 0 






.0 • '. 






; no 


0 '„ 















102 


dants were worn about the neck.(l) Lady de Courcy 
affected a lorgnette of gold, which she' used to good ad¬ 
vantage in scrutinizing people she disliked.(2) Women 
always had a pocket-handkerchief handy, with which they 
might perform a pretty gesture, conceal a modest blush; 
or bring'Jto their eyes to check the flow of real or ima¬ 
gined tears (3). 

MOURNING: 

The proprieties of mourning have been mentioned in a 
previous chapter: Now a few words will be added as to the 
dress worn by widows. The widow always wore a mourner’s 
cap: Wherever a widow is mentioned by Trollope she is 
described as wearing such a cap,-- under all circumstances, 
as though it were stuck to her head. Attached to this cap, 
and hang#iing down over the sides of the face and the 
shoulders, were broad black ( sometimes white) ribbons, 
called weepers. (4) Whenever a widow went out-of-doors 
she wore a thick, black veil to hide her face from the 
sight of man (5). Her dress, usually of black crape, or 
of bombazine, had a very high neck, and completely enve- 
Ipped her in a smothering blackness. Lady Glavering, 

i l) Phineas Finn , vol.2: 51 ~~ ~~ 

2) Barchester Towers , 356 

3) ibid ., 89 

4) Rachel Hay , 4; The Claverings , 67, and 163; 

The Prime Minister , vol.2; 310 
(5) Orley Harm , vol.l: 163 






























' 




e - 





t 













103 


"had assumed in all its grotesque ugliness 
those paraphernalia of outward woe which 
women have been condemned to wear, in order 
that for a time they may be shorn of all the 
charms of their sex* Nothing could be more 
proper or unbecoming than the heavy, drooping, 
shapeless blackness in which Lady Clavering 
had enveloped herself*" (1) 


(b) Womanly Beauty* 

One thing that makes Trollope’s women as attractive 
and natural and lovable as they are is the fact that he 
refuses to describe them according to the accepted canons 
of classical beauty* Unlike the usual Victorian heroine 
of cold, perfect, symmetrical beauty, they are all 
very real, warm, ordinary creatures of normal flesh and 
blood and humour and affection. Despite the fact that 
novels heroines were supposed to be classically tall and 
fair, Trollope’s women must have appealed to his readers 
— as they do to us today — else he could not have made 
them as he did and continued to have prospered as a nove¬ 
list. As I have said, Trollope loved to linger over his 
descriptions of his heroines: his novels are full of them. 
To quote all of these passages would be redundant. The 


(1) The Claverings , 501 




















104 


simplest way to obtain a picture of the accepted ideal 
of womanly beauty, and, at the same time, Trollope’s 
ideal as comparedjfidth it, will be to quote a few of his 
heroine-descriptions: - 

First, there is Eleanor Harding: 

"Hers was not^of those impassive faces, which 
have the beauty of a marble bust; finely 
chiselled features, perfect in every line, 
true to the rules of symmetry, as lovely 
a stranger as to a ffiend, unvarying unless 
in siciaiess, or as age affects them. She had 
no startling brilliancy of beauty, no pearly 
whiteness, no radiant carnation. She had not 
the majestic contour that rivets attention, 
demands instant wonder and then disappoints 
by the coldness of its charms. You might pass 
Eleanor in the street without notice, but you 
could hardly pass an evening with her and not 
lose your heart." (1) 

"There was a quiet, enduring, grateful sweetness 
about her face, which grew so strongly upon 
those who knew her, as to make zne great praise 
of her beauty which came from her old friends, 
appear marvellously exaggerated to those who 
were only slightly acquainted with her. Her 
loveliness was like that of many landscapes, 
which require to be often seen to be fully en¬ 
joyed# There was a depth of dark clear bright¬ 
ness in her eyes which was lost upon a quick 
observer, a character about her mouth which only 
showed itself to those with whom she familiarly 
conversed, a glorious form o^fhead the perfect 
symmetry of which required the eye of an artist 
for its appreciation. She had none of that 
dazzling brilliancy, of that voluptuous Rubens 
beaut}?-, of that pearly whiteness, and those 
vermilion tints.... You might begin to talk to 
her as though she were your sister, and it would 
not be until your head was upon your pillow that 
the truth and intensity of her beauty would flash 


(1) The Warden , 155 












' 


.. 






















« 


( 





















105 


upon you; that the sweetness of her voice 
would come upon your ear.” (1) 

Then there is Mary Thorne:- 

"She is my heroine, and, as such, must neces¬ 
sarily be very beautiful; but, in truth, her 
mind and inner qualities are more clearly dis¬ 
tinct to my brain than her outward form and 
features* I know that she was far from tall, 
and far from being showy; that her feet and 
hands were small and delicate; and that her 
eyes were bright when looked at, but not bril¬ 
liant so as to make their brilliancy palpably 
visible to all around her; her hair was dark 
brown, and worn very plainly brushed from her 
forehead; her lips were thin, and her mouth, 
perhaps, in general inexpressivewMR, but 
when she was eager in conversation it would 
show itself jto be animated with curves of 
wondrous energy; and, quiet as she was in 
manner, sober and demure as was her usual 
settled appearance, she could talk, when the 
fit came on her, with an energy which in truth 
surprised those who did not know her; aye,and 
sometimes those who did* Energy! nay, it was 
occasionally a concentration of passion, 
which left her for the moment perfectly 
unconscious of all other cares but solicitude 
for that subject which she might then be 
advocating* " ( 2 ) 

Trollope * s preference for "inner beauty",— the beauty 
of the soul and of the spirit,—■ over that of the body, is 
also well illustrated in the following description of 
Madeline Stavely:- 

"She was indeed above the average height of women; 




Doctor Thorne, 4&‘ 






















106 


but not the less were all her movements 
soft, graceful, and fawnlike as should be 
those of a young girl... It was a pity 
almost that she should ever have become 
grave, because with her it was her smile 
that was so lovely. She smiled with her 
whole face... I never/saw the face of a 
woman whose mouth was equal in pure beauty, 
in beauty that was expressive of feeling, 
to that of Madeline Stavely. Many have I 
seen with a richer upper lip, with a more 
luxurious curve, much more tempting as 
baits to the villainy and rudeness of man; 
but never one that told so much by its own 
mute eloquence of a woman’s happy heart 
and a woman’s happy beauty... Her face was 
oval, and some might say that it was almost 
too thin... Her complexion was not clear, 
though it would be wrong to call her/a 
brunette. Her face and forehead were never 
brown, but yet she could not boast the pure 
pink and the pearly white which go to the 
formation of a clear complexion. For myself 
I am not sure that I love a clear complexion. 

Pink and white alone will not give that hue 
which seems best to denote light and life, 
and to tell of a mind that thinks and a heart 
that feels... Her nose was Grecian, but per¬ 
haps a little too wide at the nostril to be 
considered perfect in its chiselling. Her 
hair was soft and brown,-- that dark brown 
which by some lights is almost black... And 
now that I have said that, I believe I have 
told all that may be necessary to place her 
outward form before the inward eyes of my 
reader.... All beauty of a high order should 
speak, and Madeline’s beauty was ever speaking. (1) 


(1) Orley Farm , vol. 1 : 256 - 8 
























107 


(c) Women 1 s Occupations, 

The occupations of young women only will he discussed 
in the& section. The tasks and recreations of older women 
will he dealt with in the chapter on Love and Marriage . 

Trollope's women are never idle. When they are not 
performing some specific household or social task, they 
are always to he found with some kind of work in their 
hands. Although Trollope tells us that "Women are more 

( 1 ) 

accustomed than men to long, dull, unemployed hours," it 
is almost impossible to find anywhere in his pages a woman 
who has not afplece of knitting, needle-work, or crocheting 
in her hands; or, if she is not busy at some such pretty 
handicraft, she is drawing, playing music, studying, or 
writing a letter. 

Needlework is, perhaps, the occupation most often 
mentioned in the novels. Women must always have had an 
inexhaustible store of pretty articles from which they could 
draw whenever they needed to make a gift to someone ; and 
the wardrobes of gentlemen must have been choked with all 
the fussy, useless bits of needlecraft which their female 
admirers showered upon them. Even when Phineas Finn was 
re-elected for Tankerville, 

"For six weeks after thel/ceremony parcels were 


(1) The Small House at Allington, II, 43 



























. 


















. 










- 






I 

- 


















. 












lob 


showered upon him by the ladies of the borough 
who sent him worked slippers, scarlet hunting 
waistcoats, pocket handkerchiefs, with *P.F.* 
beautifully embroidered, and chains made of 
their own hair*" (1) 

1 Worked slippers * 1 * 3 4 5 are most often mentioned among the hand- 
embroidered gifts for gentlemen. "The enthusiastically reli¬ 
gious young ladies, and the middle-aged spinsters" ( 2 ) of 
Bar Chester worked cushions and slippers and hem-bands for , 
their idol, Mr. Slope. Crinoline “was zealously engaged 
on the fox* s head that was to ornament the toe of a left- 
foot slipper. Who shall dare to say that those slippers were 
intended to grace the feet of Macassar Jones?”(3) If not 
slippers, or a chshion-cover, or hem-bands, the labour of 
love upon which the young lady was working might have been 
an embroidered purse, or a cover for a sofa.(4) And to per¬ 
form these labours, she used a little work-box, sometimes 
given to her by the gentleman of her choices 

’’Katie had a well-worn, well-known little work- 
box, which, in years now long past, had been 
given to her either by Alaric or Harry.... her 
custom was, in her daily needlework, to use this 
oldpriend. He (Charley) knew every hole and cor¬ 
ner in it*, he was intimate with all her little 
feminine nicknacks — her silver thimble, her 
scissors, her bit of wax, and the yard-measure, 
which twisted itself in and out of an ivory cot- 

tage.... 11 (5) 


(1) Phineas Redux, II, 341 

( 2) Barchester Towers , 54 

(3) The Three Clerks, 248-9 

(4) Ibid ., 276 

(5) Ibid ., 379 











■* 





* 

- - * 4 ’ : . 























As often as not, of course, the needlework in hand was some 
hit of prettiness for the young lady hersdf to wear,— such 
as the petticoat which Netta Proudie was working with 
"diminutive coach-wheels."(1) Hetta Carbury "had been 
working some morsel of lace, as ladies do when ladies wish 
to be not quite doing nothing. 11 (2) Knitting is mentioned 
in The Warden (236); and crochet-work in Barchester Towers 
(279) and Orley Farm (I, 288). 

Most of this work was done in the mornings and during 
the eveningss- 

"After yd inner the family settled down to their 
reading, writing, music copying, round games, 
or fancy work. Papa, if of a domesticated nature, 
might read aloud, w&ile the ladies worked at 
cross-stitch or, as it was also called, Berlin 
woolwork, producing rugs, carpets, chair seats, 
cushions, bell-pulls, and possibly curtain bor¬ 
ders and pelmets... Some of the work was beau¬ 
tiful in colour, some harsh and glaring. A cushion 
with a spaniel* s head worked in cross-stitch 
enriched with beads was a popular piece of fancy 
work. Slippers and smoking-caps -- round stiffened 
caps with a centre tassel —■ were worked for the 
gentlemen, or long bag purses were netted, fire¬ 
screens painted, and fruit and flowers modelled 
in wax, coloured and then imprisoned in a glass 
case. To press flowers and arrange them in an 
elegant album with their Latin names inscribed 
beneath was also a fashionable practice." (3) 

Young ladies spent aj^reat deal of time in reading 

English novels, which exercise was considered to be very 

fashionable at this time. Of a slightly heavier nature was 

(1) Barchester Towers, 144 

(2) The Way We Live Now , II, 149 

(3) G-.M.Young, Early Victorian England (London, 1934), I, 98. 















110 


Lily Dale 1 2 3 4 s reading of Pilgrim 1 s Progress , which she liked 
"■because it 1 s too beautiful to be understood" (1), and 
i Carlyle* a History of the French Revolution , The Signora 
Neroni read nothing but/ French novels; but then, she was 
considered not to be quite lady-like*. (2) 

Drawing,and the playing of some musical instrument 
were popular lady-like accomplishments. Lizzie Eustace, 
had 

n a little sitting-room which looked out over the 
sea,— the room where she kept ner Shelley and 
her Byron, and practised her music, and did water¬ 
colours, and sat, sometimes, dreaming of a Cor¬ 
sair. f * (3) 

Among these accomplished ladies was Mrs. Atterbury — not 
so young — who, 

"painted pictures, copied Madonnas, composed sona¬ 
tas, corresponded with learned men in Rome, Berlin, 
and Boston, had been the intimate friend of Gavour, 
had paid a visit to G-aribaldi on his island with 
the view of explaining to him the real condition 
of Italy,9- and was supposed to understand Bis- 
mark.” (4) 

Whatever time was not taken up with all these crafts and 
* accomplishments*, was filled with letter-writing. Perhaps 
the writing of letters is mentioned in Trollope’s novels 
just as often as any other feminine occupation. 

"If left to their own society ladies had plenty of 


(1) The Small House at Al l ington, II, 266 

(2) Barchester Towers , 247 

(3) The Eustace Diamonds, 236 

(4) Phineas Redux . I, 186-7 


















Ill 


Indoor occupation, for the upper class women 
generally were well educated, readers of serious 
literature, and good linguists. Talk, reading, 
drawing, painting, the study of botany and of 
languages, music, music copying and needlework, 
and letter-writing, fill the hours until the 
luncheon bell rings... 

“Writing letters was an occupation which took 
up a considerable amount of the time of ladies 
who, owing to the difficulties of transport by 
land and sea, might be separated from friends 
and relations for long periods. 

"Because of the cost of postage which was 
paid by the recipient of the letter and the 
severely restricted weight of letters, all of 
which had to be carried by horse-drawn mail- 
coaches, and the fact that a letter of more than 
one sheet was charged double, thin letter-paper 
was used and the lines/ of writing were crossed 
and re-crossed, so that it was natural that much 
attention should be paid to thejteaching of writing."(1) 

(This carriage of letters by "horse-drawn mail-coaches", 
refers, of course, to the earliest Victorian times, before 
the railways undertook the transport of Her Majesty s mail.) 


"Singing and playing upon the piano, and during the 
thirties and forties, upon the harp and the guitar, 
were approved feminine accomplishments. G-entlemen 
also sang and duets were in high favour, but play 
the piano gentlemen did not, that being a task 
considered only fij* for ladies and professional 
musicians. Lord Chesterfield had been firm about 
this, holding that if a man loved music ne should 
pay fiddlers to play for him but never make him¬ 
self appear frivolous and contemptible by playing 
for himself', and as it was in his day, so it was 
in the early Victorian era." (2) 


"When guests were present there might be dancing 
or charades as well as music. At any time between 
nine and ten o’clock, the tea-table was set out, 
coffee having Deen served directly after dinner. 
Between ten and eleven o' clock good-nights were 


(1) G-.M.Young, Op. cit ., I, 92. 

(2) Ibid., 98-9 

























' ■ 
















. 






■ 










- 






. 

, 

- . 




















. •:"' 
















■ • 




■ 









112 


said, and the gentlemen lighted and handed to 
the ladies the bedroom candlesticks, complete 
with snuffers and extinguisher, ready assembled 
on a table in the hall. The ladies, if young, 
retired to the nocturnal hair-brushing confe¬ 
rences beloved of young females to the present 
day." (1) 

Other pastimes indulged in by Trollope 1 s young ladies 
are chess (2) walking (3), riding,-- both on horses and upon 
donkeys (4), having afternoon tea (5), and the study of 
astronomy (6). 

"Walking and riding were popular forms of exercise, 
though for ladies to go out on a wet day was con¬ 
sidered quite out of the question, as being likely 
to lead to serious illness, which, indeed, might 
have been the case when skirts were long, petti¬ 
coats many, shoes, thin, and galoshes and macintoshes 
found no place in the wardrobe." (7) 

(Again, it is necessary to limit the above remark to 

the earliest part of Victoria's reign. After 1830, when 

Chas. Macintosh & Co, started operations, the macintosh 

overcoat began to be worn.) 

In the afternoons it was the usual habit of ladies, 

"to take'carriage exercise*, and when in London 
to pay calls and to leave cards, a solemn social 
duty at a period when the rules of a complicated 
etiquette were followed with meticulous care.... 

Or there may be an archery or croquet party or a 
picnic, or my lady may visit the village school, 


(1) 

G-.M. Young, 

Op. cit. 

, 1,99 

(2) 

Barchester 

Towers, 

313 

(3) 

idem. 



(4) 

Doctor Thorne, 335 


(5) 

Barchester 

Towers, 

313 

(6) 

idem. 



(7) 

G-.M. Young, 

Op. cit. 

, 1 , 91 






























' 


1 


r. 















113 . 


or some of the village people, who receive her 
with respectful awe.“ (1) 


(d) Women * 1 2 s Deportment and Attitudes . 

Once again, part or the discussion, and, in this case, 
a very important part, will be left to a l^ter section: No 
attempt will be made here to discuss the behaviour of young 
ladies in their relationships with men, excepting where 
such behaviour does not concern courtship and marriage. 

Such discussion will be taken up in the chapter to follow^ 
next but one ? on Love and Marriage . 

"That the education of girls, as codified by 

.eighteenth-century manners and moralized by 
nineteenth-century respectability, tended to 
a certain repression of personality in the 
interests of a favourite sexual type, can hardly 
be denied. But in the Victorian age this type 
was moulded by the pressure of an uncompromising 
religion: if the convention was that eighteenth- 
century man preferred his women fragile, and 
nineteenth-centur^y man liked them ignorant, 
there is no doubt 5 at all that he expected them 
to be good; and goodness, in that age of uni¬ 
versal charity, imported the service of others, 
and if service, then training for service." (2) 

After firs. Hurtle, the American lady, had persuaded 
Paul Montague to take her, unchaperoned, to the Haymarket, 
she said:- 

”1 do hate all kinds of buckram. I like good con¬ 
duct, and law, and religion too if it be not 
forced down one’s throat; but I hate what your 
women call propriety. I suppose what we have been 

doing to-night is very Improper; but I am quite __ 

(1) G-.M.Young, Op. cit. # I, 95. 

(2) Ibid. , II, 492 









































' 










t : 








- 

' 




, 















114 


sure that It Has not been in the least wicked." (1J 
An Englishwoman, this time,-- Lady Mary Palliser -- complains 
at the restrictions placed upon a woman's deportment: - 

'*. .. 1 2 3 Ii‘ I had a husband who was last I should 
make him taster by being fast myself. Tnere is 
nothing I envy so much a^ohe power of doing 
half-mad things.' 

'“Women can do that too.' 

“' 'But they go to the dogs. We are dreadfully 
restricted.' If you like champagne you can have 
a "bucketful. I am obliged to pretend that I only 
want a very little. You can bet thousands. I 
must confine myself to gloves* You can flirt with 
any woman you please. I must wait tijJ somebody 
comes,— and put up with it if nobody does come. 1 "(2) 

The rules were very strict as to when and.under what 
circumstances a lady should receive a gentleman visitor. It 
was out of the question, of course, that she should receive 
him In ner bedroom. Even the most improper Sophie G-orde- 
loup realized this:- 

*' ♦.. when Captain Boodle called the next morning 
at twelve o* clock she was still In bed. Had she 
been in dear Paris, or in dearer Vienna, that 
would not have hindered her from receiving the 
visit; but in pigheaded London this could not be 
done...." (3) 

Another improper woman, Mrs. Dobbs Broughton, was compelled, 
against her desires, to send her inamorato from her house 
during the absence of her husband: - 

ri I tell you, Conway, that in these matters you must 


(1) The Way We Live Now , I, 262 

(2) Tne Duxe 1 s Children , I, 337 

(3) The Claverings , 313-4 















115 ). 


either be guided by me, or you and 1 must cease 
to see each, other. It does not do Lhat you should 
remain here with me longer than the time usually 
allowed for a morning call . 11 ( 1 ) 

In spite of the fact that they are in love with each other, 

and about to be married, Violet Effingham will not visit 

Lord Chiltern's bachelor quarters, even though he is con¬ 
i' iii H WPa 

fined there as the result of a serious accident:- 

"In those circumstances a girl should not go to 
a man* s room unless she means to consider her¬ 
self as engaged to him, even with his sister; 

— not though he had broken every bone in his 
S-Kin. I Know what 1 may do, Laura, and I Know 
what I mayn't..." (2) 

It was even improper for the Duchess of Omnium and Madame 
G-oesler -- one married and the other a widow -- to visit 
Phmeas Finn in prison, as long as they were unaccompanied 
by the husband of one of them. (*3) 

In the early days of Queen Victoria it had been con¬ 
sidered improper for a girl to go, unchaperoned, to the 

f» 

theatre with a young man; out in 1674 we r ca me l such beha¬ 
viour not particularly frowned upon.(4) It was still impos¬ 
sible, however, for a young lady to remain in London by her¬ 
self if her mother chose to go into the country.( 5 ) She 
could, of course, stay in town as the guest of a married lady 


(1) Tne Last Chronicle of barset , I, 275 

(2) Phmeas Finn , 1, 540 
(5) Phmeas Redux , II, 150 

(4) The Way We Live Now , 1 , 599 
( 5) I bid ., I, 125 


















110 . 


if the visit had been arranged for her by her mother; but 
wherever she went in public she had to he accompanied by 
her hostess or some suitable chaperone appointed by ner 
hostess, (l) So restricted, indeed, were a young lady*s 
movements that her mother would even demur at the idea of 
ner waiting, in broad daylight, unaccompanied, to visit 
a friend a few streets away.(2) 

Something nas already been said about the propriety 
of language, and the influence of women upon the speech of 
men (q) In watching the language of their husbands and 
brothers, ladies also guarded thejpurity or their own tongues. 
For Violet Effingham to call a young man of ner acquaintance 
H A 1“ was "certainly very wrong".(4) But such language was 
mild compared to that which the men themselves would use; 
and if "A l rt was an unladylike expression, we can hardly 
wonder that a young lady would shriek with indignation when 
ner brother would say something like "Trie d— they are’, "(q) 
Not only in these outward forms, but also in their 
true characters, women were, on the wnole, much finer, more 
’proper 1 , and more righteous than their men. Let us now 
consider some of the qualities expected in a Victorian woman 1 £ 

character. Fanny Robarts, for example,; __ 

U) Ibid ., I, 235 

(2) Ibid., II, 105 
(5) Supra : 49 et seq. 

(4) Phineas Fin . II, 49 

(5) The Way We Live Now , I, 121 



















117 


"....' was one of the pleasantest companions that 
could be brought near to a man, as the future 
partner of nis nome, and owner of riis heart. And 
if high principles without asperity, female gentle¬ 
ness without weakness, a love of laughter without 
malice, and a true loving heart, can qualify a 
woman to be a parson’s wife, then was Fanny Monsell 
qualified to fill that station.' 1 2 3 (1) 

What follows is an excellent description of two young 

ladies of good character:- 

“There was about them a dignity of demeanour 
devoid of all stiffness or pride, and a maiden¬ 
ly modesty which gave itself no airs. In them 
was always apparent that sense of security 
which women should receive from an unconscious 
dependence on their own mingled purity and 
weakness. These t^o girls were never afraid 
of men,— never looked as though they were 
so afraid..,. Lily ... couldjbe full of play, 
but in her play she never so carried herself 
that anyone could forget what was due to her.“(2) 

G-ood advice as to the control of temper is contained, in 

these words of Trollope:- 

"As a general rule, it is highly desirable that 
ladies should keep their temper; a woman when 
she storms always makes herself ugly, and usually 
ridiculous also. There is nothing so odious to 
a man as a virago." (3) 

Patience and submission were considered admirable qualities 
in a woman:- 

"This woman was patient to a marvel, long-bearing, 
affectionate, imbued with that conviction so com¬ 
mon to woman and the cause of so much delight to 
men,— that ill-usage and suffering are intended 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 4 

( 2) Tne Small House at Aldington , II, 93-4 

(3) Barchester Towers , 224 










t 




, 

. 








. 






%■ 














. 

. 






' 








■ 


. 






118 . 


for woman/* (1) 

Tne ubiquitous Sopnie G-ordeloup cannot bring nerself 
to lixe English young ladies. She says: - 

"'There is nothing I hate so much as your meesses;' 
.... noting*. Your English meesses give themselves 
such airs. Now in Paris, or in dear Vienna, or 
in St. Petersburg, they are not lixe that at all. 
Tnere they are nobodles -- they are nobodies; 
out then they will be something very soon, which 
is to oe better. Your English meess is so much 
and so grand, she never can be greater and gran¬ 
der.’ 11 (2 ) 

Yet it was expected of a girl that she always be meek and 
attentive towards ner older friends and lady companions. (3) 

Tne fiction that women were weaker than men, not only 
physically, out intellectually as well, was supported oy 
the women tnemselves as much as it was maintained by the 
men. Clara Amenroz, a sufficiently self-reliant young lady, 
taxes the attitude that she is, “of course,... an unpro¬ 
tected female, and subject to disadvantages.* 1 2 3 4 5 (4) When 
cornered by a man who wishes to force her to keep her 
promise to marry him, Julia Brabazon follows the Victorian 
woman* s usual strategy by turning her supposed weakness to 
ner own advantage: - 

, if 0n, Mr. Clavering, 1 did not imagine that your 
strength would have condescended to take such 
advantage over the weakness of a woman/* (3) 


(1) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 109 

(2) The, Claverings , 18b 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 328 

(4) The Belton Estate , 300 

(5) The Claverings, 3 







































119 

Women kept this fiction of their weakness alive by the use 
of many little tricks and subterfuges,— whicn are the more 
amusing to us when we know that hotn men and women expected 
a well-conducted young lady to employ such tricks and sub¬ 
terfuges. When Charley Tudor was taken by the bailiffs, 
young Katie Woodward “did not faint. She never had fainted, 
and probably did not know the way.'* (1) It is to be sus¬ 
pected that, given a few more years of practice, Katie would 
have learned now, when f and where to faint^with the most 
accomplished young ladies of her acquaintance. When, month 
after month, Charley Tudor failed to 'pop the question* to 
her, she languished away.and almost died of consumption; out, 
when Chaxie'f finally came through with nis proposal, she 
quickly and miraculously recovered her health. This langui¬ 
shing Katie seems very unreal to us.(2) When Emily Wharton 
heard of a slight accident to her brother, she “uttered a 
little shriek“(3),— no doubt in the most approved manner. 

At the news of her daughter* s impending marriage Mrs. Mas¬ 
ters “was quite overpowered. She had thrown herself on to 
the old ramiiy sofa and was fanning herself with ner hand¬ 
kerchief 4) If anyone of Trollope's characters was too 
orazen and sophisticated to blush, she was Lizzie Eustace, 

(1) The Three Clerks, 344 

(2) Ibid., '451 

(3) The Prime Minister , I, 236 

(4) The American Senator , 4^3 




















« 


















. ■■ 











•. CV : " > hr ' 






. 



















mu 


nee G-reystock; but when ner fatherly attorney, 

“witn the sweetest and wittiest of smites, sug¬ 
gested that perhaps Miss G-reystock was going to 
be married, Lizzie,with a pretty maiden blush, 
admitted that such a catastrophe was probable." (1J 

This same Lizze Eustace is more active in business matters 
than most of Trollope* s women; but business pursuits, out¬ 
side of the management of a home, were not quite ladylike; 
and we learn that Lizzie “had discovered how to draw cheques 
but she nad no other correct notion as to business."(2 ) 
Before ner father*s death “hut little had fallen to Lucy 
(Robarts) to do in thejway of woman’s duties. f, 0f money tran¬ 
sactions she had known nothing, beyond a jocose,attempt to 
make her annual allowance of twenty-five pounds cover ail 
her personal wants — an attempt which was made jocose by 
the loving bounty of ner father.“ (3) 

Even in a village, let alone the great and dangerous 
city of London, ladies were not in the habit of going out 
alone at night unless they did so in their carriages or in 
a trap hired at the inn.(4) As soon as twiii&fct would fall, 
and lights would begin toi^appear in windows, they considered 
themselves imprudent if they found themselves alone out of 
doors.(b) They did stay at hotels, but usually not alone; 

(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 2 

( 2) Ibid., 12 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 10b 

(4) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 32b 

(5) The Claverings , 303 












. 




1 ■ 












. i- 

■ 










■ 

. 


.. 




. 

- 




. 






















121 


and when they did so under any circumstances, they"felt 
an hotel to be so public." (1J Whiiejtravelling, a woman 
nad much less freedom than a man; for instance, at a rail¬ 
way station: - 

"A man walks up and down the platform, and in 
that way obtains something of the advantage of 
exercise; but a woman finds herself bound to 
stttstill within the dreary dullness of the 
waiting-room.... Everything is hideous, dirty, 
and disagreeable; ana the mind wanders away, 
to consider why station-masters do not more 
frequently commit suicide." (2) 

One final comment upon the deportment of Victorian 
ladies thrown a little light on a femininejjkabit that is 
at least as common to-day as it was then;— the habit women 
have of greeting each other with affectionate gestures under 
ail circumstances, whether they really feel the affection 
tney display or not;- 

"Inere nas come up a nmkmi fashion for laaies 
to pretend to be very loving, and so they put 
their faces together. Two hundred years ago 
ladies and gentlemen did the same thing with 
just as little regard for each other. Fashions 
change, you know." [3) 


(1) Ibid ., 4y; & The Belton Estate , 2y7 

(2) The Belton Estate , bi 
( 3) Phlneas Redux , 1, 400 






















122 


(e) The “bady". 

Since I nave already discussed at some length the behaviour 
and proper deportment of women, there is no need in this 
section to say anything further on these matters. It is my 
purpose, rather, to deal with that particular class of women 
who were born or were married into that higher station of 
life which in itself entitled them to the title of f, Lady“. 
Pre-eminent among such women in Trollope's novels were the 
wives of his squires. In addition to all the characteristics 
of a lady already mentioned, these women behaved always with 
a quiet reticence and a lively dislike of ever hurting any¬ 
one by their own speech or actions. Their qualities were 
the same as those of their husbands and fathers, which shall 
will be discussed in the next chapter but one^when we come 
to consider the mid-Victorian English "Gentleman”. It will 
be sufficient at this time to glance at the lives and charac¬ 
ters of two or three English "ladies” as found In Trollope:- 
First, there is old Miss Thorne of Ullathorne, who has 
all the prejudices of a dyed-in-the-wool Tory, thinks that 
nothing good has been said or done since her girlhood, and 
lives nostalgically in the days of her remote ancestors:- 

"She would not open a modern quarterly, did not 
choose to see a magazine in her drawing-room, and 
would not have polluted her fingers with a shred 
of the 'Times 1 for^ any consideration. She spoke 
of Addison, Swift, and Steele, as though they were 









' 





















123 . 


still living, regarded De Foe as the best mown 
novelist of his country, and thought of Fielding 
as a young but meritorious novice in the fields 
of romance. In poetry, she was familiar with names 
as late as Dryden, and nad once been seduced into 
reading the 'Rape of the Lock;' but she regarded 
Spenser as the purest type of ner country's lite¬ 
rature in this line.To her all modern English 

names were equally insignificant: Hengist, Horsa, 
and such like, had for ne?r ears the only true 
savour of nobility. She was not contented unless 
she could go beyond the Saxons..,. 

f, As a politician Miss Thorne had been so 
thoroughly disgusted with,public life by base 
deeds long antecedent to the Corn Law question, 
that that had but little moved her... She had not 
yet reconciled herself to the Reform Bill.... If 
asked whom she thought the Queen should take as 
her counsellor, she would probably have named Lord 
Eldon; and when reminded that that venerable man 
was no longer in the flesh to assist us, she would 
probably have answered with a sigh that none now 
could help us but the dead,..... 

"And so Miss Thorne went on sighing and regret¬ 
ting, looking back to the divine right of king^as 
the ruling axiom of a golden age, and cherishing, 
low down in the bottom of her heart of hearts, a 
dear, unmentioned wish for the restoration of some 
exiled Stuart.... 

"In her person and her dress she was perfect... 

... Shejhad a very comfortable independence of ner 
own, which she divided among juvenile relatives, 
the milliners, and the poor, giving much the lar¬ 
gest share to the latter. (1) 

Dear old Miss Thorne was actively conscious of her station 
and of her ancient blood, but not offensively so: Her pride 
was an ornament upon her life. Not so was the haughty pride 
of some other 'ladies' of the time,-- for example, that of 
Lady Aylmer, who lived in a mansion much too sumptuous for 
her husband's income, and tried to rule the lives of her 


(1) Barcheter Towers, 196-9 





















' 



















. 

. 








124 


family and of all others who had dealings with her: - 

"Sir Anthony could only blow up the servants when 
they were thoughtless enough to come in his way, 
and in doing that was restricted hy nis wife* s 
presence* But Lady Aylmer could get at them day 

and night.and then she wrote many letters 

daily. ... And she knew the cottages of all the 
poor about the place, and knew also all their 
sins of ommission and commission. She was driven 
out, too, every day, summer and winter, wet and 
dry, and consumed enormous packets of wool and 
worsted, which were sent to ner monthly from 
York...." (1) 

Lady Aylmer’s daughter , 

"who was the eldest of the younger generation, and 
who wadnow gently descending from her fortieth 
year... followed Lady Aylmer in all things,-- at 
a distance. She was very good,— as indeed was 
Lady Aylmer,— entertaining a high idea of duty, 
and aware that her own life admitted of but little 
self-indulgence. She had no pleasures, she incur¬ 
red no expenses; and was quite alive to the fact 
that as Aylmer Park required a regiment of lazy, 
gormandizing servants to maintain its position in 
the country, the Aylmers themselves should not be 
lazy, and should not gormandize. No one was more 
careful with her few shillings than Miss Aylmer. 

... She knew that it v/as for the honour of the 
family that one of her brothers should sit in 
Parliament, and was quite willing to deny herself 
a new dress because sacrifices must be made to 
lessen electioneering expenses. She knew that it 
was her lot to be driven slowly in a carriage with 
a liveried servant before her and another behind 
her, and then eat a dinner which the cook-maid would 
despise .... But still she was contented, and felt 
that she had consolation for it all in the fact that 
she was an Aylmer .... She read of gaiety, though 
she never encountered it, and must have known that 
the world elsewhere was less dull than it was at 
Aylmer Park. But she took her life as it came,, with¬ 
out a complaint, and prayed that G-od would make her 
humble in the high position to which it had pleased 


(1) The Belton Estate , 214 






■ 







' 




. 

. 




1 




125 


Him to call Her. She hated Radicals, and thought 
that Essays and Reviews, and Bishop Colenso, came 
direct from the Evil One. She taught the little 
children in the parish, being especially urgent 
to them always to courtesy when they saw any of 
the family;— and was as ignorant, meek, and 
stupid a poor woman as you shall find anywhere in 
Europe." (1) 

There are several such ladies in the novels, who are pinched 
and pushed and smothered into dull, parsimonious, parochial 
lives by the failure of their husband's incomes — sometimes 
quite large|incomes — to meet the enormous expenses of a 
well-kept country estate. More typical, perhaps, of the 
happier, more comfortable gentlewomen whom Trollope knew 
is Lady Stavely:- 

"Lady Stavely was a good, motherly, warm-hearted 
wpman, who thought a great deal about her flowers 
and fruit, believing that no one else had them 
so excellent,-- much also about her butter and 
eggs, which in other houses were, in her opinion, 
generally unfit to be eaten; she thought also a 
great deal about her children, who were all swans, 

— though, as she often observed with a happy sigh, 
those of her neighbours were so uncommonly like 
geese." (2) 

"The charities of Noningsby (Lady Stavely*s home) 
were done on a large scale, in a quiet, handsome, 
methodical manner, and were regarded by the mis¬ 
tress of the mansion as a very material part of 
her life's duty....Morning and evening prayers, 
church twice a day on Sundays, attendance at the 
Lord's table at least once a month, were to her¬ 
self -- and in her estimation for her own family 
-- essentials of life. And they had on her their 
practical effects. She was not given to backbiting 


(1) Ibid ., 214-5 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 254. 























126 


— though, when stirred by any motive near to 
her belongings, she would say an illnatured 
word or two. She was mild and forbearing to 
her inferiors. Her hand was open to the poor. 

She was devoted to her husband and her chil¬ 
dren. In no respect was she self-seeding or 
self-indulgent. But, nevertheless, she appre¬ 
ciated the comforts of a good income -- for her¬ 
self and for her children. She liked to see nice- 
dressed and nice-mannered people: about her, pre¬ 
ferring those whose fathers and mothers were 
nice before them. She liked to go about in her 
own carriage, comfortably.... She liked to live 
in a large place like Noningsby, and preferred 
country society to that of the neighbouring town. 

"... Her idea of a woman’s duties comprehended 
the-birth, bringing up, education, and settlement 
in life of children, also due attendance upon a 
husband, with a close regard to his special taste 
in cookery.... Shejherself visited the poor, seeing 
them almost daily. If it was foul weather they 
came to her, and if it was fair weather she went 
to them.' 1 (1) 


(!) Orley Farm , II, 243-5 













12? 


CHAPTER SIX 

MEN 


(a) Cosiume. 


In his foremhrd on Costume G-.M.Young gives tne most 
concise account I can rind of men* s dress in Victorian times. 
Tne following notes are taken from this forewarn:- 

"But as women 1 s rasnions were mostly derived from 
France they are not Historically of much interest 
m England, wmcn did on the otner nand set trie 
fashion i'or men 1 s wear. By id^o tne use of black 
for professional and business wear was established; 
but for sport, travel, and social occasions a great 
variety of colour, green, brown, blue, was still 
permitted,... and the standard late Victorian 
evening dress, black and white with a tie of mode¬ 
rate dimensions, would in the thirties have been 
taken for the garb of a waiter, an usher, or a 
Westminster hoy. 

11 In id3o black breecnes were still worn by trie 
older men and, for Sunday wear, trie fashion per¬ 
sisted among the yeomanry t&ii the fifties. But 
trousers (with a flap buttonecfacross the waist) 
were normal 1 : they were worn tight and were of every 
texture, colour and pattern, from Brougham* s tar¬ 
tan cloth, through Disraeli* s green velvet to Macau- 
ley* s nankeen. G-aroers might be worn over the trou¬ 
sers. The wrist-bands would be turned up over the 
coat-cuff. 

T< The coat can "be reduced to one of two types: the 
outdoor, ciose-buttoned against the weather, with a 
full skirt for riding, and the indoor, with fine 
drawn tails and lapels rolled well back to display 
the linen, neck-cloth, jewellery, and flowered 
waistcoat. The early Victorian male was biologi¬ 
cally sound: he liked to display his lines -- good 
calves, slender waist, broad chest,and clustering 
hair; and tne cut of tne dandy* s clothes conformed 
to the baroque swagger of his gestures and altitudes. 



























- 

- 


















12d 


".... Tiie spencer was originally a snort. double- 
breasted overcoat, snowing the tails. The name 
was transferred, first to a very snort woman 1 2 s 
Jacket, and tnen (later forties) to a man's under¬ 
coat, parent of the lounge suit..,. Tne arrival 
of the spencer maicHs the decline of Early Vic¬ 
torian ostentation in clotnmg and the movement 
of clotnmg (as of manners) towards what P.G-. 
Hammerton called 'an informal serviceableness*• 
Shorter nair and the Albert (watch-cnain worn 
ac^ross tne waistcoat instead of the long thin 
chain passed over the neck) tend m the same 
direction. 

"The two types of coat produce, as a compro¬ 
mise, tne morning coat for all wear ( with its 
vestigial buttons in the small of tne back, from 
the riding coat, but open m front to snow waist¬ 
coat and smrt). Thus we arrive at two styles of 
graduated informality -- spencer and morning coat; 
tne frock coat for formal wear; and the * full 
social dress* which, by idbu, nad not been finally 
differentiated into day and evening. This diffe¬ 
rentiation -- high waistcoat ana a continuous 
curve of the coat from throat to tail, against 
low waistcoat and cut-away tail, and the final 
triumph of black and white for evening --completes 
the story." (1) 

Tne above information may serve as a guide m picturing 

men's costume> insofar as it is mentioned by Troiiope:- 

Suits, coat3 , trousers, and waistcoats ; - 

"Etheloert Stanhope was dressed in light blue from 
head to foot. He had on the loosest possible blue 
coat, cut square like a shooting coat, and very 
snort. Itj£ was lined with siik of azure blue. He 
had on a blue satin waistcoat, a blue necknandker- 
cmef which was fastened beneath his throat with a 
coral ring, and very loose blue browsers which 
almost concealed ms feet.” (2) 

Louis Scatcnerd dressed himself m , 


(1) G-.M.Young, Op. cit ., I, xiv-xvi 

(2) Barcnester Towers , 64 












, 

. 

' 






1 

, 















I2y 


"what he considered trie most fashionable style of 
the day* He had on a new dress-coat lined with 
satin, new dress-trousers, a sills waistcoat covered 
witn cnains, a white cravat, polished pumps, and 
sills stockings, and he carried a scented handker¬ 
chief in his hands; he had rings on his fingers 
and carbuncle studs in his shirt, and he smelt as 
sweet as patchouli could make him*" (1) 

In contrast to these gaily dressed young bloods, we find 
some older men-of-business,"decent-looking,*.. dressed in 
black not of the newest, in swallow-tailed coats and black 
trousers, with cnimney-pot hats, and red faces.” ( 2 ) 

A certain man-about-town, anxious not to make too fashionable 
an appearance, "wore a cut-away coat, a coloured shirt with 
a fogle around his neck, old brown trousers that fitted 
very tightly around the legs, and was careful not take gloves 
with him." (3) Among several men drinking at an inn in 
London,"Cne man had on an almost new brown frock coat with 
a black velvet collar, and white trousers. Two had blue 
swallow-tailed coats with brass buttons; and a fourth, a 
dashing young lawyer* s clerk from Clement* s Inn, vias abso¬ 
lutely stirring a mixture, which he called a mint julep, 
with a yellow kid glove dangling out of his hand." (4) Mr. 
Turnbull, a very proper London attorney "always wore a black 
swallow-tailed coat, black trousers, and a black silk waist- 

coat." (5) Most gentlemen always changed for dinner, dof- 

(1) Doctor Thorne . 409 

(2) Rachel Ray . 360 

(3) The Claverings. 314 

(4) The Three Clerks . 386 

(5) Phineas Finn, I, 196 

































■ ' 




. , V , 


t 

■ 













■ 




, 


' 




. 












* 










, 






■ 






130 


I fing their street or^ outdoor clothes for suits which, 

I particularly with older men, were usually black, with a 
| white cravat,(l) For daytime wear, those men who favoured 
black sometimes relieved the darkness of their appearance 
by affecting a coloured waistcoat.( 2) Such coloured waist¬ 
coats, often of brilliant hue and made of satin, were also 
worn with dark evening suits,(3) 

Louis Scatcherd must have cut a dashing, if incongruous, 
figure with his 11 out-door show dress”, which was ” a little 
tight frock-coat, round which a polished strap was always 
buckled tightly, a stiff white choker, leather breeches, 
top-boots, and a hat, with a cockade,stuck on one side of 
his head."(4) Around his fields and farms ^country gentle¬ 
man usually wore an old shooting-coat, breeches, gaiters 
and thick shoes,(5) For outdoor wear at country-house 
parties, men were “wonderful in knickerbockers, picturesque 
hats and variegated stockings,”(6) Whenever a man went 
forth in the cold, damp^ winter days he wrapped himself 
around with shawls, mufflers and coats as protection against 
the inclement weather. This was true not only when he went 
about by horse or carriage, but also when he travelled by 

I~l) The Small House at Allington, I, 403 

(2) The Eustace Diamonds , 44l 

(3) Rachel Ray , 65 

(4) Doctor Thorne , 406 

(5) The Small House at Allington , I, 222; Tne Claverings ,3b2 . 
The American Senator, 3d. (6) The Dukes Children , I, 370 





















131 


: railway. The Duke of St. Bungay,"on entering the room nad 
' to unfold himself out of various coats and comforters." (l) 


1 Will Belton arrived upon a visit "enveloped in nis damp 
j great-coats".(2) However, there is some change m tne 
heaviness of winter clothing shown as having been Drought 
, about by the greater comfort of railway travel;- 

"Men when they arrive from their travels now-a-days 
have no strippings of greatcoats, no deposits to 
make of thick shawls and douoie gloves, no abso¬ 
lutely necessary changes of raiment... out now he 
had left Birmingham by the late express, had enjoyed 
his nap on the train for two hours or so, and m 
walked into his own drawing-room as he might have 
done had he dined in his own dining-room.' 1 2 3 4 (b) 


But Trollope often mentions men taking off many heavy gar¬ 
ments upon arriving from a railway journey. The contradic¬ 
tion can be explained, perhaps, by the possibility that 


these men had to travel some distance from the railway 
station before arriving at their destinations. 

Neckwear : - 

The frequency with which Trollope mentions men* s neck¬ 
wear when he describes their dress suggests that considerable 
attention was paid by men to the appearaice of their cravats, 
collars and kerchiefs. We find the following:- 
"A blue silk neckhandkerchief," (4) 

(1) The Prime Minister , I, 73 

(2) Tne Belt-on Estate , iyb 

(3) The Small House at Allington , I,lp4 

(4) Bar Chester Towers, b4 



















132 . 


n A satin neckhandkerchief; 11 (1) 

U A loose, unstarched, white nan dicer chief; " ( 2) 

A kerchief which made its wearer "rather stiff about 
the neck."(3) 

"White neckties;" (4) 

"A hroad, stiffly starched coloured handkerchief tied 
rigidly around ms neck;“(5) 

"A blue and gold nandkercher around the neck;" (6) 

“He always wore round ms neck a stiff-starcned 
deep white handlerernef, not fastened with a 
bow m front, the ends being tucked in so as to 
be invisible* This cravat not only covered ms 
throat but ms chin aiso, so that ms head seemed 
to grow forth from it without the aid of any 
neck; and ne had a trick of turning ms face 
around witmn it, an inch or two to the right or 
to the left, in a manner wmch seemed to indicate 
tnat ms cranium was loose and might be removed 
at pleasure." (7) 

This, perhaps, was the “all-rounder" referred to 'elsewhere: - 
"Macassar essayed to turn his head towards her as 
.ne replied; he could not turn it much, for ne 
wore an all-rounder..." (d) 

Trollope makes fun of the all-rounder:- 

"Some people may think that an all-rounder is an 
all-rounder, and that if one is careful to get 
an &il-rounaer one has done all that is neces¬ 
sary. But so thought not Macassar Jones. Some men 
wear collars of two plies of linen, some men of 
three; but Macassar Jones wore collars of four 
plies. Some men — some sensual, self-indulgent 
men — appear to think that the collar should oe 
made for the neck; but Macassar Jones knew better. 

He, who never spared himself when the cause was 
good, he knew that the neck had been made for tne 
__ _ collar." ________ 

[ 1) Bar Chest er To w ers , 335 

12) Tne Warden , 1^4 

13) Ibid. t 73 

[4) Doct or Thorne , 1^0 
,5; Qr&ey Farm, i, 3d5 
k 6) Ibid ., 4yu 
,7) The Three Clerks , iyo-y 
,d) Ibid ., 24y 
yj Ibid ., 257rb 




















±33 


Miscellaneous :- 

Most or the gloves mentioned are oi* Kid ( 1 ), m 
; various colours: primrose ( 2 ), white(3), and yenow(4). 

One young man is not consiaered wortn liKmg Decause ne 
wears cotton gloves*( 5 ) 

For dress wear, the young dandy affected a small cane 
that could nardiy be called a walKmg cane* We find such 
articles described as ”a little cane ,f ,(o), ”a diminutive 
cane with a silver Knob (7), "bright little canes” (d). 

For practical purposes sucn as w aiming m the country, or 
trudging over tourist trails, larger, heavier and less 
attractive canes were carried, and were usually called, 

w i' 

simply, stiCKS.(y) 

Men*s shirts usually had ruffles down the front* 

It seemed to be nothing for a men to order “thirty dozen 
of ..• shirtings” at one time.(II) 

Dress shoes were of fine leather, sometimes of patent 

leather ( 12 ), and sometimes nad bucities instead of laces ( 13 ) 

(1) The Small House at Alimgton , I, dd 

(2) Bar Chester Towers , 33b 

(3) Framiey Parsonage , e>3 

(4) Tne Tnree Cierns , 3 dd 

(5) The Claverings, 65 

( 6 ) Bar Chester Towers , 410 

(7) The Eustace Diamonds , 431 

( 8 ) The Way We L ive Now , I, 112 

(9) The Last Chronicle of Barse t, II, 57 

(10) The Barden , 185 

(11) The Eu s tace Diamonds , 303 

(12) The Three Cle rks, 295 

(13) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 307 






















1 


- 






' 





- 

. 




. 

. 

- 

. 








134. 

It was considered impressive for the shoes, particularly 
| those of a medical man, to creak.(1) For rough outdoor 
wear in the fields, men usually wore top-boots, such as 
those worn in hunting (2), or heavy low boots and gaiters. 

Handkerchiefs,— that is, pocket-handkerchiefs as dis¬ 
tinguished from those worn around the neck,-- were sometimes 
very colourful. Mr. Moulder wiped the sweat from his brow 
with a red silk handkerchief. (3) Macassar Jones carried a 
coloured bandana.(4) 

It was not uncommon for a gentleman to carry a pocket- 
comb abont with him.(5) His watch might be a large hunting- 
watch (6), or, for dress wear, a small gold watch.(7) It 
might be tied around his watch by a chain or a bit of old 
ribbon, or carried in his pocket, attached to a chain with 
seals.(8) 

The monocle was also affected by some men, and used 
with as tmch haughtiness as that employed by a grand lady 
! with her lorgnette.(9) 

(1) Doctor Thorne , 475; The Three Cl e rks, 266 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 96 

(3) Orley Farm , l~ 335 

(4) The Three Clerks, 271 

(5) Ibid ., 57 

(6) The Small House at Allington , I, 403 

(7) Idem . 

(8) Idem . 

(9) Barche ste r Towers , 354. 

The Last C hroniib&e of Bar-set , 1, 288 

































- h 






) 



















■■ 






















135 


Men in London, and elsewhere, habitually carried um- 
brellas(l),— as they do to-day in that place of unpredic¬ 
table, rainy weather. The umbrella was,perhaps, more usual 
a part of. a man's costume then because he did not have the 
advantage enjoyed by his grandchildren of being able to 
jump aboard a covered bus much more frequently he could 
have hi in his own day. 

Only the more vulgar men are shown as wearing much 

jewellery,-- usually in the form of many heavy gold chains 

( 2 ) 

and seals over their waistcoats. One such man, a retired 
grocer, was also ”odious with the worst abominations of 
perfumery,” (3) 

The only mentions of men* s mourning costume I can recall 

(4) 

refer, in one case, to one man*s shirt-studs, and, in the 
other, to a "mourning ring with his wife*s hair”• (5) 

In their smoking-rooms, gentlemen wore smoking-caps 
and dressing gowns, which may have been "wonderful Chinese 
dressing-gowns”, or a”short dressing-coat”.( 6) 

There are several references to men’s night-caps,-- an 
article of clothing of some comfort in the cold night damp¬ 
ness of English homes.(7) 

(1) Framley Parsonage, 198; The Claverings , 290; Phineas 
Redu x, 96 ; The Last Chronicle of Barse t, 17; Ibid ., 161 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 245; 454 

(3) Rachel Ray , 74 

(4) The Last Chronicle of Barset, I, 247 

(5) Ibid .", 455 

(.6) The American Senator, 54; Phineas Redux, i, 30 
X 7) T he warden7 ~TB7 









































' 


- 







... 










- 


. 

. 















- 






■ 






. . 




r-r: 






. 















136 


(b) A p pearanc e and Attitudes . 


The outward appearance of Trollope* s heroes may fairly 
; he taken to represent the ideal appearance of mid-Victorian 
man; otherwise, the author, writing his novels for as large 
a public as could he persuaded to huy them, would have taken 
pains to describe his heroes differently. If a modern young 
girl were asked to detfccribe her ideal man, she would very 
likely say that she liked him ’‘tail, dark, and handsome." 

A mid-Victorian girl would say much the same, with the sub¬ 
stitution of "fair" for "dark". 

Peregrine Orme,the younger, was not tall; but then he 
was just not quite the hero in his particular novel. He had 
bright blue eyes, 

"His hair was light; his forehead was not large 
(again, because he was not quite the hero), hut 
well formed and somewhat prominent; his nose had 
something, though not much, of the eagle* s heak; 
his mouth was handsome in its curve, and his 
teeth were good, and his chin was divided hy a 
deep dimple.... He was very strong on his legs; 
he could wrestle, and hox, and use the single¬ 
stick with a quickness and precision that was 
the terror of all the freshmen who had come in 
his way." (1) 

The Rev. Mark Roharts, hero of Pramley Parsonage , 

"In person... was manly, tall, and fair-haired, with 
a square forehead, denoting intelligence rather 
than thought, with clear white hands, filbert nails, 
and a power of dressing himself in such a manner 


(1) Orley Fa rm, I, 46 



























■ 

























137 


that no one should ever observe of* him that 
his clothes were either good or bad, shabby 
or smart.” (1) 

All of Trollope’s thoroughly English heroes are fair-haired 
men. If an Englishman in one of his novels is not fair¬ 
haired, it is almost a sure sign that that man is not the 
hero of the tale, or that he is definitely the villain. For 
example, Trollope not only admits ? but even raves over the 
beauty of Ferdinand Lopez; yet Lopez is a villain, and a 
dark man:- 

”He was certainly a handsome man,-- his beauty 
being of a sort which men are apt to deny and 
women to admit' lavishly. He was nearly six 
feet tall, very dark, and very thin, with regu¬ 
lar, well-cut features indicating little to the 
physiognomist unless it be the great gift of 
self-possession. His hair was cut short, and he 
wore no beard (unusual) beyond an absolutely 
black moustache. His teeth were perfect in form 
and whiteness.” (2) 

Another man, who was not a villain, but whom Trollope wished 
to assume quite a minor part in his novelf»~a man who was to 
have the qualities of a gentleman, but who was not to com¬ 
pete with the hero for popularity,-- was described as being 
dark, and as not quite having certain items of appearance 
which would have made him handsome:- 

”Dr. Crofts was a slight, spare man, about five 
feet nine in height, with very bright dark eyes, 
a broad forehead, with dark hair that almost curled, 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 5 

(2) The Prime Ministe r, I, 4-5 









138 


but which did not come so forward over / his 
brow as it should have done for purposes of 
beauty,-- with a thin, well-cut nose, and a 
mouth that would have been perfect had the 
lips been a little fuller/* (1) 

Almost every mid-Victorian man wore a beard. Perhaps 
this has something to do with our tendency nowadays to look 
upon those days as the days of the Patriarchs* To those of 
us who are not accustomed to beards, it is rather discon¬ 
certing to be reminded that the dashing heffojin whose doings 

we are pleasurably empathizing,boasts a gorgeous set of 

to 

silken whiskers* It is impossible describe the mid-Victorian 
beard, because each man grew his hair in anyone of a great 
variety of styles. Perhaps the normal facial decoration was 
an abundant growth on and under the chin, plus an equally 
abundant moustache on the upper lip. These growths were 
allowed to get long, or were trimmed to various degrees of 
shortness, according to the taste of the man himself. These 
are some of the hirsute deaerations described by Trollope:- 
Ethelbert Stanhope, an eccentric young poseur , wore 
his light hair very long and silky /‘coming down over his 
coat.His beard had been prepared in the holy land, and was 
patriarchal. He never shaved, and rarely trimmed it. 11 (2) 
Another man wore "small black whiskers and a small black 
moustache".(3) Another had "red moustaches, and a great deal 

(1) The Small House at Allington, I, 163 

(2) Barchester T o wers , 73 

(3) Doctor Thorne, 185 


























. 

- 

. 

' 


. 

. 














































__ 








. • 








* 






























. 








. 

' 




. 









139 . 


of red beard beneath his chin.“(I) Squire Gresham teases 
jhis son about his beard:- 

"You don*t mean to tell me, Frank, that you are 
going to eat soup with that beard?" 

"Don f t I, sir? All I require is a relay of 
napkins for every course:" and he went to work, 
covering&t with every spoonful, as men with 
beards always do. (2) 

One young man is described as having "soft brown whiskers 
sprouting on his cheeks" (3); and he is only seventeen years 
old. Another man wears an"enormous moustache";(4) and 
another has "brown wavy hair, and a light silken beard".(5) 

A Frenchman is shown to have "the smallest little pair of 
moustaches imaginable, and the smallest little imperial."(6) 
Some men wore whiskers only, some moustaches only, and others 
no hair on the face at all. Will Belton had "small whiskers 
which came half way down his cheeks."(7) Sir Harry Hotspur 
"wore no beard save a slight grey whisker, which was cut 
away before it reached his chin."(8) Both Frank Greystock(9), 
and Roger Carbury (10) wore nothing but slight chin-whiskers. 
Among those who afPetted a moustache only, without any growth 


(1) Ibid ., 293 

(2) Ibid., 422 

(3) Orley Farm , I, 28 

(4) Framley Parsonage , 124 

(5) Phineas Finn , I, 68 

(6) The Three Clerks , 295 

(7) The Belton Estate , 28 

(8) Sir Harry Hotspui? of Humblethewaite , 2 

(9) The Eustace Diamonds^ 26 

(10) The Way Wi Live Now , I, 51. 


























140 . 

upon the chin, were Mr. Gilmore (1), Sir Felix Carbury (2), 
the American, Mr. Fisker, who wore a well-twisted moustache 
(3), Ferdinand Lopez (4), and Mr. Runciman, the inn-keeper 
(5)* The earliest of these references to men who did not 
wear both a moustache and a beard occurs in The Belton Es ¬ 
tate , published in 1865* Whether or not this was a new style 
dating approximately from this time, cannot be said with 
safety. 

Some men seem«f to have been just as vain as some 
women in the care of their faces. In the case of Mr. Thorne, 
a fine gentleman if ever there was one, ’'The grey hair in 
his whiskers were eliminated perhaps once a month; those on 
his head were softened by a mixture which we will not call a 
dye; it was only a wash.“(6) Mr. Appledom was not an attrac¬ 
tive suitor because "he dyed his whiskers and had his coats 
padded.”(7) Mr. Spooner, when he was rejected by a young 
lady in favour of a more fashionable man, complained; - 

"Because a man greases his whiskers, and colours 
his hair, and paints his eyebrows, and wears kid 
gloves, by George, they’ll go through fire and 
water after him.” (8) 


’1) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 85 
[2) The Way We Live Now , I, 18 
p), Ibid ., 81 

(4) The Prime Minister , I, 5 
£ 5) The American Senator , 22 
j( 6) Bar cheater Towers , 448-9 

(7) Bhineas Finn , II, 79 

(8) Phineas Redux , I, 318 

































141 


Some men .did not actually dye their whiskers, but, if the 
ihair was streaked with grey, they managed to make the grey 
ja darker colour by using a leaden comb.(l) The use of 
|cosmetics by men could not have been very common; but some 
men, including Major Tifto, M.F.H., clubman and gambler, 
suffered from “the common assertion that he painted."(2) 


Trollope describes his heroes in character as,well as 
in appearance; and, again, we should be justified in assu¬ 
ming that the characteristics he gives to these men were 
the ones most admired in men of the times. Adolphus Grosbie 
-» though certainly not a ’hero* -- was*handsome, graceful, 
clever, self-confident, and always cheerful when she asked 
him to be cheerful.“(3) He was also, 

“a pleasant man for ladies in a large house. Though 
a sportsman, he was not so keen a sportsman as to 
be always out with the gamekeepers. Though a poli¬ 
tician, he did not sacrifice his mornings t© the 
perusal of blue-books or the preparation of party 
tactics. Though a reading man, he did not devote 
himself to study. Though a horseman he was not 
often to be found in the stables. He could supply 
conversation when it was needed, and could take 
himself out or the way when his presence among the 
women was not wanted.“ (4) 

Will Belton , 

“was just the man to have for a cousin,-- a true, 

(1) Doctor Thorne , 144 

(2) The Duke 1 2 3 4 s Children , I, 56 

(3) The Small House at Allington, I, 95 

(4) Ibid ., 332 













v. 












. 


' l 

■ 




























’ • 









. 


•' . . ' ' ; o 

r 


' . : J " ; 










. "• ■ • ■ : . ' 



















r 


* 










142 


loving cousin, stalwart, self-confident, with 
a grain or two of tyrrany in his composition 
as becomes a man in his relations to his inti¬ 
mate female relatives." (1) 

Captain Aylmer is typical of many steady, rather dull, 
humourless mid-Victorian men, and has all the unimaginative 
earnestness of his times'. He had a good position in the 
world, was a man of influence and a man of fashion; he 
always looked like a gentleman, was well educated, given 
to reading; was prudent, steady in his habits; and a man 
likely to rise in the world.(2) Such a man as this was 
ideally good,— the sort of man.whom mothers would recommend 
to their daughters; hut he was not necessarily the sort . 
that the daughters themselves would prefers- 

"In the first place, whose eyes are good enough 
to know whether in truth a sheep be black or 
not? And then is it not the fact that some little 
amount of shade in the fleece of male sheep is 
considered, if not absolutely desirable, at any 
rate quite pardonable? A male sheep with a fleece 
as white as that of a ewe-lamb, is he not consi¬ 
dered to be, among muttons, somewhat i^ipid? It 
was this taste of which Pope was conscious when 
he declared that every woman was at heart a rake."(3) 

English young men are described as suffering generally from:- 

"occasional impecuniosity, sternness of parents, 
native shyness, fear of ridicule, inability of 
speech, and a general pervading sense of inferiority 
combined with an ardent desire to rise to a feeling 
of conscious superiolfity." (4) 


(1) The Belton Estate , 38 

(2) Ibid., 128 

(3) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwalte , 40-1 

(4) The Prime Minister , I, 162 
































143 


It was fashionable for gentlemen of liesure to pretend 
that they had no Intellectual interests and that they did 

j 

| not care to exert themselves in any way* Speaking of such 

a man, Lady Chiltern says:- 

11 * And why does he pretend to do nothing: When 
he* s out he rides hard; but at other times 
there* s a ha-ha lackadaisical air about him 
which I hate* Why men assume it I never could 
understand* It can recommend them to nobody. 

A man can't suppose that he'll gain anything 
by pretending that he never reads, and never 
thinks, never does anything, and never speaks, 
and doesn't care what he has for dinner, and, 
upon the whole, would just as soon lie in bed 
all day as get up. It isn't that he is really 
idle* He rides and eats, and does get up, and 
I daresay talks and thinks* It* s simply a poor 
affectation." (1) 

In another place we find that "men think it grand not to 
know one tune from another."(2) 

Trollope has a great deal to say about the "manliness" 
of his men* It iS orre quality, it seems, which was essen¬ 
tial to a hero. He makes an interesting attempt to define 
quality:- 

"The property of manliness in a man is a great 
possession, but perhaps there is none that is 
less understood*... The woman's error, occa¬ 
sioned by her natural desire for a master, leads 
her to look for a certain outward magnificence 
of demeanour, a pretended Indifference to stings 
and little torments, a would-be superiority to 
the bread-anA-butter side of life, an unreal 
assumption of personal grandeur. But a robe of 
State such as this,-- however well the garment 
may be worn with practice,-- can never be the 
raiment natural to a man; and men, dressing 

(1) Phineas Beaux ,"!, 32 

(2) The Claverlngs , 83 


this 


















144 


themselves in women 1 s eyes, have consented to 
walk about in buckram. A composure of the eye, 
which has been studied, a(reticence as to the 
little things of life, a certain slowness of 
speech unless the occasion call for passion, 
an indifference to small surroundings, these, 

— joined, of course, with personal bravery, 

— are supposed to constitute manliness.... 

Manliness is not compatible with affectation. 

... Before the man can be manly, the gifts 
which ma him so must be there, collected by 
him slowly, unconsciously, as are his bones, 
his flesh and his blood. They cannot be put on 
like a garment for the nonce,— as may a little 
learning. A man cannot become faithful to his 
friends, unsuspicious before the world, gentle 
with women, loving with children, considerate 
to his inferiors, kindly with servants, tender¬ 
hearted with all,— and at the same time be 
frank, of open speech, with springing, eager 
energies,—• simply because he desires it. These 
things, which are the attributes of manliness, 
must come of training upon a nature not ignoble. 

.These things are the very opposites. ..... 

of ... deportment.... The natural man will 
probably be manly. The affected man cannot 

be so. n (1) 

All of Trollope* s more admirable male characters are manly 
according to the above definition. Nevertheless, their 
manliness does not prevent them from being rather senti¬ 
mental. It is amazing — if not amusing — sometimes to find 
a fine, strong man bursting into tears, or sighing and carry¬ 
ing on like a sentimental schoolgirl. Since Trollope — who 
was only too ready to make excuses for the behaviour of his 
characters — makes no comment upon such behaviour, we must 
conclude that mid-Victorian readers did not look upon it as 
being unmanly o it unusual. There follow some instances of 


(1) Phineas Redux , II, 302-4 










. 


'■A 


* 






' 


. 




- 


• ' 

' ' ' ■ 

. 











145 


such sent iment al 1 ty: - 

Mr. Harding, that most gentle and sensitive of men, 

'can be excused for such attitudes. When he was overcome 

■ 

by his daughter^ concern for him, 

"How he pressed her to his heart again with almost 
a spasmodic pressure*. How he blessed her, and 
called her by a hundred soft sweet names which 
now came new to his lipsl How the tears fell like 
rain from his old eyes'." (1) 

Another old man, sitting with his sorrowing daughter, 

"kissed her, and sobbed over her, and held her close to his 

heart with his clinging arms."(2) 

But when strong young men give way too easily to tears, 
we 'moderns' are left a little puzzled:- 

"Alaric brushed a tear from his eye, and ended 
by promising to be guided by his friend* s ad¬ 
vice." (3) 

"'I am not fit to be here,* said Charley; and as 
he spoke his manly self-control all gave way, and 
big tears rolled down his cheeks."(4) 

The exceptionally strong, bluff and manly Will Belton, 

"... talked of his sister, swearing that she was 
as good as gold, and at last wiping away the 
tears from his eyes as he described her maladies."(5) 

In front of his fiancee, to whom he had been not quite true, 

Harry Clavering "was sitting in a chair sobbing violently, 

( 6 ) 

and pressing away th e tears from his ch eeks wit h hi s han ds." 

(1) The War den. 126 

(2) The Prime M i nister , II, 176 

(3) The Three Clerks, 68 

(4) Ibid., 281 

(5) The Be lton Es tate, 38. (6) The C lave rin gs, 263 



























■■ C 










. 

. 

■ 

' 


n 


f ) C: 




. 




. 







146 


Instances like these could he multiplied: In almost every 
jnovel some man, young or old, hursts into tears over an 
;incident or an emotion whch, nowadays, would certainly not 
move a man to such an extremity. Yet, this propensity does 
not seem to he incompatible with the manliness of the men 
concerned. 


For want of a more suitable place in which to discuss 
it, this section on men*s deportment may as well include 
some remarks on the habit of smoking. Most 6f Trollope* s 
men smoke, yet it does not seem to he considered as quite 
the proper thing to do; and many regulations are laid down, 
particularly by ladies, as to when and where a man may in¬ 
dulge in tobacco. Even a heavy smoker like Undy Scott, admits 
that he should not smoke: - 

1,1 You don*t smoke,* said Undy, with his cigar-case 
in his hand. * Well -- I believe you are right -- 
cigars cost a great deal of money, and can*t well 
do a man any real good. God Almighty could never 
have intended us to make chimneys of our mouths 
and noses.” (1) 

Smoking was not generally allowed inside the house(2); 
and this regulation was not always enforced by the women 
only:- 

"On their return they found Sir Felix smoking a 
(If The Three Clerks , 95-6 

(2) Barchester Towers, 382 ; The Vicar Of Bullhaspton, 84; 

Ibid., 168“ 



















147 


cigar on the gravel path, close in front of 
the open drawing-room window, 

Felix,* said his cousin,* take your cigar 
a little farther. You are filling the house 
with tobacco, 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 

” 'Oh heavens,—* what a prejudice’*' said the 
baronet, 

" ’Let it be so, but still do as I ask you.* 

Sir Felix chucked the cigar out of his mouth on 
to the gravel walk, whereupon Roger walked up 
to the spot and kicked the offending weed away,” (1) 

G-entlemen often went out on to the lawn to smoke.(2) They 
did not generally smoke in the presence of a lady (3), un¬ 
less the lady herself, suggested that they do so.(4) We 
gather from one remark (5) that smoking was not allowed on 
trains nor upon station platforms. 

Most of Troliope)fs men smoke cigars;-- almost any 
chapter of his novels will tell of some man or another 
lighting up a cigar. Pipes are also smoked,— often by 
more vulgar men (6), but sometimes by gentlemen.(7) The 
only description we have of a pipe is the phrase, ”a grand 
long tobacco pipe”. (8) 

In all the novels under discussion in this thesis 
there are only two places in which men are mentioned as 
smoking cigarettes, the earliest being in Phineas Redux , 


(1) The Way We Live Ho w, I, 158-9 

(2) The Small House at Allington , I, 271; Ibid ., I, 314 

(3) Sir Harr y Hotspur o f H umblethwaite , 215 

(4) Phineas Redux, I, llZT" 

(5) The Small House at Alli ngton, II, 68 

(6) The Three Clerks, 18; Ibid., 91; Ibid., 196 

(7) Ibid ., 223 ; The Way We L ive No w, II, 228 

(8) The Three Clerks, 276 






























148 


published in 1873 (1), and the second in The Way We Live 
Now, published in 1874. (2) 

Most clubs (3), and some homes (4) had rooms in them 
set aside as smoking-rooms* In other houses rooms were 
fitted up or set aside for use as smoking-rooms. In one 
such home there was "an outside room fitted up for smoking.” 

(5) ; and in another the men would go down to the harness 
room to enjoy their cigars.(6) 

(cr) The Squi re. 

Among all the gentlemen in his novels, the ones most 
loved by Trollope are his squires; He lingers over his des¬ 
criptions of them; and, human and fallible as each one is, 
he makes us love them all,— for their very faults as much 
as for their manifest virtues. Among these landed country 
gentlemen, the ones who most take my fancy are the Earl de 
Guest (1), Thorne of Ullathorne (§), Sir Peregrine Orme ( 9 ), 
Gresham of Greshamsbury (MD),Sir Harry Hotspur (ff ), Mr. Spoo¬ 
ner , Roge r Gar bury (/». and Sir Alured Wharton m. 

Cl) Op. citT , I, 223. (2) Op cit ., I, 338. 

(3) The Small House at Arlingt on, I, 469. 

(4) The Claverings , 29. (5] Orley Farm , I, 272 

(6) The Small House at Allington , I, 339. (7) Ibid . 

(8) BarChester Tower s. (9) Orley Farm .(10) Doctor Thorne . 

(11) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite . 

(12) Phineas Redux . 

(13) The Way We Live Now . 

(14) The Prime Minister * 


















































149 


All of these gentlemen are of ancient family; and each 
is as proud as the other of his long lineage* But this 
pride is gracefully carried, and never degenerates into 
snobbery. One£ can sense this deep pride in the offhand 
manner in which the squire of Allington discusses his pro¬ 
perty with Major G-rantly: - 

"’You can see the date still in the brickwork of 
one of the chimneys,-- that is, if your eyes are 
very good you can see it,-- 1617* It was completed 
in that year, and very little has been done to it 
since* We think the chimneys are pretty.’ 

’They are very pretty, 3 said the major. ’Indeed, 
the house altogether is as graceful as it can be.’ 

’Those trees are old, too,’ said the squire, 
pointing to two cedars which stood at the side 
of the house. ’They say they are older than the 
house, but I don’t feel sure of it. There was a 
mansion here before, very nearly, though not quite, 
on the same spot.’ 1 2 ' (1) 

The land upon which they lived, and from which they 
derived all their incomes, was of paramount importance to 
these gentlemen, not only because of its bread-and-butter 
value but also, and, perhaps, more importantly, because 
of the prestige and power it brought with ifcs ownership: - 

"’It is a comfortable feeling to know that you 
stand on your own ground. Land is about the 
only thing that can’t fly away* And then, you 
see, land gives so much more than the rent. It 
gives position and influence and political 
power, to say nothing about the game." (2) 

Never to sell one’s land, but,rather, to hang on to it or 

even to increase it, was almost a religion with these men: - 


(1) The Last Chronicle of Barset, I, 295 

(2) Ibid. , II, 178 


















150 


" 1 2 Never let the estate decrease in your hands. 

It Is only by such resolutions as that that 
English noblemen and English gentlemen can 
preserve their country. I cannot bear to see 
property changing hands.” (1) 

While urging hisjson to marry for money, Mr. Gresham of 

Greshamsbury voices this same attitude and also some other 

ambitions common to landed gentlemen:- 

111 If you wish to hold up your head in the country; 
if you wish to represent your county in Parlia¬ 
ment, as has been done by your father, your grand¬ 
father, and your great-grandfathers; if you wish 
to keep a house over your head, and to leave Gres- 
hamsbury to your son after you, you must marry 
for money." (2) 

The majority of Trollope* s squires are Conservatives, 
if not downright Tories; and, as such, they regret the pas¬ 
sing of the * good old days* , have very definite views as to 
their duties towards their tenants and as to their tenants* 
obedience towards themselves; and love/ England with a^love 
that wife peculiarly English and nothing else. These attitudes 
are well expressed by Lady Lufton, widow of a deceased noble¬ 
man: - 


"She loved cheerful, quiet, well-to-do people, who 
loved their Church, their country, and their Queen, 
and who were not too anxious to make a noise in the 
world. She desired that all the farmers around her 
should be able to pay their rents without trouble, 
that all the old women should have warm flannel 
petticoats, that the working men should be saved 
from rheumatism by healthy food and dry houses, that 
they should all be obedient to their pastors and 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 138 

(2) Doctor Thorne , 110 














151 


masters — temporal as well as spiritual. That 
was her idea of loving her country. She desired 
also that the copses should be full of pheasants, 
the stubble-field of partridges, and the gorse 
covers of foxes; in that way, also, she loved her 
country. She had ardently longed, during that 
Crimean War, that the Russians might be beaten 
— but not by the French, to the exclusion of 
the English, as had seemed to her to be too much 
the case; and hardly by the English under the 
dictatorship of Lord Palmerston, Indeed she had 
had but little faith in that war after Lord Aber¬ 
deen had been expelled. 1 ’ (1) 

The squire occupied a position of importance and use¬ 
fulness in his community. He was usually a magistrate. Harry 
Norman was, 

"about to take his place as the squire of his parish, 
to sit among brother magistrates, to decide about 
roads and poachers, parish-rates and other all-ab¬ 
sorbing topics, to be a rural magistrate, and fill 
a place among perhaps the most fortunate of the 
world’s inhabitants." (2) 

In these capacities he would influence the lives of every¬ 
one in his part of the countryside; but those who lived 
upon the squire’s own property and paid him rent for the 
use of his land, not only came under his influence, but were 
dependent upon his bounty or his selfishness for most of 
their comforts or hardships. Many squires took an active 
interest in the daily welfare of th?r tenants, while others, 
like Bernard Amedroz, paid little attention to them. Yet they 
liked Amedroz:- 

"Though always dignified he was ever affable, and 


(1) Fr amley Parsonage , 15. (2) The Three Clerks . 520. 















152 


^ the poor liked him better than they might have 
done had he passed his time in searching out 
their wants and supplying them* They were proud 
of/their squire, though he had done nothing for 
them* It was something to them to have a man 
who could so carry himself/sitting in the family 
pew in the parish church* They knew that he was 
poor, but they all,declared that he was never 
mean. He was a real gentleman,-- was this last 
of the Amedroz. family; therefore they curtsied 
low, and bowed on his reappearance among them, 
and CftiAtftall those signs of reverential awe which 
are common to thejpoor when they feel reverence 
for the presence of a superior*'* (1) 

The squire* s interest in his tenants was not usually con¬ 
fined to such things as the annual Christmas charities of 
coals and blankets (2), or to more or less impersonal help 
in economic and agronomic problems, but often extended into 
an active and genuine concern for the intimate personal 
problems of the men and women who depended upon him. Roger 
Carbury, for instance, spent much time and money to help 
the erring daughter of his tenant, Daniel Ruggles.(3) When 
discussing his tenants with the heir to his estate. Sir 
Alured Wharton shows this active personal interest;- 

"*John Griffith has been a good man, and if not 
always quite ready with his rent, has never been 
much behind* You won*t be hard on John Griffith? 

•... But I don* t quite know what to say about 
young John. The farm has gone from father to son, 
and there’s never been a word of a lease... He’s 
a little given to poaching. ... J've always got 
him off for his father's sake. They say he’s 
going to marry Sally Jones. That may take it out 


(1) The Belton Estate, 7 

(2) The Claverings, 31 

(3) The way We Live Now * 














. 

- 








■ 

' 

* 










■ 










, 


























1 


























153 . 


of him, I do like the farms to go from father 
to son, Everett, It*s the way that everything 
should go. Of course, there’s no right... But 
I have a feeling about it. It is good that 
things should go from father to son. I never 
make a promise; but the tenants know what I 
think about it, and then the father works for 
the son. Why should he work for a stranger. 

Sally Jones is a very good young woman, and 
perhaps young John will do better. ,MI (1) 

Many of these squires were, themselves, active farmers. 
The Earl de Guest spent all his days in his fields and his 
farms, dressed in old breeches and heavy shoes, supervising 
the work on his crops, his gardens, his hay-meadows, and in 
his barns.(2) Mr. Thorne of Ullathorne discusses with 
his parson the wheat harvest, guano fertilizer, ”turnip- 
drillers and new machines for reaping. 11 (3) Such a gentle¬ 
man farmer would start his day’s work before breakfast: he 
would go "round his farm before he came in for prayers,"(4) 
while his wife "was probably looking to the butter in the 
dairy."( 5) Others might, if they could afford it, leave 
all such work to a steward or an estate-manager* although 
Sir Peregrine Orme, who could afford it, would not employ 
such a man, and told his son,"I have never had a regular 
land steward, but have seen to that myself. If you’ll take 

my advice you’ll do the same. There is no better employment 

(1) The Prime Minister, I I, ~340-l 

(2) The Small House at Allington . 

(3) Barchester Towers , 211 

(4) Framley Parsonage , 428 

(5) Idem . 













... 

- 

- 










154 


for a gentleman."(1) The duties of a land steward are very 
roughly described in the case of Andyjgowran who, "was the 
steward and bailiff and manager and factotum about the 
place, who bought a cow or sold one if the occasion required, 
and saw that nobody stole anything, and who knew the boun¬ 
daries of the farms, and all about the tenants, and looked 
after the pipes when frost came." (2) 

If, in addition to his duties as a landlord, a farmer, 
and a magistrate, the squire was also Master of Hounds for 
his local hunt, he was a busy man, indeed; and if the enor¬ 
mous expense of lool^bg after the kennels was not borne by 
public subscription but out of his own pocket, he also ran 
the risk of rapidly becoming a poor man as well. So much 
had happened to Mr. G-resham. ( 3) 

Trollope* s squires are reminseent of Sir Roger de 
Cover-ley in the$r simplicity, countesy, bluffness, honesty, 
and air of parochial well-being. The most amusing glimpses 
we have of them i m are as they behave in church and as they 
take an interest in the parson* s affairs. When Arabin came 
to St. Ewold's, the very first thing that had to be done was 
to introduce him to squire Thorne♦( 4) The squire 

i 

of Allington "read the responses loudly and plaAly,-- so 

(!) Orl e y Farm , II, 263 
(2) The Eustace Diamonds , 166 
( 3) Doctor Thome . 

(4) BarChester Towers , 180 















. 

' ' 

’ 
















155 


loudly andjplalnly , that the parish cleric could by no means 
equal him, though with emulous voice he still made the 
attempt."(1) 

In all the novels under discussion, there is only one 
voice raised in contempt of the English landed gentleman, 
and that is the unimportant voice of Mr. Gockey, an unsa¬ 
voury ' commercial gentleman* from London:- 

"^What does a country gentleman know, and what 
does he do? What 1 s the country the better of 
hfom? He *unts, and he shoots, and he goes to 
bed -with his skin full of wine, and then he gets 
up and he 'unts and he shoots again, and 'as 
his skin full once more. That's about all." (2) 


( d) The "G-entleman 18 . 

It is the purpose of this section to discuss the chara- 
jcir e r—e f—t he-^ge afebeaan 

cter of the gentleman. Although this discussion may be defi¬ 
cient in itself, if it is studied in conjunction with other 
parts of the thesis, I believe that a fatly comprehensive 

A 

picture of the mid-Victorian English gentleman may be had. 
The other parts to which I refer are: the section immedia¬ 
tely preceding this one, on "The Squire"; section (b) of 
this same cnaptdr,on men's "Appearance ana Attitudes"; ana 
tnose parts of Chapter Two which discuss "Caste". 

I do not Delieve there is anything that occupies An- 

thony Trollope* s mind more than the question: "What consti- 

(1) The Small House at Ailington, I, 209 

(2) The Vicar of Buiihampton , 20§ 



























■ 





, 


r \ 




- 

, 










' 








. 






























. 

. 

































Ibo 

tutes a gentleman?" Althougn it is beyond the scope of 
this thesis to seek out a reason ror this, such a reason 
may he found in the circumstances of Trollope*s life. (1) 

His father held a tenuous claim to gentility as the probable 
heir to a gentleman who owned a country estate. As an unsuc¬ 
cessful lawyer he did his best to raise his family as a 
gentleman would, and lost wnat money he had in a vain attempt 
to set himself up as a squire. Starting out with tne posses¬ 
sion of a fairly good country home, nee rapidly lost what ne 
had, and ended up in the most poverty-stricken imitation of 
gentility in buildings ordinarily occupied by the tenant of 
an estate. His son, Anthony, must nave felt the ignominy of 
this, just as he felt the shame of being a badly-dressed, 
awkward day-boy at Harrow. In fact, his entire childhood and 
youth were spent in an impecunious struggle to grasp and hold 
on to whatever shreds of gentility he and his family might 
claim. In his maturity he had none of the more obvious marks 
of the gentleman: He had no great wealth, no rank, no station; 
he had to work for his living; and all he had was a - owfe e a i* 
the claim to a certain "gentleness” of blood. If, as was the 
case with Trollope, such a man wished to live as a gentleman 
among gentlemen, it is little wonder that he thought a great 
deal about the definition of gentility. And, in attempting to 
define gentility, it is also little wonder that, while admit- 

(1) Anthony Trollope, Au t o biograpny . 














157 


ting the value of ranm, wealth and station, he places more 
importance upon the gentleman's need of gentle blood, good 
breeding, nign ideals, and exemplary benaviour. 

Almost every chapter in ev^y novel written by Trollope 
maKes some reference to tne gentility of ms characters. 

To quote all these references, or to make footnotes of tnem, 
would take up far too much space. Therefore, m this dis¬ 
cussion, I shall make direct quotations of only the most 
interesting items, giving footnotes to these qotations only, 
and none to all the other information dealt with: Suffice 
it to say that the reader may find such information on almost 
any page of the novels. 

First of all, I shall deal with the few attempts Trol¬ 
lope makes to define the word,"gentleman":- 

"He was not a gentleman. I do not mean to say that 
he was a thief or a liar; nor do I mean hereby to 
complain that he picked his teeth with his 

fork and misplaced his 1 h*s’. I am by no means 
prepared to define what I do mean,-- thinking, 
however, that most men and most women will under¬ 
stand me.... It is not the owner of a good coat 
that sees and admires its beauty. It is not even 
they who have good coats themselves who recognize 
the article on the bacK of another. They who have 
not good coats themselves have the Keenest eyes 
for the coats of their better-clad neighbours. As 
it is witn coats, so it is with that which we call 
gentility. It is caught at a word, it is seen at 
a glance, it is appreciated unconsciously at a 
touch by those who have none of it themselves. It 
is the greatest of all aids to the doctor, the 
lawyer, the member of Parliament,-- as though in 
tnat position a man may prosper without it,— and 
to the statesman; but to the clergyman it is a 







f 














. 
















- 


- 








I . : 







.... 


. * 












t 

- 








lbb. 


vital necessity.”(1) 

In discussing Phineas Finn’s natural claims to gentility, 

V/iolet £4<iv\ihd>*\ 

Lady - toura Kenned y say s: - 

”*In the first place he is a gentleman ... Then 
he is a man of spirit. And then he nas not too 
much spirit;— not that Kind of spitit which 
makes some men think that they are the finest 
things going. His manners are perfect;— not 
Chesterfieldian, and yet never offensive. He 
never browbeats anyone, and never toadies any¬ 
one. He knows how to live easily with men of all 
ranks, without any appearance of claiming a 
special status for himself. If he were made Arch¬ 
bishop of Canterbury to-morrow, I believe he 
would settle down into the place of the first 
subject in the land without arrogance, and with¬ 
out false shame.” (2) 

That Trollope prefers ’’nature* s gentlemen” to those born 

into gentility, is suggested by his rather sarcastic des¬ 
cription - o f 

cription of Mr. Longstaffe: - 

”He was intensely proud of his position in life, 
thinking himself to be immensely superior to all 
those who earned their bread. There were no doubt 
gentlemen of different degrees, but the English 
gentleman of gentlemen was he who had land, and 
family title-deeds, and an old family place, and 
family embarrassments, and a family absence of 
any usual employment.... It was not allowed to 
him to be close In money matters. He could leave 
his tradesmen* s bills unpaid till the men were 
clamourous, but he could not question the items 
on their accounts. He could be tyrannical to his 
servants, but he could not make inquiry as to the 
consumption of his wines in the servants® hall. 

He had no pity for his tenants in regard to game, 
but ne hesitated much as to raising their rent. 

He had his theory of life and endeavoured to live 


(1) Rachel Ray , ?b 

(2) Phineas Finn. I, 30b-9 























' 


■ 

■ 




■ 


, 

. 








4 






1 ' ! 

' 


* • 








159 


up to it.“(l) 

Finally, the Dume, of Omnium, talking 10 nis son, says:- 

n, To such a one as you the law can be no guide. 

You should so live as not to come near the law, 

— Op to have the law to come near to you. From 
all evil against which the law Pars you, you 
should be barred, at an infinite distance by 
nonour, bji conscience and nooility. Does the 
law require patriotism, philanthropy, self-abne¬ 
gation, public service, purity of purpose, demo¬ 
tion to the needs of others wno nave been placed 
in the world below you?.... Between you and me 
there should be no mention of law as the guide 
of conduct. Speak to me of nonour, of duty, and 
of nobility; and tell me what they require of 
you. 1 2 3 " (2) 

The possession of land or money could not, by them¬ 
selves, make a man a gentleman: Si t Peregrine Grme would 
not allow that Mr. Jospph Mason of G-roby was f a gentleman, 
“or that ne could by any possible transformation become 
one“, in spite of the fact that Mason “was quite as rich a 
man as Sir Peregrine, and owned an estate which was nearly 

- s 

as large as The Gleeve property. 11 (3) In further discussion 
of Mr. Mason 1 s eligibility it is said: - 

“In judging the position which a man should hold 
m the world. Sir Peregrine was very resolute in 
ignoring all claims made by wealth alone. Even 
property in land could not in his eyes create a 
gentleman. A gentleman, according to nis ideas, 
should at any rate have great-grandfathers capable 
of being traced in the world* s history; and the 
greater the number of such, and the more easily 


(1) The Way We Live Now , I, 116-7 

(2) The~Duke* s Children , II, 200 

(3) 0rley Farm, I, 24. 













. 


- 

s 


- 


SO ■- 




. 












1 

- 

, 

' t 


.... 








. 


- 








.. 

t i 

* 

. *E-:- 

r 





















■ 











■ 


















160 


traceable they might be on the world 1 s surface, 
the more unquestionable would oe the status of 
the claimant in question. 11 (1) 

It is not to be supposed that such men as Sir Peregrine 

despised wealth. His friend. Judge Stavely, says, for 

example: - 

"High position and. a plentifjtl income are great 
blessings in this world, so that they be achieved 
without a stain. But even in this world they are 
not the greatest blessings. There are taings 
much sweeter than them. 1 " (2) 

A man who worked for his living was not considered by 
society to be a gentleman; but Trollope does not quite 
agree with this, insofar as he shows Will Belton (3) to be 
one of the finest gentlemen in his novels;-- in spite of 
the fact that "Will belton was not a gentleman 1 . So, at least, 
said the Belton folic, who had heard that the heir had been 
brought up as a farmer somewhere in Norfolk." (4) 

Sir Peregrine Orme regarded "gentle blood and early 
breeding ... as necessary to a gentleman".( 5 ) Trollope 
voices this idea through others of his gentlemen, for in¬ 
stance, Sir Harry Hotspur, who thought of men as he did 
of horses: "It is astonishing what blood will do in bringing 
a horse through mud at the end of a long day."(6) And in 

(1) Ibid., I, 40. 

(2) Ibid ., II, 252. 

(3) Tne Belton Estate . 

(4) Ibid ., 6 

(b) Or ley Farm , I, 25 

(6) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humbietnwalte , 15$ 














t 




. 









' -• : • 






* 

' 




• : „ ■ ■ r -j : i. 

■ " ' ' 


* 
















- - 







• 





■ dr 



. 



L ' 














* 

‘ 








* 




,;7 , .. •. 




. 















lbl 


another place Sir Harry is said to believe that:- 

"good blood too will nave its effect,-- physical 
for tne most part,— and will produce bottom, 
lasting courage, tnat capacity of carrying on 
through tne mud to whicn Sir Harry was wont to 
allude; but good blood will bring no man bac& 
to honesty. Tne two things together, no doubt, 
assist in prodcuing the nighest order of self- 
denying man.” ( 1 ) 

But "gentle blood and early breeding” do not guarantee 

tnat their possessor is a gentleman; they only mane it more 

linelv that ne will behave line one. By piecing together 

all the hints and statements made by Trollope himself, and 

by study 1 ^!.^ the speeches and actions of nis heroes, we 

can achieve the following picture of his ideal gentleman:- 

is 

The true gentleman, with a quiet dignify, was proud 
of his status, and Garries himself "without any of that 
humilitjr which betrays one class of uncertified aspirants 
to gentility, or of that assumed arrogance which is at once 
fatal to another class$ H (2) "never for a moment attempting 
to place himself on a footing with men who|f (are) richer 
than himself, and, as the world goes, brighter, but still 
feeling himself to be in no way lower than they.”(3) 

He is affable towards his inferiors, courteous to nis 

equals, gentle to women ( 4 ), and forebearing towards his 

elders.(5) He is manly and gallant ( 6 ) , clean-living (7), 
(1) Ibid ., 197 . (2) Fhineas Finn, I, 234 

(3) The Claverings , 237 

(4) Orley Farm , I, 39 . (i) Ibid.,I, 186. 

( 6 ) IMd., II, 170. (7) Ibid .» II, 267* 





















' 

■ 







' 






: r-'- / ■ ' • ' ■' : • 

■ 

t I ’ ■ 


1 • . .. i y ' ':j J 

k 




- 












162 


and "private".(1) 

He is Honest in speech:- 

"She did know that the one offence which a gentle¬ 
man is supposed never to commit is that o$ spea¬ 
king an untruth* The offence may he one committed 
oftener than any other hy gentlemen,— as also by 
all other people; but, nevertheless, it is regarded 
by the usages of society as being the one thing 
which a gentleman never does." (2) 

And if he is not always quite as honest as ne should be, 
there are those, like Laurence Fitzgibbon, who can find 
excuses for untruth:- 

"Laurence Fitzgibbon certainly possessed the rare 
accomplishment of telling a lie with good grace. 

Had any man called him a liar he would have con¬ 
sidered himself to be not only insulted, but in¬ 
jured also. He believed himself to be a man of 
truth. There were, however, in his estimation, 
certain subjects on which a man might depart as 
wide as the poles are asumder from truth without 
subjecting himself to any ignominy for falsehood. 

In dealing with a tradesman as to his debts, or 
with a rival as to a lady, or with any man or woman 
in defence of a lady’s character, or in any such 
matter as that of/ia duel, Laurence believed that a 
gentleman was bound to lie, and that he would be no 
gentleman if he hesitated to do so." (3) 

In action ne is restrained; and in language he is 
reticent. He "wants ample evidence before he allows his 
judgment to actuate his conduct. 11 (4) Will Belton "laid him¬ 
self justly open to severe censure" when he "talked of crush¬ 
ing his rival 7 5 bones."(5) A gentleman does not allow his 
- - — —““. 

(1) The Claverings, 66 

(2) The Eustace Diamonds, 214 

(3) PhineasTFinn II, 3-4 

(4) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 19 

(5) The Belton Estate , 320 






















' 

■ 

' 










. 

. 




! 






- 

5 • , , 
















■ 















163-. 

feelings thus to overpower his tongue. In all his speech 
he is so anxious to seem composed and dignified that he 
understates what he has to say, and avoids a dogmatic 
superlative like the plague: Under stress of a great resolve 
Sir Peregrine Orme says, "No, by Heaven! I tnink 1 may ven ¬ 
ture to say that it will never come to me to wish that."(l) 
(I have italicized his ’masterpiece of understatement 1 2 3 4 5 .) 

When the Marquis of Trowbridge utterly spoiled for the Rev. 
Mr. Fenwick tne beauty of his home by causing to be built 
an ugly dissenter* s chapel in front of iOs gate, Mr. Fen¬ 
wick simply said, M Grimes, I’m not quite sure that I like 
this."(2) When Lord Fawn found himself almost hopelessly 
involved in a most undesirable alliance with Lizzie Eustace, 
he quietly said,"Lady Eustace, the position in which you 
and I stand to each other is one not altogether free from 
trouble." (3) 

The ideal gentleman is loyal to those who depend upon 
him, even In opposition to justice.(4) He Is not the least 
bit Inquisitive of other people’s private affairs, no matter 
how closely those affairs touch upon nimself$(5) and he is 

(1) Orley Farm , II, 478 

(2) The Vicar of Bullhampton, 242 

(3) The Eustace Diamonds , 149 

(4) See Sir Peregrine’s loyalty towards Mrs. Mason, In 
Orley Farm ; particularly,II, 501. 

(5) The Belton Estate , 207; The Eustace Diamonds , 443 




















* 






t 






' 

’ 



- 









' 




























164 


most discreet in discussing the attitudes and doings of 
his acquaintances• (1) 

Add to these qualities that he is composed (2), quiet- 
spoken (3), ready to sympathize and understand (4), tempe¬ 
rate in his habits (5), and simple in nis tastes (6), and 
we have a rather complete picture of Trollope* s ideal 
gentleman* 


(1) The Belton Estate , 207 

(2) The Claverings , 506 

(3) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 85; The Eustace 
Diamonds, 275 

(4) The Last Chronicle of Barset , 1, 161-2 

(5) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 120 

(6) Phineas Redux , II, 368 



























165 


CHAPTER SEVEN 

LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


(a) Courtsnip. 

Much light is thrown upon mid-Victorian ideas of prop¬ 
riety and morality by the attitudes of men and girls — 
particularly of the latter —• towards each other in their 
behaviour before marriage. In those days there were few 
'career women* as we Know them to-day: A woman* s place was 
in the home; so it is not a matter of great wonder that 
mid-Victorian English girls bent most of thfeir thoughts and 
efforts towards the Important goal of winning a husband*- 

"She (Emily Wharton), like other girls, had been 
taught to presume that it was her destiny to be 
married, and llfce other girls she had thought 
much about her destiny.... To the girl the matri¬ 
mony which is or is not to be her destiny contains 
within itself the only success or failure wnicn 
she anticipates... The girl can loom forward to 
little else than the chance of having a good man 
for her husband."(1) 

Most girls toolc this as a matter of course, and enjoyed the 
thrills of finding a suitable husband; but others, lime 
Georgiana Longstaffe (2) and Arabella Trefoil (3), found it 
to be nothing but the dullest and most exacting labour after 

| I 

many seasons of trying to secure the proper man. 

The qualities In a husband most sought for by young 

U; T.ne Jr'i-xme Minister, X, 4'7 .(^Vl ' fae Wav Wo Lira Unw — T —2u? 

( 3 ) 4K & r(C&r\ ‘tFS • 











































. 






























' 




' 


- 




. 


' 




. 




















. 


















166 


ladies were tnose possessed by such a man as John Bold:- 

"He has all those qualities which are nicely to 
touch a girl* s heart. He is brave, eager, and 
amusing; well-made and good-looking; young and 
enterprising; ms character is in all respects 
good; he has sufficient income to support a 
wife; he is ner father* s friend; and, above all, 
he is in love with her*" (1) 

Upon finding such a man, and, having brought him to 
the point where he "pops" — to use Trollope* s word — 
most girls would feel a sense of triumph, and others 
would feel nothing out gratitude: Witness, for example, 
the attitude of Grace Crawley, which must nave been applau¬ 
ded by many of the first readers of this book;- 

"Grace was embarrassed and retreated, and it was 
not till she had been compelled to give a direct 
answer to a direct question that she submitted 
to allow his arm round her waist. But when she 
had answered that question she was almost more 
humble than becomes a maiden who has just been 
wooed and won. A maiden who nas been wooed and 
won, generally thinks that it is she who has con¬ 
quered, and chooses to be triumphant accordingly. 

But Grace was even mean enough to thank her lover. 

*I do not know why you should be so good to me,* 
she said." (2) 

Grace Crawley* s shyness of being kissed by her lover may, 
however, have arisen from caution as much as from embar¬ 
rassment: - 

"There is often much of reticence on the part of 
a woman towards a man to wnom she is engaged, 
something also of shamefacedness occasionally. 


(1) The Warden , 16 

(2 ) Tne Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 433 


































167 . 

There exists a shadow of doubt, at least of that 
Hesitation which shows that m spite of vows the 
woman knows that a change may come, and that pro¬ 
vision for such possible steps backward snouid 
always be witnm her reach." (1) 

However, having once given herself to a man, our mid- 
Victorian girl — if we are to go by Trollope * 1 2 3 4 s heroines — 
would cleave unto that man alone and nave no dealings with 
any other, before marriage as strictly as after marriage. 
Emily Hotspur, 

"had ner ideas about tne delicacy and the aroma 

.of a maiden’s love. She had confessed her love 
very boidlyto tne man who had asked for it; nad 
made her rien present with a free hand, and had 
grudged nothing in the making of it. But having 
given it, she understood it to oe fixed as the 
heavens that she could never give the same gift 
again.’ 1 (2) 

Emily Wharton, who held the same view, said: - 

‘“I consider myself given away to Mr. Lopez already. 
Nothing but his marrying some other woman,-- or 
his death,— would make me think of myself other¬ 
wise than as belonging to him." (3) 

Clara Amedroz T, was ashamed of herself because she did love 

the one man, when, but a few weeks since, she had confessed 

that sne loved another.”(4) In winning the love of such 

a girl as one of these, a man could be sure , not only that 

she would be strictly true to him, dux also that she had 

never even considered being true to anyone else. Eetta Car- 

6o 


(1) Ibid ., II, 117 

(2) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , l3b-7 

(3) Tne Prime Minister , I, 250 

(4) The Belton Estate , 4u3 


















j 

* 


■ 


























lt>8 


bury was no different than the others: - 

n No doubt she gave to nim a virgin neart. No other 
man had ever touched ner lips, or been allowed to 
press ner hand, or to loo£ into ner eyes with 
unrebuKed admiration. It was ner pride to give 
ner sell to the man she loved alter tills fashion, 
pure and white as snow upon which no foot has 
trodden.” (1) 

Whether this maidenly ideal was held and put into practice 
by most mid-Victorian gins, or was simply an ideal at which 
they aimed with much or little success;* there is no way of 
telling if we ta&e our evidence from Trollope alone. There 
is only one of his gins who behaved badly with a man, and 
that was poor, misguided Carry Brattle, who allowed nerself 
to become the mother of some unknown man*s baby. The ter¬ 
ribly unrelenting condemnation of such behaviour by mid- 
Victorian society is suggested m the attitude of Carry* s 
own father, Jacob Brattle, who, in spite of this attitude, 
loved nis daughter more dearly than anything else on earth:- 

n Now the door (of Carry*s bedroom) was never 
opened before nis eyes. His last interview with 
Carry had been in that room,-- when he had laid 
his curse upon her, and bade ner begone before 
nis return, so that his decent threshold should 
no longer be polluted by ner vileness.' 1 2 (2) 

While giving to ner man f1 a virgin heart'*, a young girl 
also looked forward to her marriage not only as a thing of 
joy and pleasure, but also as a union requiring of ner stern 


(1) The Way We Live Now , II, f»91 

(2) The Vicar of Bullnampton , 42 
















16y 


duties. Lucy Morris thought: - 

"that should, it ever oe ner lot to be a man* s 
wile, she would be to mm a true, loving friend 
and companion, living his joys, and fighting, 
if it were necessary, down to the stumps of ner 
nails in ms interests." ( 1 ) 

To Emily Hotspur 1 s reeling, 

"a woman should not marry at all unless she could 
so love a man as to acknowledge to herself that 
she was imperatively required to sacrficie ail 
tha/t oeiongeojco ner for ms welfare and good." (2) 

But whatever might nave been a girl* s feelings or 
thoughts on marriage in general, or about one man in par¬ 
ticular, she was bound oy convention not to disclose them 
to him under any circumstances until after ne nad made a 
formal proposal,-- and even then she was expected to behave 
with reticence and decorum;- 

"What she thought, or what young ladies may think 
generally about young gentlemen, is not to be 
spoken openly." (3) 

"It was, to be sure, no more than natural that a 
young lady so well brought up as Miss G-rantly 
should show no signs of a passion till she was 
warranted in showing them oy tne proceedings of 
the gentleman." (4) 

The strictness of this attitude was sometimes softened, how¬ 
ever, even by such a stfccKler as Lady Lufton, who said:- 

"But then a young lady, though she need not jump 
down a gentleman 1 s throat, or throw herself into 
his face, may give some sign that she is made of 
flesh and blood." (5) ___ 

(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 49*(2) Sir Harry Hotspur of H .,i64 

(3) Orley Farm, I, 150. C 4)Framley Parsonage, 31b 
(5) Ibid ., 251 



















. 

! 

, 


» 




* 












' 




. 

, , 

■ 

' 









. 

. 

- 


■ 



















, 








. 






. • , ■ 






. 

-- 

















170 


It is to be suspected that most young ladies did show tne 
men about them that they were made of flesh and blood, else 
the men of the time would surely have been too discouraged 
to pursue them. However, the young lady had to bring her 
man to a formal proposal before she relented. Edith Brown- 
low "understood... that young women shouldn’t give away 
their hearts before they are asked for them$"(l) and Mr. 

Masters tells his daughter that "young women should be quiet 

- 

and wait till ttoeAy^BO H they’re sought after. "(2). But, 
being sought after, it is supposed that they might use their 
feminine charms to Keep their man warm. However, they would 
have to be most discreet in this, for, says Trollope, in 
one place:- 

"The offer of herself by a woman to a man is,to 
us all, a thing so distasteful that we at once 
declare that the woman must be abominable." (3) 

And m another place:- 

"It was terrible to her that any woman dear to 
ner should seem to seen for a man’s love." (4) 

If, when a man called upon a young lady, she happened 

to be alone, she should at once pretend that he was calling 

upon her mother, make excuses for her mother* s absence, and 

take immediate steps to nave ner mother Drought upon the 

scene. (3) 

(1) The Ylcar of Bullhampton , 417-8 

(2) The American Senator , 175 

(3) The Eustace Diamonds , 264 

(4) The Claverings , 395. (5) The Three Clerks, 249 






















■ 







' 


' 








“ 

' 

_ 




. 








t 

. 












t 

- 


- 


. 




, 

, , t 













171 


When the gentleman finally ''popped the question", mo 
matter how long he had been laying seige to the younfe ±ady* s 
heart, she should pretend to be taKen by surprise• This was 
evidently the case even with the elderly Lady Mason when 
proposed to by the more elderly Sir Peregrine Orme. Each of 
them was old enough to Know that such "surprise" was arti¬ 
ficial; hut they accepted it as natural•(!) An amusing 
instance of this attitude is found in Alarkc Tudor* s first 
timid avowal of love for Linda Woodward:- 

" 1 2 3 Gertrude is beautiful, very beautiful,* he con¬ 
tinued, still beating about the bush as modest 
lovers do; * but she is not the only beautiful 
girl in Surbiton Cottage, nor to my eyes is she 
the most so.* 

Linda was now quite beside herself. She Knew 
that decorum required that she should say some¬ 
thing stiff and stately to repress such language, 

.... She Knew that it behoved her to be repeliant 
and antagonistic to the first vows of a first 
lover." (2) 

Having once accepted a lover, it was a young iady*s 
first duty to tell her parents about its "A girl* s position 
in such matters is so delicate." (3) And, even though she 
may have bound a man irrevocably to her, she should not 
allow him to help her in any material way until after their 
marriage. Lady Fawn warns Lucy Morris of this:- 

"*My darling girl,... it is not exactly a question 
of belief, but one of common prudence. No girl 


(1) Orley Farm . I, 493 

(2) The Three Clerks, b5-6 

(3) The DuKe* s Children. I, 18 














- 












' 

■ 

•' I" ■ 






■ l 1 

■ ; . • 




' • ■ i ■ 




;) r • 



- ■ 




■'V ' 


1 .-:v- » 

' 




t 

























172 


should allow herself to depend upon a man before 
she is married to him. By doing so she will be 
apt to lose even his respect... She should not 
be in any respect at his disposal till he has 
bound himself to her at the altar. You may believe 
me, Lucy, when I tell you so.' 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (1) 

Until a young lady has formally accepted him, a gentle¬ 
man should not write to her nor speak to her in intimate 
terms.(2). He should not call her oy her first name.(3)» 

And, above all, he should not allow the least bit of passion 
to control nis actions towards her.(4) 

It was decidedly indecorous for a young lady to be 
seen walking alone, even in daylight (5)» with a young man 
to whom she was not engaged, or to linger anywhere with 
him (6); but to be found walking with him after dark was 
among the worst things that could happen to her.(7) It was 
not quite proper for a man and a woman to ride alone in the 
same carriage, and a great aea^ of trouble was often taken, 
because of this, in arranging the transportation of large 
mixed parties.(8) Even though they were engaged to each 
other, objection might be made to such ’intimacy 8 9 *. (9) a nd 


(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 346 

(2) Bar Chester Towers , 244; 262 

(3) Rachel Ray , 39 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds , 294-5 
The Claverings, 263 

(5) Rachel Ray , 22 

(6) Ibid ., 39 

(7) The Duke* s Children , I, 268 

(8) BarChester Towers , 316-7 

(9) The American Senator , 136 


















* 






















* 

■ 
















, 








. 
























. 

- 











173 


one young lady,who was using every trick in her full bag 

of experience in order to catch an unwilling man, seemed 

to consider that she could force that man to propose to her 

if she tola uer guardians tnat she nad driven nome with 

him in a carriage, alone, after dark.(l) 

Before leaving this topic, there is a pasaage — long 

though it be -- well-worth quoting in full:- 

“In America a girl may form a fifa£ndly intimacy 
with any young man she fancies, and though she 
may not be free from little jests and good-hu¬ 
moured joking, there is no injury io ner from 
such intimacy. It is her acknowledged right to 
enjoy herself after that fashion, and to have 
what she calls a good time with young men. A 
dozen such intimacies do not stand in her way 
when there comes some real adorer who means to 
marry her and is able to do so. She rides with 
these friends, walks with them, and corresponds 
with them, and afterwards lets herself in with 
a latchkey, while her papa and mamma are a-bed 
and asleep, with perfect security. If there be 
much to be said against the practice, there is 
also something to be said for it. G-iris on the 
other hand, on the continent or Europe, do not 
dream of making friendship with any man. A cou¬ 
sin with them is as much out of the question as 
the most perfect stranger. In strict families, 
a girl is hardly allowed to go out with her bro¬ 
ther; and I have heard of mothers who thought it 
indiscreet that a father should be seen alone 
with his daughter at a tna&tre. All friendship 
between the sexes must, under such a social code, 
be looked forward to as post-nuptial joys. Here 
in England there is something betwixt the two. 

The intercourse between young men and girls is 
free enough to enable the latter to feel how 
pleasant it is to be able to forget for awhile 
conventional restraints, and to acknowledge how 


(1) The American Senator , Chapter XL. 










, 

. 

■ 

■ 

- ' .- - ' 



_ 

* 



* 


















174 . 


joyous a thing it is to indulge in social inter¬ 
course in which the simple delight of equal mind 
meeting equal mind in equal talk is just enhanced 
by the unconscious remembrance that boys and girls 
when they meet togetner may learn to love. There 
is nothing more sweet in youth than tnis, nothing 
more natural, nothing more fitting, nothing, in¬ 
deed, more essentially necessary for God * 1 2 3 s pur¬ 
poses with his creatures. Nevertheless, here with 
us, there is the restriction, and it is seldom that 
a girl can allow herself the full flow of friend- 
snip with a man who is not old enough to be her 
father, unless he is her lover as well as her 
friend. But cousinhood does allow some escape from 
the hardship of this rule." (1) 

Before formally accepting a man* s hand, a well-behaved 
girl usually sought her father* s permission to do so; and 
was willing to abide by her father* s decision, even when he 
refused to sanction the marriage. Madeline Stavely, though 
deeply in love with the man of her chois^, was prepared to 
give him up because her father did not quite approve of 
him.(2) Emily Hotspur acknowledged her duty to abide by 
her father* s witholding of his consent for her to marry her 
cousin; but she insisted that her father had not the right 
to force her to give up her cousin.(3) of Trollope*s 

heroine* s show ajpatient willingness to abide by their father* 
adverse decisions. In only one place have I found an oppo¬ 
site attitude recommended: - 

f,tl * No doubt your papa will have it out with you 

just now; so you had better make up your mind 


(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton, 93-4 

(2) Orley Farm , II, 161; II,242 

(3) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 83 










4 











175 


what you will say to him* If you really like 
the man, I don’t see why you shouldn’t say so, 
and stick to it. He has made a regular offer, 
and girls in these days are not expected to be 
their father’s slaves.*" (1) 

But this advice was given by a woman who was not quite a 
lady; and It turned out that the marriage thus urged and 
consummated came to grief. 

The unmarried daughter was expected to live in the 
same house with her parents until she married or died; and^ 
while thereshe was subject to her parents’ will in all 
matters, great and little. A parent could, if he wished, 
read his daughter*s mail before she read it herself; and 
the daughter was usually quite willing.(2). The well-be¬ 
haved daughter would wait upon her father, bringing him 

l 

his slippers when he came home from his labours.(5) She 
was expected to be home at a decent hour at night, some¬ 
times at nine o’clock (4); in one case at half-past ten(5); 
and In another, "sometime between ten and eleven."(6) 

Yet girls were married, in spite of all these taboos 
and restrictions; and -- perhaps because of them — most 
such marriages were successful. The long seige over, the 
man, for the moment,submissive, and the girl triumphant, 

the bride would celebrate her last moment of freedom with 

(1) The Prime Minister , I, 46~~ 

(2) Rachel Ray , 206 

(3) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 4 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds , 51 

(5) Rachel Ray , 25 

(6) The Small House at Allington, I, 47 




















• 



iu: j..ii: -i " 


. 


- 











- 












' 


■ 


'; * ■. 

. 




, 

r 

- 














{ ; ;■ 








. 








t 













176 . 


as brave and showy a wedding as her father* s finances would 
permit. If it were a wedding from a rich and titled home, 
the parish bells might be rung all morning, and all the 
people of the parish would gather round the church to see 
the bride and groom. If the bride or the groom were well- 
liked, there might be bonfires, and eating and drinking by 
everyone at the father* s expense; and s^fcial comforts might 
be provided for the poor on this special occasion.(1) The 
bride* s father might give a large breakfast at his home, 
where the wedding presents would be on display. In the case 
of Lord Silverbridge* s marriage to Miss Boncassen, 

"not only were they (the gifts) displayed; but a 
list of them, with an approximating statement as 
to their value, appeared in one or two of the 
next day*s newspapers;-- as to which terrible 
sin against good taste neither was Mr. or Mrs. 
Boncassen guilty. But in these days, in which 
such splendid things were done on so very splen¬ 
did a scale, a young lady cannot herself lay out 
her friend* s gifts so as to be properly seen by 
her friends. Some well-skilled, well-paid hand 
Is needed even for that, and hence comes this 
public information on affairs which should surely 
be private. In our grandmother* s time the happy 
bride* s happy mother herself compounded the cake; 

— or at any rate the trusted housekeeper. But 
we all know that terrible tower.of silver which 
now stands niddle-noddling with its appendages of 
flags and spears on the modern breakfast-table. 

It will come to pass with some of us soon that we 
must deny ourselves the pleasure of having young 
friends, because their marriage presents are so 
costly."(2) 


(1) The Claverings , 31 

(2) The Duke * s Children . II, 375 












There might he as many as six bridesmaids; (1) and the 
ceremony might be performed by as many as four clergymen f ( 2) 

A quiet, simple country wedding, however, would have 
only one officiating parson, likely the local reetor; only 
immediate relatives, with, perhaps, a few house-guests, would 
fee present; and the bride would have no more than two maids 
of honour*(3) There might still be a wedding breakfast after 
the ceremony, with the usual voluble and dull speeches from 
the rector, the father, the groom, and the best-man*(4) 
kfter the breakfast the newly-wedded couple might be driven 
by carriage to the nearest station, where they would take 
a train to their place of honeymoon.(5) 

The most popular honeymoon place, for those who could 
afford it, was the Continent, specifically, perhaps, in 
Switzerland, or more likely in Italy*(6). However, it was 
also quite fashionable to go to the Lake District (7), or 
to Folkestone, (8) or to Wales.(9) 


(1) The Duke*s Children, II, 375 

(2) Ibid *7 11,375"“ 

(3) Ibid *, II, 376-7 

(4) The Claverings , 102-3 

(5) The Prime Minister , II, 452 

(6) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 400 
Doctor Thorne , 568 

The Prime Minister , I, 269 

(7) Doctor Thorne , 561 

(8) The Small House at Allington , II, 282 

(9) Ibid *, II, 566 























178 


(b) Married Life* 

After the honeymoon, man and wife would settle down 

to a life of devotion and service to each other according 

to the strict mid-Victorian code. In the ideal marriage 

the wife would conduct herself according to the promise 

that Trollope makes for Lady Rufford*s future behaviour:- 

11 She will be true to him and never give him cause 
;for a moment* s jealousy. She will take his title, 
his house, and his property. She will never spend 
a shilling more than she ought to do. She will 
look very sharply after him, but will not alto¬ 
gether debar him from his accustomed pleasures. 

She will grace his table, nurse his children, and 
never for a moment give him cause to be ashamed 
of her. He will think that he loves her, and, 
after a lapse of ten or fifteen years, will pro¬ 
bably be really fond of her. From the moment that 
she is Lady Rufford she will love him,-- as she 
loves everything that is her own. 1 2 3 ' (1) 

In return, the properly considerate husband would look upon 

his wife as the woman, 

11 who has sacrificed all the world to her love for 
him,-- who is the mother of his children, and the 
partner of nis sorrows and the wife of his bosom. ,f (2) 

They would have "commenced a partnership which was to make 

of them for the remaining term of their lives one body and 

one flesh."(3) In this "partnership" the husband was most 

decidedly the senior partner and could, if he wished^treat 

his wife with tyrannical severity, with the full sanction 


(1) The American Senator , 515 

(2) Framley Parsonage , 596 

(3) The Small House at Allington , II, 283 













179 . 


of the law, of society, and even of the wife herself. There 
seems to have been no limit to the husband 1 s authority over 
his wife,-- only the limits that his own affection, trust, 
and decency might set upon his behaviour. 

Indeed, the wife was the property of the husband.(1) 

She was expected to obey him in everything; The Rev. Mr. 
Crawley, who loved his wife dearly, said, when objecting to 
Dean Arabin* s gifts to her:- 

"A man* s wife is his very own, the breath of his 
nostril, the blood of his heart, the rib from 
his body. It is for me to rule my wife, and I 
tell you that I will not have it." (2) 

The less kindly Lopez maintained that, 

"His wife was his own, and she must be taught to 
endure his will, and must be made to know that 
though she was not to be kicked, yet she was to 
be tormented and ill-used." (3) 

A husband could forbid his wife to visit any of her ffciends. 

(4) He could write letters in her name, and "put any words 

that he pleased into her mouth."(5) He could, and usually 

did, keep her money in his own hands*(6) and the word, 

"partnership", sounds ironical: "I will be your true husband 

for the rest of the journey;— by which I mean it to be 


(1) 

The 

Prime 

Minister, II, 

138 

(2) 

The 

Last 1 

Chronicle of Earset, II, 395 

(3) 

The 

Prime 

Minister, II, 

61 

(4) 

The 

Way We Live Nov/, I, 

301 

(5) 

The 

Prime 

Minister, II, 

85 


(6) Rachel Ray , 204 


























180 


understood that I take you into partnership on equal terms, 
hut that I am to he allowed to manage the business just/) as 
I please."(1) According to the husband’s idea, he should 
he to his wife, 

’’The petted divinity of the household, whose 
slightest wish was law, whose little comforts 
had become matters of serious care, whose 
frowns were horrid clouds, whose smi&es were 
glorious sunshine, whose kisses were daily 
looked for, and if missed would he missed with 
mourning.” (2) 

As I have said, not only did the husband hold such 
views as these; but the wife also agreed with them, and 
was usually submissive to her husband* s will. She was "the 
partner of his bed and board, the minister who soothed his 
headaches, and made his tea, and looked after his linen." 

(3) She would usually say to him,in matters of business, 
"You know that I always think that to be best which you 
think bestj"(4) or, upon any subject, "I don’t think, Theo¬ 
dore, I care so much about my own way as some -women do. I 
am sure I always think your opinion is better than my own; 

; ■— that is, in most things;"(5) or, "Do you not know that.. 

•.. you will have to bid me in everything, and that I shall 
be bound to do your bidding?"(6) Of course, while admitting 

(1) The American Senator, 490-1 

(2) The Way We Live Now , II, 337 

(3) The Three Clerks, 185 

(4) Ibid ., 411 

(5) The Claverings, 424-5 

(6) Phineas Finn , II, 153 


















- 








' 


■ . . 

■ 

. 






S ' 

* 


■ 






, 




■ 










4 




- 












181 


her duty to obey, she could still act upon the understan¬ 
ding that “a wife.,, should be prepared to yield, but yet 
was entitled to be her husband*s counsellor.“ (1) 

But obedience of her husband was not the only bond 
that held her to him: If he was a good and kindly man who 
performed well his own part of the marriage contract, his 
wife usually treated him with unstinted loyalty and ado¬ 
ration. Gertrude Tudor stubbornly refused to admit suspi¬ 
cion of her husband:- 

“Suspicion*, suspect him, her husband, the choice 
of her heart, her Alaric, the human god whom 
she worshipped*, suspect him of robbery*, her lord, 
her heart, her soul, the strong staff on which 
she leaned so securely, with such true feminine 
confidence*.“ (2) 

When Alaric himself admitted his crime to her, 

“She answered by opening her arms to him with more 
warmth than ever, and bidding him rest his weary 
head upon her breast. Had they not taken each other 
for better or for worse? 11 (3) 

When Mr. Crawley was^taken to prison on suspicion of for¬ 
gery, all that Mrs. Crawley said was, “And I might not go 
with him?” (4) It was possible for a woman to refer to her 
“lord and master” even in such rhapsodical terms as, 

“My bosom* s own; my heart* s best hope; my spot 
of terra firma, my cool running brook of fresh 
water; my rock; my love; my lord; my all**.“ (5) 


(1) The Prime Minister , II, 77 

(2) The Three Clerks , 438. (3) Ibid., 461 

C3) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 82 
C4) The Eustace Diamonds, 173 


















182 


In his book. The Victorian Tragedy , Wingfield-Strat- 

<*rA 

ford has some ^using things to say about mid-Victorian 
marriage when he discusses the Cult of the Double Bed :- 

"The happy ending was the one in which the cham¬ 
ber door closed, for the first time, behind the 
hero and heroine, ‘Further, 1 2 3 as Mr. Robert Mont¬ 
gomery would have said, 1 the red and raging eye 
of imagination is forbidden to pry. 1 And yet one 
wonders, sometimes, how beings so apparently 
devoid of fleshly passion as the heroes and 
heroines of most Victorian novels, could ever 
have effected the transition from courtship to 
parenthood.... 

“By fearful sanctions was this hymeneal pro¬ 
priety defended. Once the goal was attained and 
the door closed, the destiny of Flora was regarded 
as finally settled. Whatever happened, there was 
no appeal and no escape.... 

“To be fruitful and multiply, in spite of the 
teachings of Mr. Malthus, was a sacred duty. That 
was what the marriage union was originally for, 
and that, too, what the Holy of Holies, the mar¬ 
riage chamber, was for.... By the strange inver¬ 
sion of propriety that reigned behind closed 
doors, any suggestion of substituting two beds 
for one would have been regarded as not very nice. 
There are old-fashioned people, even to-day, who 
have not wholly cast off this prejudice.” (1) 

But Trollope does take his readers behind the doors of 
his married people*s bed-chambers. It was in there, after 
the long day* s work, that the husband and wife had their 
little friendly talks (2), and exchanged those confidences 
too intimate and important for other ears.(3). Sometimes 
in that most private of rooms the husband would scold his 


(1) Esme Wingfield-Stratford, The Victorian Tragedy , Ch. XV 

(2) Framley Parsonage , 111 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 33 














- 





















■ 

. 








.... 

* 

■ 

. 




■ 








. 

. . . . 

. 

' ■ 












. 












183 


( 1 ) 

wife before he fell asleep; but, more often, the wife 
would take advantage of their safety from public censure 
to restore the balance of marital partnership by delive¬ 
ring to her tired spouse a curtain-lecture on his beha¬ 
viour* Archdeacon G-rantly discussed the matter of his 
father-in-law* s strange behaviour, 

"with his all-trusted helpmate, within that sacred 
recess formed by the clerical bed-curtains at 
Plumstead Episcopi. 

“How much sweet solace, how much valued counsel 
has:our archdeacon received within that sainted 
enclosure*. *Tis here alone that he unbends, and 
comes down from his high church pedestal to the 
level of a mortal man.“ (2) 

Trollope, apostrophizing Mr. Slope, agrees that, for the 
moment, he has conquered Mrs. Proudie*s control of her 
husband, the bishop, but asks: 

“Can you provide that they shall be separated at 
bed and board?.... Can you be present when those 
curtains are drawn, when that awful helmet of 
proof has been tied beneath the chin, when the 
•small remnants of the bishop* s prowess shall be 
cowed by the tassel above his head? Can you then 
intrude yourself when the wife wishes * to speak 
to her husband alone?*“ (3) 

Another lady was just as proficient as the redoubtable Mrs. 
Proudie in this bed-chamber strategy:- 

“Mary was free from her stepmother* s zeal and her 
stepmother* s persecution, at any rate, at night; 
but the poor father was hardly allowed to sleep. 

For Mrs* Masters never gave up her game as altogether 


(1) Rachel Ray , 124 

(2) The Warden , 17 

(3) BarChester Towers, 237-8 



























184 


lost. Though she might be driven alternately 
into towering passion and prostrate hysterics, 
she would still come again to the battle. 

Though his (Mr. Master's) heart sank within 
him, he was still firm. He would turn his back 
to his wife and let her/run on with her argu¬ 
ments without a word of ansv/er, till at last he 
would bounce out of bed and swear that, if she 
did not leave him alone, he would go and lock 
himself into the office and sleep with his head 
on the office desk." (1) 


Woman's place was definitely "in the home".(2) With 
business and money they were not supposed to be troubled: 
"Sir Peregrine conceived that money was a man's business, 
and that the softness of a woman's character should be pre¬ 
served by a total absence of all pecuniary thoughts and 
cares."(3) Women themselves,-- like Mrs. Furnival, for 
instance,-- might sometimes agree that "Women ought not to 
have any spheres."(4); but there were some — like Madame 
G-oesler -- who envied men their business and political 
interests, and complained that n A woman can only look on, 
and admire and long."(5) 

Women could not, of course, vote in the country's 
elections, and were considered "constitutionally ineffi¬ 
cient to take any part in returning members to Parliament." 
(6) The smug and opinionated Mr. Prong said,"Voting for 


(1) The American Senator , 358-9 • (2) Ibid ., 225 
(3) Orley Farm . I, 47 . (4) Ibid ., I, 147 

(5) Phineas Finn , II, 199 

(6) Framley Parsonage , 512 
















, . . r , . . ■ • ; O 

■ . 












185 


Members of Parliament is a thing which ladies naturally 
are not called upon to understand." (1) Again, most women 
agreed with this attitude, and many even scoffed at the 
idea of allowing toomen to vote, let alone A electing them to 
Parliament. But there were some — like Lady Laura Kennedy— 
who felt that "a woman 1 s life is only naif a life, as she 
cannot have a seat in Parliament." (2) It was her ambition 
"to be brought as near to political action as was possible 
for a woman without surrendering any of the priveleges of 
feminine inaction."(3) In Trollope’s later political 
novels, the idea of women* s suffrage is mentioned several 
times; and some interesting comments are made by his cha¬ 
racters on this 1 revolutionary* topic.(4) 

Confined to the activities of the nome as sne was, tne 

ill rin Vrnt 

mid-Victorian woman, nevertheless, nad a busy time of it. 
There was enough work^ in her home to keep her well occu¬ 
pied. If she were the wife of a poor man, she had all the 
housework to do herself; and, if she were the mistress of a 
great mansion, she had, even with tne help of a housekeeper, 
heavy responsibilities of management. 

The housewife was characterized by her bundle of keys: 
While scolding her husband the first thing in the morning, 

Mrs. G-rantly was busy "collecting all her house keys into her 

(1) Rachel Ray, 524 

(2) Phineas Finn , I, 70. (3) Ibid., I, 108 

(4) The Duke 1 s Children, I, 276T~T’he Prime Minister, I, 12b 

Ibid ., II, 124. 











* 



















, 

. 


■ 


. 











































' 


> . " 

. 




















. 









• 














. 

















X 

















: - ; 

• > < • • ; . ~ 

















. 

. 


... . . , 





166 . 


1 basket before she descended."(1) Although she did not do 
so, it is suggested that Mr$s Proudie should not have inter¬ 
fered with the bishop's business, but should khve "confined 

s 

herself to her wardrobes, stiil-xooms, and laundries." (2) 

Poor Mrs. Quiverful, with her fourteen children, and no 

other help than a giri-of-all-work, had to perforin all the 

tasks of her household, and was usually found "hot, from fne 

kitchen fire."(3). Apparently, however, ladies of Trollope's 

as 

day were not as industrious they had been formerly, for 

he talks of Lady Ushant performing her work "with the 

tenacity as to household matters, which characterized the 

ladies of the country some years since."(4) 

But the one outstanding duty of the wife was to give 

birth, regularly, to children, and to bring them up to be 

god-fearing men and women. 

"'Produce*, produce’.' was the cry, not only of its 
the VicoTian age's) prophet Carlyle, but of the 
age itself. But the output of the factory was 
less important, in the long run, than that of the 
double bed.... 

"When anaesthetics first came in, there were 
many husbands, and even some doctors, who were as 
much scandalized at the idea of mitigating the 
agonies of childbed, as a Carthaginian priest might 
have been at that of painting the hands of Moloch 
instead of red-heating them for the reception of 
infants. And however romantically chivalrous a 
husband might be in other ways, he was the most 


(1) The Warden . 90 

(2) Barchester Towers, 421 

(3) Ibid., 225 

(4) The American Senator , 484 














* 

. 

- 






. 





, 

■ 

, 










• 







. 






- 
























■ • 










187 


austere taskmaster in exacting the punctual 
succession of children that so often over¬ 
taxed his wife* s strength, and brought on pre¬ 
mature age, or death* 

"But there is no reason to believe that there 
was any general desire on the part of women to 
shirk this essential of what was then conceived 
to be their duty. The Queen herself set the 
example, and there is something heroic in her 
submitting, amidst all the cares of state, to be 
the bearer of nine children. If it was improper 
to talk about these obligations of marriage, it 
would hfeve been grossly improper to default from 
them, and the woman who attempted to do so would 
have got short shrift from her sex." (1) 

Once the marriage ceremony had been performed and the 
happy couple had gone on its honeymoon, the wife lost little 
time in fulfilling her mid-Victorian, prolific destiny?- 

"The Arabins after their marriage went abroad for 
a couple of months, according to the custom in 
such matters now duly established, and then com¬ 
menced their deanery life under good auspices... 

Mrs. G-rantly has found many more points of sym¬ 
pathy with her sister; and on a coming occasion, 
which is much looked forward to by all parties, 
she intends to spend a month or so at the deanery."(2) 

Off to such an early start, it was to be expected that the 

new mother would continue to bear children at regular and 

frequent intervals?- 

"In the course of two. rapid years, two normal chil¬ 
dren make their appearance to gladden the hearts 
of their parents." (3) 

We are not surprised to-day to find families of ten or mo±?e 
children; but such large families are invariably found among 


(1) Esme Wingfield-Stratford. The Victor i an Tragedy , Ch. XV. 

(2) Barchester Towers . 504-5 

(3) Doctor Wortle* s School , 263 
















. 

■ '• 










-VL: ; • 

. 

' 


: : 


•• ■ ■ 




■ 

. 


l . 




- 

1 ' 


















188 


the poorer classes only. In Trollope's day, however, even 
the most exalted ladies were delivered of many children. 

I have already quoted the case of the Queen herself.(l). 

In Trollope we find the Lady de Courcy who married Francis 
G-resham had become the mother of a large family:- 

"In the first twelve years of their marriage, 
children came fast into the nursery at G-reshams- 
bury. The first that was born was a boy... and 
great was the joy at the birth of an heir to 
G-reshamsbury.... But when the tenth baby, and 
the ninth little girl, was brought into the 
world, the outward show of joy was not so great."(2) 

Of these children: - 

"The two eldest, Augusta and Beatrice, lived, and 
were apparently likely to live. The four next 
faded and died one after another — all in the 
same sad year."(3) 

Mr. Wharton, a couniry-gentleman, did not manage to do so 
well, because he "had not married till he was forty, and his 
wife had now been two years dead." (4) Nevertheless, "he 
had had six children,—* of whom but two were now left to 
make a household for his old age."(5) Among the poorer 
people, *Jacob Brattle, the miller, "had married the daughter 
of a neighbouring farmer, and had had some twelve or four¬ 
teen children (sic*.). There were at this time six still 
living."(6) Although Trollope was writing in fun when he 

had his Charley Tudor com pos e t he sto ry^ of Macassar Jones, 

(1) Supra, 187 

(2) Docto r T horne . 6 . (3) Ibid ., 8. 

(4) The Prime Minister, 1, 25 

(5) Idem . 

(6) The Vi car of Bullhampt on, 34 




































- 


. 






... 

- - - - 

, 

, 

- 

- 

* 





~' ' ' ■ . ■ ■ * 


• „ • - ' _ ■ 









■ t 


- j 

* 












♦ 

. 


. 













189 


we might say that the following quotation from this story 
would be a suitable slogan for the times: - 

"May G-od be with you, and make your bed fruitful*. 11 (1) 
Such poor gentlefolk as Mrs. Crawley or Mrs. Quiver¬ 
ful, and such lowly mothers as Mrs. Erattle, had to raise 
their numerous broods with the help only of what inexperie¬ 
nced maids-of-all-work they could afford to hire; but such 
wealthier ladies as Mrs. Robarts were comfortable in "the 
attendance of nurses"(2) --(note the plural). Some of 
the more genteel mothers wisely fed their babies at their 
own breasts (3); but others employed wet-nurses:- 

"Sir Roger Scatcherd had but one child; that child 
which had been born in the days of his early 
troubles, and had been dismissed from his mother* s 
breast in order that the mother* s milk might 
nourish the young heir of G-reshamsbury 9 "(4) 

About the mother of this young heir, Trollope says:- 

"Of course Lady Arabella could not suckle the 
young heir herself. Ladies Arabella never can. 

They are gifted with the powers of being mothers, 
but not nursing-mothers. Nature gives them bo¬ 
soms for show, but not for use. So Lady Arabella 
had a wet-nurse." (5) 


Once the mid-Victorian woman was married, she was 
expected to stay married, no matter what provocation she 


(1) The Three Clerks , 271 

(2) Framley Parsonage , 235 

(3) Barchester Towers , 15 

(4) Doctor Thorne, 129 

(5) Ibid .V 28 




















190 


might have to leave her husband.:- 

“Whatever happened, there was no appeal and no 
escape. For a woman to divorce her husband was 
next door to impossible.*.... '■'The marriage 
vow was not to be lightly broken — to do so 
was to incur the guilt of treason. 11 (1) 

Trollope confirms this by calling a woman 1 s desertion 

of her husband her “last sin“.(2) In another place he saysf- 

“I will not say to you a word as to the injury 
in a worldly point of view which would come to 
you from any rupture with your husband... You 
would break the heart of your father, and send 
your mother to her grave;... you would offend 
your G-od by the worst sin that a woman can 
commit, and cast yourself into a depth of infa¬ 
my in which repentance before God is almost 
impossible, and from which escape before man is 
not permitted.” (3) 

The subject of divorce was being actively discussed at 

this time; and we find two or three references to divorce 

legislation in the novelsi Captain Aylmer, at a political 

meeting “said some word about the marriage and 'divorce 

court, condemning the iniquity of the present law, to which 

Ferivale had opposed itself violently by petition and 

general meetings.“(4) His aunt refers to “that wicked 

Divorce Act of Parliament.“(5) Even Lady Laura Kennedy, 

who keenly from her husban<P s tyranny, did not 

choose “to submit the matter to the iniquitous practices of 

t he present Divorce Co urt. u (0 ______ 

UT Esme Wingfield Stratford, The V ic tori a n Tragedy , Ch. XV. 
(2) The Small House at Aldington , I, 190. ( 3 ) Ibid .. 11,471. 
(4) The Belton Estatef~92~ (5) Ibid ., 100 
(6) Phineas Redux , II, 206 





















. ... . 





: V. • - 

. 

. 

- 




' 


















. 












■ 

t ’ . 

* 






* 


. 


. 






■ 

■ 




\ 









191 


i 


CHAPTER EIGHT 
SOCIAL LIFE 


(a) Rural Sflciaty . 

Excepting the local squire or lord and members of his 
family, the most important people in country and village 
society were the parson, the doctor and the attorney. The 
parson might take top rank because he was usually a gentle¬ 
man. The attorney might come next -- or even be equal -- 
if he were a barrister; and the doctor, unless he were 
an important specialist, or of gentle blood, would likely 
give precedence to the ©ethers. In Silverbridge, the Walkers 
were the recognized social leaders: "They lived in a great 
brick house in the middle of the town, gave dinners, to 
which the country gentlemen not unfrequently condescended to 
come, and in a mild way led the fashion in Silverbridge."(1) 
If Mr. Walker not earrf^his j|read as an attorney, it is 
to be suspected that his leadership would not have been quite 
so "mild." The squire and his family were beings apart and 
above: Lady Arabella Gresham could not walk "about the vil¬ 
lage without making some little disturbance among its inha- 
bitants." (2) In the v illage of Guestwi ck it was qu ite an 

Sect or S T^rn c? n Mnt- ° f Barset » I > 1 






























: 





























1* ■' 



' 



: 


' 








' 






'V* ■ ", 






. : r:.o f.- 










- 

. 

* 

. 





192 


event when Lady Julia de Guest 1 s carriage drove into town 
twice a week.(l) 

Even such simple events as this gave the villagers 
something to discuss; and if anything more exciting occur¬ 
red, the tongues of the whole countryside would wear the 
incident threadbare with their gossip. "Every man and woman, 
boy and girl, in the village" discussed the^fact that Mary 
Thorne no longer visited the squire’s house.(2) When Lady 
Arabella made a rare call at Mary* s house, "Mrs. Umbleby 
and Miss Gushing had quite settled between them what was 
the exact cause of the very singular event."(3) At Ailing- 
ton, old Mrs. Crump knew almost as well as Lilly Dale whe¬ 
ther the inside of Lily’s house was going to be painted.(4) 
The whole village of Baslehurst discussed the terms of a 
business deal between two of its citizens,-- a deal which 
really concerned no one but the two men themselves.(5) 

Such a scandal as the suspected forgery of the Rev. Mr. 
Crawley could keep an entire countryside buzzing with gos¬ 
sip for months on end (6). In any case, Trollope was able 
to spin out the simple yarn through two long volumes. All 
such rural goSsip was characterized by the usual exagge¬ 
ration and miss t atement;(7) and it was a l l considered as 
(T) The Small Hous e at Ailington , II, 136 
(2) Doctor Thorne , 276 . (3) Ibid ., 495 

(4) The Sm al l House at Aldington , II, 572 

(5) Rachel Ra y, 372. 

(6) The'Last Chronicle of Bar set. 

(2) Ibid ., I, 140, 141 
























* 




. 






« 




. 


' 




* 






% 








♦ 

. 

. 

, . , • '« 

. 






* . 


. 




















193 


am 'being quite proper and permissable, with even such fine 
; people as Mrs. Grantly freely admitting their participation 
I in such talk.(l) 

Village men were just as talkative as their women; and 
they found a convenient forum for thffiglr discussions in their 
village clubs. "There was a county-club in BarChester, and 
at this county-club nine men out of every ten were talking 
about Mr. Crawley."(2) There was also a "provincial club" 

(3) at Silverbridge, where "the chosen spirits" (4) of the 
town played whist and gossipped. In the village of Dills- 
borough the more prominent men met at their club every 
Saturday evening from eight till eleven in the Bush inn. 

Here each of the seven or eight members sa,t in a back par¬ 
lour, paid for their^ own drinks, and subscribed generally 
for a little supper which was eaten at about ten o’ clock. 

Country people got most of their fun by entertaining 
themselves and each other. They derived the same pleasures 
as city people from dinner parties, social calls, dances 
and games in private homes; and they had the added pleasures 
of country sports, and excursions on foot or on horseback. 

These amusements and sports will be discussed later in this 

U) Ibid ., I 9 223 ~ 

(2) Ibid . , I, 60 

(3) Ibid .. II, 329 

(4) Idem . 











- 















. 



■ 






. 


- 

* 










- 





. 










. 





- 


. 




. 






I , , 

< '■ « 


























194 


chapter, after a word has been said about the "London 
Season"♦ 


(b) The London Season, 

One of the features of English social life most often 
mentioned in Trollope's novels is the migration of well-to- 
do people up to London very early in the spring and down to 
their country places late in the summer. The length of the 
"season" in London was pretty well defined by the opening 
and the adjournement of Parliament. To Members of Parliament 
this time spent in London was, of course, their time of 
labour; and their departure at the end of each session markec 
the beginning of their annual vacation. Sometimes Parlia¬ 
ment would adjourn in July; but it got into the way of sit¬ 
ting on into the months of August and September. Those mem¬ 
bers of higher society who were not bound to remain would 
not, however, lengthen their London season to these autumn 
months. By 1874 Parliament seemed to have settled down into 
this habit of a late adjournment, for Trollope says:- 

"it was now the end of June, and the weather was 
delightful;— but people were not as yet flocking 
to the seashore. Every shopkeeper in every little 
town through^fthe country now follows the fashion 
set by Parliament and abstains from his annual 
holiday till August or September." (1) 

The more or less bucolic pleasures of the summer and 
autumn finished, the leaders of England, with their wives 


(1) The Way We Live N ow, I, 434 



















. 

* 

. 








- 




- 


, 










. 




. 


I 


- 

■ 






. 








« 





















. 






. 

























‘ 











' 













195 


and daughters, sons and brothers, aunts and uncles, and 
winter guests, would flock up to London for a season of 
politics, parties, grand social affairs where they went to 
see and to be seen, evenings at the theatre and the opera, 
mornings in the park, and afternoas in an endless round of 
social calls, visits to the Horticultural Gardens and great 
gatherings at the Academy* While their husbands settled the 
affairs of the realm, the mothers laboured for equally long 
hours with more than equal political skill in arranging the 
destinies of their marriageable daughters and eligible sons. 

The London season was, roughly, six months long. We 
are told that London "was becoming fairly full 51 during the 
third week in January.(1) Those who could not arrange their 
absence from the country, or could not afford a long season 
in town, usually waited until April or May before going up. 
This was also true of those who wished to stay in the coun¬ 
try for the hunting.(2) The month of May was a gayer time 
in town than the three.preceding months.(2) It was the 
habit of some ofjthe gentry to spend only six weeks in Lon¬ 
don, during April and May;(4) while others lengthened their 
stay into June.(5) The greatest activity of the London sea¬ 
son occurred during the months of May, June and July. (6) 

(1) The Small House at Allington , II, 176-7 

(2) Ibid., II, 243 . (3) Ibid ., II, 333 

(4) The 3elton Estate , 24. (50 The Claverings , 185 

(6) The Last Chronicle of Barset, I, 249. 























, 

- 

\ , . 

. .. 

■ 



■ 


. 










































, 












. 

. 






196 


In one place we find that Mr. Palliser was kept in 
London until July by his Parliamentary duties.(1) The first 
of August is the date when others ‘’always fly away".(2) 
London was not a pleasant place for fastidious people later 
than this date:- 

"The session was protracted for two months after 
that,— beyond the time at which grouse should 
have been shot,-*- and by the 23rd of August be¬ 
came the law of the land. * I shall never get 
over it,* said Mr. Ratler to Mr. Finn, seated 
one terribly hot evening on a b&nch behind the 
Cabinet Ministers,-- ’never. I don’t suppose 
such a session for work was ever known before. 

Think what it is to have to keep men together 
in August, with the thermometer at 81, and the 
river stinking like,-- like the very mischief.’"( 3 ) 

We find, however, a little later on, a reference made to 

August 10th as the date "which may be considered as the 

great day of the annual exodus."(4) 

If people complained when there was an extra long ses¬ 
sion of Parliament, they were also disappointed when the 
session was shorter than usual:- 

"Men do not really like leaving London before the 
grouse calls them,-- the grouse, or rather the 
fashion of the grouse. And some ladies were very 
angry at being separated so soon from their swains 
in the city. The tradesmen, too, were displeased,-- 
so that there were voices to re-echo the abuse.."( 5 ) 

We find other references to the dismay and anger of London 


C 1 * 3 4 ) The Small House at Allington, II, 473 

( 2) The L ast Chron icl e of Barset ," I, 249 

(3) Phineas Finn , II. 99 

(4) Phineas Redux , I, 16 . ( 5 ) The Prime M inister 


9 


n,8 
















* 

« 




- 

. 

, 

« 






. 

, 




- 


. 










* 




■ 






- 










- , 


« 





















197 


tradesmen over the early closing of Parliament.(1) The 
unexpected departure o^ so many wealthy customers must have 
been a serious loss to them. Socially, the months of August 
September and October were the dullest of the year in Lon¬ 
don. Only those members of higher society, such as Civil 
Servants, members' of the Cabinet, London clergymen, and so 
on, whose work required it, remained in London. Most of 
these people tried to see to it that their holidays would 
take them out of town in 0ctober.(2) At this time one would 
finA "the streets of the West End nearly deserted."{3) But 
there is a suggestion that a man might begin to find conge¬ 
nial company in town after the end of October (4),-- per¬ 
haps because of the early return of those who had to prepare 
for Parliament and of those who had had their vacations. A 
bleak picture is drawn of London* s off-seasons - 

"The streets at the West End were deserted. The 
houses were shut up. The very sweepers of the 
crossings seemed to have gone out of town. The 
public offices were manned by one or two unfor¬ 
tunates each, who consoled themselves by reading 
novels at their desks. Half the cab-drivers had 
gone apparently to the seaside,-- or to bed. The 
shops were still open, but all the respectable 
shopkeepers were either in Switzerland or at their 
marine villas. n ( 5) 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 407; Phineas Finn , 340; Ibid ., 384. 

(2) The Small “'House at Allington , I, 77 

(3) Ibid ., I, 467 

(4) Phineas Redux , I, 221 

(5) The Prime Minister . II, 303 
























198 


(c) Social Affairs. 

1* House Parties : - 

Towards the end of the London season hosts and hostesses 
would be busy arranging summer and autumn parties at their 
country places; and thosejtfho did not own such country estates 
would be just as busy angling for invitations. Such an 
invitation might be an informal verbal suggestion, or quite a 
formal written request. Or a host might ask some of his 
farther neighbours to come and stay for two or three days, 
to enjoy the hunt, the shooting, or to meet some other guests 
At such a party there might be people coming and going every 
day.(1) 

There might be a dance or two for the house-guests and 

friends in the immediate neighbourhood.(2) In any case, 

pleasure was the keynote* as Senator G-otobed remarked: - 

“industry ... is a crime. You are there to glide 
through the day luxuriously in the house,-- or 
to rush through it impetuously on horseback or 
with a gun if you be a sportsman." (3) 

The number of guests might vary from three or four 

neighbours to more than ten times that many comparative 

strangers; Said the Duchess of Omnium to her housekeeper, 

"You may take it for certain... that there will never be 

less than forty for the next two months."(40 But this num- 

(1) The American Senator, 243* (2) Ibid., 110 

(3) Ibid ., 355 

(4) The Prime Minister , I, 207 





































. 


. 








- 

- 

. 


■ 










* 











-, 




• 


- 








• 












. 





199 


ber was to be found only at such grand affairs as that one 
given by the Duchess of Omnium* In preparation for it 
ground was moved, grass laid down, a new gravel road con¬ 
structed, tents erected, conservatories re-stocked with 
exotics, and an acre of ground fenced off for archery.(1) 
Inside the great house, the Duchess had things well arranged: 

’’The servants are all turned out over the stables 
somewhere..* And by knocking down the ends of two 
passages we’ve brought everything together* And 
the rooms are all numbered just like an inn*It 
was the only way. And I keep one book myself, and 
Locock has another* I have everybody* s room, and 
where it is, and how long the tenant is to be al¬ 
lowed to occupy it* And here* s the way everybody 
is to take everybody down to dinner for the next 
fortnight. Of course that must be altered, but it 
is easier when we have a sort of settled basis. 

And I have some private notes as to who should 
flirt with whom.” (2) 

Such a gigantic party was a very expensive affair for 
the host. But guests, too, found that house parties were 
costly to themselves. Mark Robarts hesitated to attend 
the Duke of Omnium’s “gathering” ,”for he knew that a man 
does not stay at great houses without expense.“(3) In fact, 
before he left the Duke* s house, he had to write to his 
wife for ten pounds.(4) Such a guest “must take a man-ser¬ 
vant with him among the distinguished guests; he must fee 
game-keepers, pay railway fares, and have loose cash about 


(1) The Prime Minister, I, 209-10 

(2) Ibid *, 217-8 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 36 

(4) Ibid., 43 


















. 







, t 


■ 






. 

. 

- 

- 


* 

' 








. 

* 





‘ 


. ■ 














* 










. 








































200 

him for a hundred purposes."(1) 

2. Balls and Dances :- 

Balls in London were usually characterized by their 
brilliance, their extravagance, and the distinction of their 
important guests. One such ball boasted the presence of two 
royal duchesses, three princes, foreign ambassadors, an edi¬ 
tor, the Prime Minister, "and as for earls and countesses, 
and their daughters, they formed the ruck of the crowd.”(2) 
The ball given by the Melmottes was said to cost sixty thou¬ 
sand pounds*. (3) There the guests milled about the many 
rooms, danced waltzes and quadrilles, played whist, and triec 
to see to it that their names got into the papers.(4) The 
ball might last until three or four o* clock in the morning. 

(5) 

Dances were intended more for fun than *balls, and less 
for show. Usually refreshements at a dance were to be had 
at any time during the evening, although they were sometimes 
served at one time in the form of a supper.(6) The general 
rule, however, was light refreshment, such as lemonade and 
ices(7), and sometimes, if the host could afford it, cham¬ 
pagne.(8) Aside from a little innocent n hand-pressing u (9), 

(1) Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite, 116. (2) Ibid., 51. 
(3) The Way We Live Now, I, 34. (4) Ibid ., I, IV. 

(5) The Three Clerks, 315 

(6) Ibid., 320 

(7) Framley Parsonage , 223 

(8) Ibid ., 219T (9) Ibid., 223 























* 






. 











, 


. 






. 

’ t 







, ' 1 












J 






. 


. - 








< 





, ;; 










, , 




















t 










• - 


. 

* ... . 










201 

the entertainment was confined to a full evening of rather 
strenuous dancing, the most popular dahces being the polka 
and the quadrille. Sometimes, during the evening, the guests 
would line up for the more formal lancers.(1) Clementina 
G-olightly was particularly enthusiastic over "that new thing 
they have just brought over from Spain -- the Contraban- 
dista."(2) There is a suggestion in one place that the 
musicians were in the habit of playing as long as there was 
someone on the floor*(3) and they must have been almost as 
fatigued as the dancers, one of whom complained, "Both my 
shoes are quite worn out, and my toes are all out on the 
floor."(4) 

3* Soirees :- 

These were evening gatherings at which people came and 
went at random, chatted with each other, partook of some 
light but expensive refreshment, end, perhaps, did a little 
dancing. ( 5) 

4. Conversaz ione; - 

A conversazione was nothing much more than a soiree 
on a large scale. At Mrs. Proudie's affair, scores of 
guests sat and stood about, and "four times during the two 

(1) The Three Clerks , 318 

(2) Ibid., 436 

(3) Ibid,, 317 

(4) Ibid ., 323 

(5) Framley Parsonage , 181 


























- 




. 

























- 














- 


. 


* . 

- 


















. 




- 

. 

. 

, 



, : 








i 

.. 

... 















202 

hours* period of her conversazione tea and cake were to 

be handed around on salvers."( 1) 

5. Dinner Parties and Banquets :- 

Much of a family* s entertaining was done by means of 

giving dinnei/parties. These were small or large, scanty or 

sumptuous, depending upon the social position and wealth 

of the host. Trollope decries the passing of expensive 

dinners, but admits the economical advantages of having 

less costly affairs which necessitated the employment of 

fewer servants.(2) Usually, however, even at these, the 

ladies and gentlemen dressed in most formal costumes, and 

the tablesw© were decorated with candles and silverware to 

■> 

the best of the hostesses ability.(3) 

Such a great man as the Duke of Omnium could give vast 
dinner-parties in his castle, so vast that he calledjthem 
11 collections". ( 4) 

At all such dinners, semi-public ones or intimate 
home meals, rules of precedence were strictly observed and 
each lady was "taken down" to the dining-room by a suitable 
gentleman.(5) At some dinners, even the intimate little 
ones given by Madame G-oesler, there was a bill of fare, 
either printed or written out by hand.(6) After the meal 

U) Ibid., 184. 

(2) Bar chester Towers , 342. (3) Idem . 

(4) Doctor T horne, 566. (50 The L ast Chronicle of B . ,1,246 

(6) Phineas Firm , II, 167 




























- 

* 

♦ 


. 


. 

- 

' 










. , 








- 




,. .. ■ 


- 


. 





- 










. 










- 








* 


. 

. 



, 





* 











. . . 




. * ■ 

. 










203 


had been eaten, the ladies would retire, leaving the men 
to drink their wine around the table• 

Banquets were simply dinner parties on a larger scale. 
And sometimes that scale was very large indeed: Mr* Mel- 
motte, for instance, was chosen to give the banquet for the 
Emperor of China on condition that he would spend ten thou¬ 
sand pounds on itl (1) 

”0n the 20th of June (two weeks before the banquet) 
the tradesmen were at work, throwing up a building 
behind, knocking down walls, and generally trans¬ 
muting the house in Grosvenor Square in such a 
fashion that two hundred guests might be able to 
sit down to dinner in the dining-room of a British 
merchant.” (2) 

Following the dinner, eight hundred more people were to be 
admitted by ticket to an evening entertainment.( 3) 

6* Social Calls: - 

Morning calls were fashionable (4), more in the country 
where people started their days early, than in the later- 
rising city. The "morning”, of course, might be as late as 
twelve o’clock noon;(5| and, as a matter of fact, this 
hour is the only one Trollope mentions for the making of 
morning calls.(6) 


(1) The Way W e Live Now, I, 298 

(2) Ibid., 327. ~T3) Ibid ., 328 

(4) Barc hester To wers , 125 

(5) IbidV ,~ 437 

(6) Docto r Thorne, 495 
The Clave rings, 249 

T he Eustace Diamo nds, 483 














. 

* 

- 


- . 

. 

- 

♦ 


. ' ■ ' 

. . 

. 




* 







' 


t 



■ 










204 


Three o'clock, or "after three", is the only time 

mentioned at which afternoon calls were made.(l) Nine 

(3) 

o' clock (2) and ten ©'clock are mentioned as the times for 
evening calls. 

A lady who happened to be popular, or very busy social¬ 
ly, might arrange to have all her callers come to her at 
certain times, when she would be "at home." "I always re¬ 
ceive on Sundays,"(4) said Lady Dumbello; and she would en¬ 
tertain at that time in "crowded rooms."(5) u Lady Baldock 

ii >i 

had evenings. People went to her house, and stood about the 
room and on the stairs, talked to each other for half an 
hour and went away."(6) 


(d) Amusements and Sports. 

Mid-Victorian people had to depend, much more than we 
do, upon themselves for their entertainment: That they made 
a good job of it is attested to by the number of amusements 
mentioned in the pages of Trollope’s novels. The following 
are some that I have particularly noticed:- 


(1) Bar Chester To wers, 247 
Rache l Ray. 194 

The Claverings, 180 

(2) BarChester Tow e rs , 162 
Framley Parsonage , 302 

(3) Ibi d., 329* T he Way We Live Now , I, 103 

(4) The Sm all H ouse at All ington, if, 245 

(5) Ib id ., II, 246 

(6) Phineas Fi nn. I, 244 





























* 









, 








- 


. 









. 



1 

. 



























■ 






■ 



205 


Chess: Played by both men and women* (Barch T. 156) (1) 
Whist: The most-mentioned card game. (Claverings, 148) 
Loo: Used largely for gambling* (Duke’s Ch., I, 59) 
Commerce: a card game. (Orley Farm, I, 377) 

Billiards: Played mostly in private homes.(Fram.P., 138) 

K 

Bac^ammon; (The Three Clerks, 142) 

Shuttlecock and battledor: (Last Chronicle, I, 277) 
Questions and Answers: (Ibid., I, 277) 

Piquet: (The Eustace Diamonds, 19) 

Snapdragon: 4 children’s game. (Orley Farm, I, 304) 
Blind-man* s-buff: (Idem.) 

Writing games: (Barchester Towers, 314) 

Charades: (The Eustace Diamonds, 19) 

Hunt-the-slipper: (Last Chronicle, I, 277) 

Cat’s cradle: (Ibid., II, 68) 

Marbles: (Barchester Towers, 418) 

Proverbs: (Last Chronicle, I, 277) 

Private theatricals: (The American Senator, 187) 

Fibes: (The Warden, 97) 

Archery: (Orley Farm, I, 23) 

Croquet: (very popular)(The Eustace Diamonds, 19) 

Tennis: (Last Chronicle, I, 277) 

(1) Some of these amusements are mentioned in sveral places 
in the novels. I have made only one reference to each 
game. 


1 














*. 
















. 

. 








■ 

- 




' 




: v •• ' .. - 

, ; 




, 









• 























. 








. 
















206 


Skating: (Phineas Finn, I, 110) 

In addition to these, the men indulged in more active 
sports, such as: - 

Fishing: (The American Senator, 512) 

Steeplechase: (Phineas Finn, I, 383) 

Big game hunting: (The American Senator, 5) 

Cockfighting: Not considered gentlemanly. (Orley F.,I) 
Pigeon-shooting: (Not gentlemanly) (Phineas Finn, I, 383 
Rat-hunting: Not gentlemanly. (Orley Farm, I, 29) 
Grouse-Shooting, and Fox-Hutrting were the sports par 
excellence for gentlemen* They spent so much of their time 
at M, and Trollope has so much to say about them that a 
separate chapter will he devoted to their discussion. 















’ 


- 

■ 

? 

, 

- 


. 




.• ■ 


» 




. 














































207 

j 

CHAPTER NINE 
SHOOTING AND HUNTING 

(a) Shooting 

The shooting of grouse started as early as August In 
some places. Lady Fawn complains that the grouse-shooting 
season puts a stop to all work on her estate in August, when 
her servants asked for time off to shoot grouse on the moors, 

(1) But the season proper usually started in September; 
and Parliament made every effort to get its late session 
finished "before the grouse should begin to crow and put an 
end to the doings of gods as well as giants."(2) Other refe¬ 
rences are made to September as the time the grouse season 
begins.(3) The season in Scotland officially opened on the 
12th of September,(4)-- that is, for grouse; pheasant-shoo¬ 
ting began in October.(5) 

It seems that the best grouse-shooting was to be had 
in Scotland, where wealthy Englishmen maintained extensive 
shooting establishments. Endless trouble and great expense 
were incurred to make these places productive of game. At 

vV ** 

Crummie-Toddie, for instance, an enormous acreage of forest 

(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 137 

(2) Framley Parsonage . 249 1 

(3) Th e Small Ho use a t Allington , I, 55 
Ibid.~, II, 533 

(4) Phine as Finn, I, 388 

(5) Th e Eustace Diamonds, 243 





























. 









- 








. 
























* 














. 




t ' 


. 








» 

. 








208 

and moor had been purchased. M Everything had been made to 
give way to grouse and deer... the tourist nuisance had been 
considerably abated.There was hardly a potato patch left in 
the district, nor a head of cattle to be seen. There were no 
inhabitants remaining, or so few that they could be absorbed 
in game-preserving or cognate duties."(1) In this paradise 
of game, hunters went forth with their guns and worked as 
though their lives depended upon the shooting of vast numbers 
of birds and animals. 

But everyone could not enjoy this sport. For instance, 

yj 11 <j - 

there was no A grouse~shooting to be had in the south (2), and 
a man living there, if he were poor, had to do without his 
shooting. If he were wealthy, however, and had the land upon 
which to do it, he could preserve game for shooting: It was 
"the amusement of gentlemen when a man chances to have the 
command Og game. u (3) G-rouse did not lend themselves to arti¬ 
ficial care, and most preserving was limited to pheasants. 

A man could, however, rent from a landowner the exclusive 

right to shoot the game upon his land. (4) ¥e find that this 

( 5 ) 

privilege cost one sportsman thirty or forty pounds a year. 

The shooting of game was a very expensive sport. In 
spite of the fact that they "killed legions of pheasants 

(1) The Duke 1 s Children , I, 361 ! 

(2) Phlneas Redux , II, 366 

(3) The Small House at Aldingt on, I, 405 

(4) The Belton Estate , 23 

(5) Ibid;, 41 

























* 

' 


. 







• - 

. 


. ' 


- 






- 


■ . • • 

* 

. 


• 



- 

. 
















. . 




, • 



























. 










, ' . 














209 


annualy, the expenses of the Primeros amounted to about ten 1 * 3 4 5 6 
shillings per head head of game.(l) Lord Popplecourt, how¬ 
ever, said that he could make the sport pay by selling his 
game at Leadenhall Market.(2| Among the expenses incurred 
were railway fares, purchase of several guns, license fees, 
purchase or rent of dogs, and the payment of game-keepers. 
Where game was preserved, the owner would invite his 
friends to a day*s pheasant-3hooting. After such a day at 
Gatherum Castle seven cartloads of pheasants were brought in 
as the produce of eight guns’. (3) Just for something to do 
a host and jjis friend might walk over fifteen miles of ground 
to shoot at a few birds.(4) While the gentlemen were out, 
lunch might be sent down to the covert side, where the ladies 
would join the sportsimtTu(5} As a rule, women did not shoot: 
Thdjmen would hardly allow them into the woods, even to help 
as beaters, because they would “make too much noise to be of 
any use.“(6) 

Although the men who enjoyed shooting also to 

hounds, there was an intense, but friendly^ feud between the 
champions of either sport. If foxes v/ere to be preserved, 
there could be little shooting in that vicinity, because the 

(1) The Way We Live Now, I, 49 

( 2) The Duke 1 s" Chi ldrenI, 340 

(3) Framie y Parsona ge, 125 1 

(4) The Small Hous e at Alling ton, I, 123-4 

(5) Phineas Redux , I, 192 

(6) The Small House at A llington, I, 55 























, 

_ 

v ' . 








« 

. 




' 


7 ' •" 










< 





. 




• 



- 






* 








4 

* 






t 











- 

» 









210 


foxes would devour the game; and if game was to be preserved, 
!foxes had to be kept pretty well out of the way. But both 
foxes and game were preserved — perhaps not too close to 
each other -- and the sportsmen blithely ignored the fact 
— which they called fantastic (1) — that both pheasants 
and foxes injured the farmers’ crops and poultry. If they 
did not ignore it, they made the farmers happy with munifi¬ 
cent indemnities. The attitude taken by the Duke of Omnium 
was, to sportsmen, nothing short of sacrei&gious: - 

111 1 don't care a straw for a head of game, Lord 
Ghiltern. As far as my own tastes go I would 
wish that there was neither a pheasant nor a 
partridge nor a hare on any property that I own. 

I think that sheep and barn-door fowls do better 
for everybody in the long run, and that men who 
cannot live without shooting should go beyond 
thickly-populated regions to find it. They do 
not interest me, and I fancy that they will be < 

gradually exterminated.' 

"' God forbid*.' excalimed Lord Ghiltern." (2) 

It is to be suspected that Trollope, the ardent hunts¬ 
man, shared the views of the Dillsborough Club:- 

"Then there came on that well-worn dispute among 
sportsmen, whether foxes and pheasants are or are 
not pleasant companions to each other. Every one 
was agreed that, if not, then the pheasants should 
suffer, and that any country gentleman who allowed 
his game-keeper to entrench on the privileges of 
foxes in order that pheasants might be more abun¬ 
dant was a 'brute' and a 'beast', and altogether 
unworthy to live in England." (3) 

----—-—------ “ ~ -—--—--—3 

(1) Ptineas Redux, I, 145 

(2) Ibid ., II, 59 

(3) The American Senator , 25 




















- 








- 






. 

« 

, 


; 




i 


. 

... 


- 

















211 


(b) Hunting* 


While living in Ireland, Anthony Trollope took up the 
sport of hunting; and for the rest of his life there was 
nothing he liked better than to ride to hounds. Although he 
did the work of two men — as a novelist and as a postal 
inspector — he always managed to join a Meet if one was 
being held within reach.(1) Hi^passion for hunting is shown 
in the many swift, exciting descriptions of hunts to be 
found in his novels. There are several of these that would 


( 2 ) 


rank high in English sporting literature; but I recommend, 
as being most readable, those in The American Senator , 


The hunting season lasted from the beginning of October 
to the end of March,(3) During this time the huntsmen coverec 
many miles of ground, not only in the chase itself, but in 
travelling to and from the various Meets, Each Meet hunted 
four or five days a week;(4) and to get to these Meets, the 
huntsman left long before the normal breakfast time, usually 
stayed out most of the day, and returned barely in time for 



hunt corn- 


dinner and an early bed 


(1) Anthony Trollope, Autobiog raphy. 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 384^B1 Ibid ., 396-401 
( The Eustace Diamonds , Gh. XXXVIII 

Phineas Redu x, I, Ch. XIV; Ibid ., 162-178 

The American Senator , 56-76; Ibid ., 148-51; Ibid ., 506-13 

The Duke 1 2 3 4 s Children , II, 218-20; Ibid ., II, 222-6 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 151 

(4) Phineas Redux, I, 194 
Ibid., II, 133 





























* 


• 






















> 








- 

- 











: 

■ o 

, . 



. 







- 













, , 






, . 





















212 


paratively close to them when it was only twelve miles away; 
but, when it was sixteen mileslaway, "they would use the 

( 1 ) 

railway — having the carriages sent to them in the evening" 
Lord Chiltern would ride as far as eighteen miles to take 
charge of a Meet.(2) And 

"a regular hunting man like Lord Rufford knew how 
to compass the difficulties of distance in all 
hunting countries. Horses could go by one train 
or overnight, and he could follow by another. And 
a postchaise could meet him here or there." (3) 

Hunting was much more expensive ihan shooting. Most 
men felt the need of at least two horses; and, if they went 
out often or far, they had to supply a groom with a mount 
as well. But those who could afford it^kept stables of as 
many as seven or eight horses.(4) Beside the feeding of 
these horses, money had to be spent on their care and upon 
their transportation to distant Meets.(5) The horse itself 
would cost its owner at least 180 pounds.(6) The members 
of a hunt were also required to pay annual fees of about 
25 pounds each;(7) but,before this time, country gentle¬ 
men prided themselves on being able to hunt the country at 

(8) 

their own expense, without paying subscriptions to any club. 


(1) The Eustace Diamonds , 278 

(2) Phineas Redux , I, 149 

(3) The American Senator , 248 

(4) Framley Passonage , 101; Phineas Finn , I, 190 

(5) The Eustace Diamonds, 279 

(6) Ibid., 277 

(%) The American Senator , 6 
(8) Ibid ., 8-9 





















. 
















* 

. 

. 

. • 








- 


* 






„ ■ ■ 









. 










- 












. 


■ 













* 




■ 




















213 

It was possible for a man without a residence in a 


particular locality to join the Meet in that locality, if 

the others wished to receive him, merely by paying his dues. 

Such a man — and Trollope, himself, might have been one of 

( 1 ) 

them — could go down to the Meet on a special hunting train. 
He could put himself up at an inn especially devoted to hun¬ 
ting. Such a place was the Willingford Bull, 

"an English inn of the old stamp, which had now, 
in these latter years of railway travelling, 
ceased to have a road business,-- for there were 
no travellers on the road, and but little posting, 

— but had acquired a new trade as a depot for 
hunters and hunting men. The landlord let out 
horses and kept hunting stables, and the house 
was generally filled from the beginning of Novem¬ 
ber till the middle of April. Then it became a 
desert in summer, and no guests were seen there, 
till the pink coats flocked down again into the 
shires." (2) 

(3) 

The usual rental charge for a horse was three guineas a day. 

Thejgreatest expense of hunting fell upon the amateur 
Master of Hounds, who invariably found that the hunt sub¬ 
scription did not cover all his expenses. Indeed, these 
expenses helped to ruin Squire Gresham.(4) The M.F.H. was 
undoubtedly a .great man in hunting circles. During a Meet, 
and in all affairs relating to the breeding and killing of 
foxes, he wielded tyrannical authority in his club. G-resham 
was admirably suited to the position of M.F.H.:- 


(1) Phineas F i nn , I, 211; The Duke 1 2 3 4 s Children , II, 158 

(2) Phineas Finn , I, 260 

(3) The Eustace Di a monds , 276 ; The American Senator , 130 

(4) Doctor Thome. 






















» 


' 




. 

, 

. 

- 

* 








. 








r ■ 




. 

. 


















« ■- 













214 


“He was known as an excellent sportsman, as one 
knowing in dogs, and tender-hearted as a sucking 
mother to a litter of young foxes; he had ridden 
in the county since he was fifteen, had a fine 
voice for a view hallo, knew every hound by name, 
and could wind a horn with sufficient music for 
all hunting purposes; moreover, he had come to 
his property ... with a clear income of fourteen 
thousand a year.' 1 2 (1) 

Under the influence of a competent Master of Hounds: 

“Hunting prevails; hunting men increase in numbers; 
foxes are preserved; farmers do not rebel; owners 
of coverts, even when they are not hunting men 
themselves, acknowledge the fact, and do not dare 
to maintain their pheasants at the expense of the 
much better-loved four-foCted animal. Hounds are 
bred, and horses are trailed specially to the 
work. A master of fox hounds is a necessity of 
the period.“ (2) 

The following is an excellent description of the ideal M.F.H. 

“it isbssential that a Master of Hounds shouldlbe 
somewnat feared by the men who ride with him. There 
should be much awe mixed with the love felt for 
him. He should be a man with whom the other men 
will not care to argue; an irrational, cut and 
thrust, unscrupulous, but yet distinctly honest 
man; one who can be tyrranical, but will tyrranize 
only over the evil spirits; a man capable of in¬ 
tense cruelty to those alongside of him, but who 
will know whether his victim does in truth deserve 
scalping before he draws his knife. He should be 
savage and yet good-humoured; severe and yet for¬ 
bearing; truculent and pleasant in the same moment. 

He should exercise unflinching authority, but should 
do so with the consciousness that he can support 
it only by his ov/n popularity. His speech 

should be short, incisive, always to the point, 
but never founded on argument. His rules are based 
on no reason, and will never bear discussion. He 
must be the most candid of men, also the most close; 

-- and yet never a hypocrite. He must condescend 
to no explanation, and yet must impress men with an 


(1) Doctor Thorne , 13 

(2) Fhineas Redux, I, 71 













215 


assurance that his decisions will certainly be 
right. He must rule all as. though no man’s 
special welfare were of any account, and yet 
must administer all so as to offend none. Friends 
he must have, but not favourites. He must be 
self-scarificing, diligent, eager, and watchful. 

He must be strong in health, strong in- heart, 
strong in purpose, and strong in purse. He must 
be economical and yet lavish; generous as the 
wind and yet obdurate as the frost. He should be 
assured that of all human pursuits hunting is the 
best, and that of all living things a fox is the 
most valuable. He must so train his heart as to 
feel for the fox a mingled tenderness and cruelty 
which is inexplicable to ordinary men and women. 

His desire to preserve the brute and then to Kill 
him should be equally intense and passionate. And 
he should do it all in accordance 'with a code of 
unwritten laws, which cannot be learnt without 
profound study.” (1) 

One Master of Hounds complained:- 

“From the first of August to the end of May I never 
have a day to myself, what with cubbing and then 
the season, and entering the young hounds, and 
buying and selling horses; by G-eorge I’m at it the 
whole year*.” (2) 

Such a man could spend ”a great part of the day handling the 
hounds and the horses, dressing wounds, curing sores, and 
ministering to canine ailments.”(3) 

It was better if the Master of Hounds was a gentleman 
of property in the county,-- a man whom farmers would res¬ 
pect, and with whom they would be inclined to deal with 
some affection.. This was advisfeable because hunting men 
did considerable damage to farmers’ property; add, if a hunt 


(1) Bhineas Redux , I, 73-4 

(2) Th e American Senator , 443 

(3) The Duke’ s C hildren , I, 346 



















. 


■ 



















. 




. • 












' 


- 




. 








. 

































’ 





216 


v/as to be conducted with a minimum of trouble and expense, 
it needed a leader who could mollify and do business with 
the farmers. For the damage caused when hunters knocked 


down his fences and rode over his crops one farmer was of- 

( 1 ) 

fered seven shillings and sixpence an acre as compensation. 

If he sent in the heads of poultry damaged or devoured by 

goto W 

foxes, he received payment for them. (2) Senator A gives the 
Y/orst side of the picture in these words addressed to a pub¬ 


lic gathering in London:- 

,}, lt will be impossible to make my countrymen be¬ 
lieve that a hundred harum-scarum tomboys may 
ride at their pleasure over every man* s land, dog*y e y £ 
destroying crops and trampling down fences, going, 
if their vermin leads them there, with reckless 
violence into the sweet domestic gardens of your 
country residences;— and that no one can either 
stop them or punish them. An American will believe 
much about the wonderful ways of his British cou¬ 
sin, but no American will be got to believe that 
till he sees it.” (3) 

If a farmer, smarting under a sense of wrong, or a game- 
keeper anxious to preserve his pheasants, trapped or killed 
a fox, he was guilty, in the eyes of hunting men, of the 
most heinous crime and was called a murderer, or a "vulpi¬ 
cide”. (4) On the other hand, the preservation of foxes was 
a matter of honour; said Major G-rantly, "I feel sure that 
every gentleman v/ho preserves a fox does good to the coun- 


(1) The American Senator, 21 

(2) Ibid., 108-9 

(3) Ibid., 541 

(4) Ibid., 27 














* 













' 

■ 
















• ■ 






217 

try;"(}.) and according to Lord Chiltern a man* s property 
was not his own in one sense, for he could not let another 
pack hunt his coverts, nor could he hunt them himself, and 
if he were in a hunting country he was hound, in honour, to 
preserve foxes•(2) 

Hunting was a dangerous sport; and we find hunting 
men risking and suffering the most gruesome accidents in 
some of Trollope*s accounts.(3) Perhaps this was why it 
was not popular with women; although many women did hunt. 
Some surprise was Voiced over the fact that the Miss Tris- 
trams actually hunted and went "after the dogs across the 
hedges."(4) But they were good hunting-women and very popu¬ 
lar: - 


"Hunting young ladies are very popular in the hun¬ 
ting-field; I know no place in which girls receive 
more worship and attention; hut I am not so sure 
hut they may carry their enthusiasm too far for 
their own interests, let their horsemanship he as 
perfect as it may he." (5) 

Their "own interests" meant their marriage interests. Said 

Sir Peregrine Orme of Miss Tristram:- 

"'I wouldn*t have her if she owned every fox-cover 
in the. county. No, hy Jove*. I know a trick worth 
two ofjfthat. It* s jolly enough to see them going, 
hut as to being in love with them -- in that sort 
of way " (6) 

(1) Th e~L a st Chronicle of Barset , II, 177 

(2) g uin e as Redux, I, 146 

(3) Orley Far m, I, 401; Phineas Redux , I, 149; Am . Se n., 212. 

(4) Orley Farm, I, 270-1 

(5) IhidV, I, 388 

(6) Ibid., I, 528 
















. 




■ 


. 




. 

* 

. 

- 






















« 


■ 



■ 



- 










- 

- 


I 














. 










, ■ 








*. ' 





















218 

When a hunt was held close to their homes, the ladies would 
sometimes go out in carriages and drive about with the men 
on their horses while the huntsman was beating the covers 
and the riders were waitihg for the fox to appear and 
break away. Cnee the hounds were in pursuit, however, the 
ladies would return to the house.(1) Sometimes the parson 
would accompany the ladies at such a time;(2) for, although 
there were parsons who hunted, it was considered unclerical 
for them to do so.(3) Mr* Crawley objected to the sport be¬ 
cause "it must be vicious in all men (not only in parsons), 

(4) 

It is in itself cruel, and leads to idleness and profligacy. 11 
The Rev. Mr. Clavering had been a hunting parson before a 
new bishop disciplined him about it. (5) Before the Sabbata¬ 
rian low-church bishops came into prominence in the Church 
of England, it was evidently considered not improper for a 
clergyman to follow the hounds: Archdeacon Grantly “had never 
been a hunting man, though in his early days many a clergy¬ 
man had been in the habit of hunting without losing his 
clerical character by doing so." (6) More will be said of 
the Sabbatarian attitude in the next chapter. 


( 1) Framley Parsonage , 36; Or l ey Far m, I, 384. 

(2) Idem . 

(3) Framley Parsonage, 80 

(4) Ibid., 163 

(5) The Clayerings , 15 

(6) The Last Chronicle of Barse t, I, 243 


























' 


, t 





- 




. 


■ , . 


. 




. 



- 


, 






, 




























. 

. 












* 














219 


CHAPTER TEN^ 


CHURCH AND CLERGY 


The history of the Church in mid-Victorian England is 

largely the story three large bodies of religious thought: 

The High Church group, with its Tractarians, its Oxford 

Movement and its Ritualists; the Low Church group, with its 

Evangelicals, its Sabbatarianism and its hatred of .Roman 

Catholicism and ritual; and the Dissenters* 

The High Church party, thehigh and dry* school, 

"inherited the principles of a learned and sober 
Anglicanism,...* preaching without passion or 
excitement, scholar-like, careful, wise, often 
vigorously reasoned discourses on the capital 
points of faith and morals.... There was nothing 
effeminate about it, there was nothing fanatical; 
there was nothing extreme or foolish about it; 
it was a manly school, distrustful of high-wrought 
feelings and professions, cultivating self-command, 
and shy of display, and setting up as its mark... 
a reasonable and serious idea of duty*" (2) 

Not by any means were the majority of High Church people 
ritualists. Among the most conservative, and, perhaps, the 
most representative ’high and dry’ parsons were those at¬ 
tached to Barchester Cathedral; and: 



tu historical material in this chapter is taken directly 
from: W.H.Hutton in Social England, ed. H.D.Traill (London, 
1897), VI, 20-5* 133-50, $73-5, 509-10. 

(2) Dean Church, "The Oxford Movement", Social Engla nd,71,22*' 






















r-ri 




■ 


■ 

, 






- 

' 




- 

■ " ' ' ' , C.r.-:: ■ 

- v . . 

- 





220 


"Hitherto BarChester had escaped the taint of 
any extreme rigour of church doctrine. The 
clergymen of the city and neighbourhood, though 
very well inclined to promote high-church prin¬ 
ciples, privileges, and prerogatives, had never 
committed themselves to tendencies which are 
sometimes too loosely called Puseyite practices. 

They all preached in their black gowns, as their 
fathers had done before them; they wore ordinary 
black cloth waistcoats; they had fto candles on 
their altars, either lighted or unlighted; they 
made no private genuflexions, and were content 
to confine themselves to such ceremonial obser¬ 
vances as had been in vogue for the last hundred 
years. The services were decently and demurely 
read in their parish churches, chanting was con¬ 
fined to the cathedral, and the science of in¬ 
toning was unknown." (1) 

In the light of this information it can be seen how impor¬ 
tant it is not to commit the common error of classifying all 
of Trollope* s high-churchmen as ritualists and Romanists. 
They were simply tradition-loving, conservative, simple and 

sincere people, who, while loving the good life in a tem- 

patwab os o on o e - 

poral as well asa spiritual sense, yet took their work 
seriously and did it well:- 

"They had spent their money and done good; feoft the 
poor had not been ground down; the clergy in so¬ 
ciety had neither been overbearing nor austere." (2) 

They lived well, but not licentiously, being no worse and 

considerably better in their habits than most gentlemen of 

their time. Of that great high-church clergyman, Archdeacon 

Grantly, it was 9&i<i that "the pasron whomrf he feared most 

(3) 

of all parsons was the parson who wouldn’t fill his glass." 

( l) Barchefeter Tower s, 41. (2) ibid ., 50 

(3) T he Last C hronicle of B arset, II, 445 



















- 


- 

t " ■ ■- ' ' ' V* ■ ' ' 

, 


- 


. 






- 
























« ■ 










■ 




. 






. 




t 




' 






221 


By the beginning of the nineteenth century Evangeli¬ 
calism had lost much of its early austerity, had become 
more reasonable and polite, and almost fashionable. Out of 
it grew the Broad Church party, led by Dr. Arnold. It is 
interesting to remember that most of the early converts to 
Roman Catholicism in the nineteenth century came from the 
Evangelicals; and yet Dr. Arnold called Cardinal Newman and 
his party idolators, and was bitterly opposed to the Romish 
| tendencies oljthe Tractarians. But, according to Trollope, 
early in Victoria 1 2 s reign, such “a liberal clergyman was a 
person not frequently to be met.’ 1 (1) 

Trollope 1 s sympathies lie almost altogether with the 
high-church people; and he shows some active contempt for 
the more narrow-minded members of the militant low-church 
group. He is caustic over Mrs. Proudie, who 

“always went to church on Sunday evenings, making 
ajpoint of hearing three services and three ser¬ 
mons every Sunday of her life. On week-days she 
seldom heard any, having an idea that week-day 
services were an invention of the High Church 
enemy, and that they should therefore be vehemen¬ 
tly discouraged. Services on saint 1 s days she 
regarded as rank papacy. M (2} 

He might not feel so strongly on the matter as Archdeacon 
G-rantly; but he would go a long way towards agreeing with 
that dignitary 1 s opinion of low-church Sabbatarians:- 

“Those are the sort of men who will ruin the Church 

(1) Barchester Tow ers, 16 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 172 













* 


' 
















- 




. 






* 

. 

■ 

























. 














v . ■. ■ 













222 

of England, and make the profession of a clergy¬ 
man disreputable. It is not the dissenters or 
the papists that we should fear, but the set of 
canting, low-bred hypocrites who are wriggling 
their way in among us; men who have no fixed 
principle, no standard ideas of religion or doc¬ 
trine, but who take up some popular cry, as this 
fellow has done about ‘Sabbath travelling. 1 2 “ (1) 

r' 

The matter of Sabbath day observance was of much greate 

A 

concern to the low-church than to the high-church supporters. 
Mrs. Proudie was in the forefront of Trollope’s militant 
Sabbatarians: - 

“Dissipation and low dresses during the week are, 
under her control, atoned for by three services, 
an evening sermon read by herself, and a perfect 
abstinence from any cheering employment on the 
Sunday.... Woe betide the recreant housemaid who 
is found to have been listening to the honey of 
ajsweetheart in the Regent* s park, instead of the 
soul-stirring evening discourse of Mr* Slope. Not 
only is she sent adrift, but she is so sent with 
a character which leaves her little hope of a 
decent place. Woe betide the six-foot hero who 
escorts Mrs* Proudie to her pew in red-plush bree¬ 
ches, If he slips away to the neighbouring beer- 
shop, instead of falling into the back seat appro¬ 
priated to his use. Mrs. Proudie has the eyes of 
Argus for such offenders. Occasional drunkew^ess 
during the week may be overlooked, for six feet 
on low wages are hardly to be procured if the 
morals are always kept at a high pitch; but not 
even for grandeur or economy will Mrs. Proudie for¬ 
give a desecration of the Sabbath.’ 1 (2) 

Trollope has no pity for Mrs. Proudie in his efforts to make 
her seem ridiculous. Witness, for instance, the time that he 
shows her leaping to her feet to interrupt a dignified lec¬ 
ture on the South Sea Islanders, and screaming, apropos of 


(1) Barchester Towers, 40 

(2) Ibid., 21 














- 




, 

- 

’ 


- 

. 









. 

- 

; t ■: . ' ’' • •' ' - 

. 

* 

* 

- ‘ ; •; '•». . :>• 

■ 

. . . 










. 























223 

nothing in particular, u Let us never forget that these 
islanders can never prosper unless they keep the Sabbath 
day holyl” (1) 

There was a law passed to close the parks of England 
on Sunday.(2) It was improper for parsons to stop at hotels 

(3), or to have a meal at in inn on the Sabbath. (4) To 
complain at the length of a parson*s sermon was sinful; (5) 
the complainer just had to suffer in church, and would very 
likely suffer at home, too, where sermons might be read on 
the Sabbath by the master or mistress of the house.(6) There 
should be no visiting of friends during church time (7); 
indeed, the receiving of company at any time on Sunday was 
improper.(8) People were not to travel on the Sabbath; (9) 
and properly religious people did not allow their carriages 
or horses to go out on Mat that day.(10) No matter how bored 
a man might be around the house, he was not to perform any 
kind of manual work between Saturday and Monday.(11$ He was 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 67 

(2) The Three Clerks , 85 

(3) Framley Parsonage , 42 

(4) Ibid .. 69 

(5) Rachel Ray , 10 

(6) The Small House at Allington , II, 91 
Phineas Finn, II, 143 

(7) Ibid ., II, 387, 389 

(8) Ibid., I, 254 
Phineas Redux , I, 105 
Ibid ., I, 246 

(9) The Belton Estate , 119 
BarChester Towers, 40 

(10) Phineas Finn , I, 290:; The Way We Live No v/, I, 159 

(11) The Belton Estate, 165 " 

















































■ 






* 




, 

















. 

• • 

' 

. 






. 







. 


. 






. 






■ 






t . ♦ 






. , . 

. .. 













224 


to refrain just as strictly from talking business, even if 
such business only dealt with a father's consent to his 
marriage with that father's daughter.(1) He could not re¬ 
fresh his mind with reading,— not even with reading a let¬ 
ter, although that letter may have been delivered by the 
postman that Sunday morning.(2) Similarly, he was not to 
write any letters on the Sabbath; but if he could not avoid 
doing so, he would date them as being written on the fol¬ 
lowing day.(3) In short, the mid-Victorian man or woman 
could engage in no enjoyable employment on the Holy Day; 
and if he indulged in any mirth it had to be"holy mirth".(4) 

Ably abetting the fierce Mrs. Proudie in her sabbata- 

c 

rian crusades was her parasite Mr. Slope. Sunday observa^e 

& 

was his hobby:- 

"Sunday, however, is a word which never pollutes 
his lips — it is always 'the Sabbath.' The 5 de¬ 
secration of the Sabbath,' as he delights to call 
it, is to him meat and drink:- he thrives upon 
that as policemen do on the general evil habits 
of the community. It is the loved subject of all 
his evening discourses, the source of all his 
eloquence, the secret of all his power over the 
female heart. To him the revelation of God appears 
only in that one law given for Jewish observance. 

To him the mercies of our Saviour speak in vain.. 

... To him the New Testament is comparatively of 
little moment, for from it can he draw no fresh 
authority for that^dominion which he loves to exer¬ 
cise over at least a seventh part of man 1 2 3 s allotted 


(1) Ibid., 46 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II , 347 

(3) Ibid., I, 176; The belton Estate , 219 
( 4) The Sustace Diamonds , 5 6 














225 


time here below." ( 1 ) 


"The history of nineteenth-century Nonconformity 
may most fitly begin with some account of the 
'Three Denominations’, as they are called, rep¬ 
resented by the three boards of Presbyterian, 
Independent, and Baptist ministers, which in 
1727 were organized as a'0oneral Body*. From 
the time of the Revolution they had a sort of 
acknowledged position in the State with the pri¬ 
vilege of approachingjthe Throne and presenting 
an address. Of these three the Presbyterians 
were at first the more numerous body, and were 
accorded precedence." ( 2 ) 

The older Presbyterian church took up the teachings 
of the Italian Socini which denied the Trinity, the perso¬ 
nality of the devil, the natural depravity of man, vica¬ 
rious atonement, and the eternity of punishment; and they 
came to call themselves Unitarians. The present Presbyterian 
church in England is of more recent origin and takes its 
doctrine directly from the Presbyterian church in Scotland. 
The Unitarians had few adherents among the common people, 
but counted many cultured men and women in its company. 
Outside London it was strongest in Liverpool, Manchester, 
York, Birmingham, Norwich, and Bristol. 

The Independents were the second of the Three Deno¬ 
minations; and out of them grew the Congregationalist 
church. Like theUnitarians, they repudiated all state con- 


ft(l) John Brown, "The Free Churches," in Social England , 
1 H.D.Traill, ed. VI, 141-2 

^(2) Barchester Towers, 25 











. 












. 




. 

. 


* 








. 

. 

t 

■ 



























. 














t ' • '••••" . • ••• 






- 


> 




. 




' ! 













226 


trol. Like the Methodists, they held firmly to evangelical 
truth* They insisted upon the autonomy of each separate 
church within their Congregational Union. Their growth 
has "been strong; and there are now^ell over, five thousand 
Chngregational churches and mission sta ions. 

The Baptists, the third of the Three Denominations, 
were like the Congregationalists in everything hut their 
belief in the mode of baptism. 

Wesleyan Methodism was born in the eighteenth century, 
and consolidated itself in the nineteenth. Its chief concern 
was with the increase of lay representation in the govern¬ 
ment of the church. Wesley had no intention of breaking 
away from the Church of England, but regarded the group he 
founded simply as a Spciety connected with the Churchy and 
for this reason he would not allow services to be held in 
his chapels at the same hours as those in the parish chur¬ 
ches. 

This restriction and others, and the question of the 
right of the laity to govern in church matters, caused a 
break in the Methodist church. One group broke away, calling 
themselves the Methodist New Connexion. 

A much more important group seceded a few years later 
and formed the Primitive Methodist church. This group 
conducted great revivals in the manner of the American camp 
meetings. They worked among the poorest and most neglected 














. 






. 


' 

. . 







- 

' 


, 




. 




: 





































- 

■ 




. 


















• 












_ 






227 


?co< 


people of England. All but these people despised themjahd 


«i 11 

called them Ranters. They set up their pulpits on wagons, 
on chairs, in open streets and in open fields, holding 
great revivals all over the country. Their preachers endured 
much persecution. From a humble beginning with two earnest 
men, this group grew to have four thousand chapels and 
sixteen thousand local preachers by the end of the century. 

Other Nonconformist denominations active in England at 
this time included the Society of Friends, the Moravians, 
the Irvinites, the Plymouth Brethren, and the Swedenborgian 
or Church of the New Jerusalem. 

I have given this brief survey of Nonconformism in 
mid-Victorian England lest the reader of Trollope may forget 
that the Church of England was not the only religious body 
of the times. 

If it is true that Trollope had little use for the 
evangelical Anglican church, he had even less use for Non¬ 
conformists. At least, he gives us many low-church character.* 
and discusses the respective merits of the high- and the 
low-church; but he rarely mentions the dissenters, and gives 
us only one scanty portrait of a dissenting parson.(1) 

He makes a caustic reference to the Independent Metho¬ 
dists when he has Miss G-ushing, disappointed In her hopes 
of marrying the high-church Rev. Mr. Oriel, take as her 


(1) The Rev. Mr. Puddleham in The Vicar of Bullh ampton. 














228 


husband the Independent Methodist parson, Rev. Mr. Rant- 
away.(l) He mentions the "Sions and the Ebenezers" in another 
place (2); and the Wesleyans only once, that I can find.(3) 
At Trollope* s "Bullhampton" in Wiltshire the Primitive 
Methodists had a very strong hold, where the people were 


building a new chapel or taberhacle which they called a 

H M .i th-e 

"Salem”, a"staring brick Methodist chapel, with H word 
Salem inserted in large letters over the door."(4) Its con¬ 


gregation is referred to as "the p$alm-singing Christian 
brethren">(5) and the rector*s wife complains,"We shall 
hear their singing and ranting whenever we open our front 
windows."(6) When the new chapel was to hold its first ser¬ 
vice,"there was a crowd collected and tt.. after the manner 
of the Primitive Methodists in their more enthusiastic days, 
a procession of worshippers had been formed in the village, 
which at this very moment was making its way to the chapel." 
In one of his sermons Mr. Puddleham preached as follows:- 

"’It did not matter where the people of the Lord 
met,* he said,*so long as they did meet to wor¬ 
ship the Lord in a proper spirit of independent 
resistance to any authority that had not come to 
them from revelation. Any hedge-side was a suf¬ 
ficient tabernacle for a devout Christian. But--,’ 
and then, without naming any name, he described 
the Church of England as a Upas tree which, by 
its poison, destroyed- those beautiful flowers 
which strove to spring up amidst the rank grass 
beneath it and to make the air sweet within its 
neighbourhood." (8) 


(1) Doctor Thorne . 385, 564 


(4) Ibid ., 240.(5) lb., 245 
(6) Ibid ., 249.(7) lb., 395 
393. fS Tlbld ., 518-9“ 
























♦ 







. 

• ■ 





! 



, 





. 




. 












. 

■ 




, 


..... 






. 


1 . 



. 

. 

. 

. • 



























229 

The Rev. Mr. Clavering did not have much to do with the 
people of Cumberly Green, "the people of which," as Trollope 
humourously remarks,"had got into a wicked habit of going 
to a dissenting chapel near to them."(1) As for Dr. Hartford, 
the rector of Baslehurst, "hatred m Mr. Prong was the stron¬ 
gest passion of (his) heart ... He had ever hated the dis¬ 
senting ministers by whom he was surrounded. In Devonshire 
dissent has waxed strong for MBfry years, and the pastors of 
the dissenting flocks have been thorns in the side of the 
Church of England clergymen. Dr. Hartford had undergone his 
full share of suffering from such thorns."(2) This horror 
of dissenters was shared by some members of such ministers* 
flocks, as this amusing speech testifies:- 

"*It was so dreadful,* said Lady Pomona;— * so 
very dreadful. I never heard of anything so bad. 

When young what* s-his-name married the tallow- 
chandler* s daughter I thought it would have killed 
me if it had been Dolly (her son); but this was 
worse than that. Her father was a methodist.’" (3) 

After 1833 the relations between Church and State be¬ 
came matters of heated discussion, and the question of church 
reform came to a head. A Royal Commission reporting in 1835 
showed, among other facts, that the net revenues in England 
and Wales of the archbishoprics, bishoprics, cathedral and 

(1) The Cla veri ngs , 19 

(2) Rachel Ray , 235 

(3) The Way We L i ve Now , II, 279 












230 


collegiate churches, chapters, and benefices was very close 
to three and one-half millions of pounds* that bishops* 
salaries ranged from one thousand pounds to nineteen thou¬ 
sand pounds per annum, with the average at about six thou¬ 
sand; and that the benefices were from under one hundred 
pounds to over forty-five hundred pounds per annum, with 
the great majority being nearer the lower figure mentioned* 
In Trollope* s novels the following clerical incomes 
are mentioned:- 


Livings: - 70 pounds per annum. 

75 *« *» » 

80 ** " ” 

plus a small home 
and glebeland. 

130 pounds per annum. 
130 
130 
300 
900 
800 


( Framley Pa rsonage, 29) 
( The"Warde n, 2SA) 
(Ibid., 163) 


( Ibid ., 208) 

( Framley Pars on age , 233) 
( The Warden , 268} 

( Barch. Towers , 178) 

( Framl e y Parso nag e, 2) 

( American Senator, 78) 


Curates:- 50 " " 11 (Orley F ar m, I, 320) 

plus a cottage 
and garden. 

70 pounds per annum ( Framley Parsonage , 29) 
100 f! “ 11 (American Senator, 78) 

plus the use of 
a pony. 


Pew-rents:- (Upon v/hich some parsons depended entirely 
for their incomes) 

130 pounds per annum ( Rachel Ray , 118) 


A clergyman could raise his scanty income if he were 


fortunate to receive some extra emolument, such as the pre- 
Cantor ship of a cathedral, which of course, was in the 
bishop*s gift, and might pay the man fortunate enough to 

























231 

obtain it as much as eighty pounds a year.(l) Or he might 
be granted a prebend, which would increase his^income by 
the princely sum of six hundred pounds a year plus the use 
of a house in the cathedral close.(2) Some livings were 
part of family estates and, therefore, in the gift of such 
families (3); others were in the gift of the dean and chap¬ 
ter of a cathedral (4); and important appointments, such as 
to the office of dean, bishop and archbishop, were in the 
hands of the Government.( 5) It was not uncommon for some 
people who had livings in their hands to augment their 
incomes by selling such livings to parsons willing to buy 
them.(6) 

On the Royal Commission report of 1835 was based an 
Act of Parliament, passed in 1836, which appointed an Eccle¬ 
siastical Commission to carry out certain recommendations. 
The reforms effected by this Commission were chiefly finan¬ 
cial, and met with a great deal of opposition from the well- 
established clergy. Trollope describes the bishopric of 
Barchester as being cut down by the Ecclesiastical Commis¬ 
sion from six to five thousand pounds per annum.(7) The op- 

(1) The Warden , 2 

(2) Framley Parsonage , 465 

(3) Ibid., 35; The Way We Live Now , II, 42? 

(4) Barchester Towers, 53 

(5) Ibid., 295; 311 

(6) Doctor Thorne , 75; The Claverings , 14 

(7) Barchester Towers , 9 































; •• :> 








' 














■ 






- 




. 





232 

position of clergymen is well shown in Dr, Hartford 1 2 3 s 
attitude:- 


'‘But when men calling themselves Commissioners 
came actually upon him and his, and separated 
off from him a district of his own town, ta¬ 
king it away altogether from his authority, and 
giving it over to such inexperienced hands as 
chance might send thither,— then Dr. Hartford 
became a violent Tory. And my readers must not 
conceive that this was a question touching his 
pocket.... His parish had been invaded and his 
clerical authority mutilated. He was no longer 
totus teres atque rotundu$ . The beauty of his 
life was over, and the contentment of his mind 
was gone. He knew that it was only left to him 
to die, spending such days as remained to him 
in vague prophecies of evil against his devoted 
country,-- a country which had allowed its ancient 
parochial landmarks to be moved, and its eccle¬ 
siastical fastnesses/ to be invaded 1 .“ (1) 

The Commission is shown as having cut the Barchester pre¬ 
bends down to three in number;(2) "and the houses in the 


Close which used to be the residences of the prebendaries 

( 3 ) 

(were) leased out to tallow-chandlers and retired brewers." 

# / f 

Trollope 1 s newspaper, the Jupiter — which may have been 
meant to be the London Times -- hasjsomething to say about 
the reform of church endowments, and about the prebends in 


particular: - 

Ul It is with difficulty enough ... that the Church 
of England maintains at the present moment that 
ascendancy among the religious sects of this coun¬ 
try which it so loudly claims. And perhaps it is 
from an old-fashioned and time-honoured affection 
for its standing rather than from any intrinsic 


(1) Rachel Ray , 235 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 99 

(3) Ibid ., II 36 











4 






, 


. 

- 


' 

- 

* 








- 




- 

' 

' 





















233 


merits of its own that some such general ack¬ 
nowledgement of its ascendancy is still allowed 
to prevail* If, however, the patrons ancl clerical 
members of this Church are bold enough to disre¬ 
gard all general rules of decent behaviour, we 
think we may predict that this chivalrous feeling 
will be found to give way.... 

11 f Among those positions of dignified ease to 
which fortunate clergymen may be promoted are the 
stalls of the canons or prebendaries in our cathe¬ 
drals. Some of these, as is well known, carry 
little or no emolument with them, but some are 
rich in the good things of this world.... Reform 
has been busy even among these stalls, attaching 
some amount of work to the pay, and paring off 
some superfluous wealth from such of them as were 
over full; but reform has been lenient with them'. !, (1) 

G-ood high-church clergymen, however, looked askance 
at reform and reformers: - 

"The bishop, in his simple mind, felt no doubt 
that John Bold, had he so much power, would 
shut up all cathedrals, and probably all parish 
churches; distribute all tithes among Methodists, 
Baptists, and other savage tribes; utterly anni¬ 
hilate the sacred bench, an^make shovel hats and 
lawn sleeves as illegal as cowls, sandals, .and 
sackcloth’. Here was a nice man to be initiated 
into the comfortable arcana of ecclesiastical 
snuggeries; one who doubted the integrity of par¬ 
sons, and probably disbelived the Trinity*.” (2) 

In trying to convince themd(l^ves that disestablishment 
of the Church of England would be a good thing,-those Mem¬ 
bers of Parliament who were good Anglicans, yet wished to 
support their party in voting for such disestablishment, 
rationalized as follows:- 

?, As to the connection with the State, the time for 
it had clearly gone by. The Church, as a Church 


(1) Framley Parsonage , 509. (2) The Warden , 33 
















, 

„ . 






. 

■ 

- 








- 




' 






. 






t 












1 : 






234 


would own increased power when it could appoint 
its own bishops, and he wholly dissevered from 
State patronage. It seemed to he almost a matter 
of surprise that really good Churchmen should 
have endured so long to he shackled hy•subser¬ 
vience to the State. Some of these gentlemen 
pleaded their cause so well that they almost 
made it appear that episcopal ascendancy would 
he restored in England hy the disseverance of 
the Church and State.” (1) 

"That the CHURCH OF ENGLAND would still be the 
CHURCH OF ENGLAND was repeated till weary liste¬ 
ners were sick of the unmeaning words.” (2) 

It seems, from Trollope* s ironical treatment of these 
politicians and their arguments, that he was not in favour 
of disestablishment. But he was in favour of financial re¬ 


form, as th* following passage shows: - 

"Let those who know clergymen, and like them, and 
have lived with them, only fancy itl Clergymen 
to he paid, not according to the temporalities 
of any living which they may have acquired, either 
hy merit or favour, hut in accordance with the 
work to he done*. 0 Doddingtonl and 0 Stanhope*, 
think of this, if an idea so sacreligious can 
find entrance into your warm ecclesiastical bo¬ 
soms*. Ecclesiastical work to he bought and paid 
for according to its quantity and quality*. 

"But, nevertheless, one may prophesy that we 
Englishmen must come to this, disagreeable as 
the idea undoubtedly is... Our present arrange¬ 
ment of parochial incomes is beloved as being 
lame-honoured, gentlemanlike, English, and pic¬ 
turesque... But are there not other attributes 
very desirable -- nay, absolutely necessary — 
in respect to which this time-honoured, pictur¬ 
esque arrangement is so very deficient?... 

"... Stanhope and Doddington must bow their 
heads, with such compensation for temporal rights 


(1) Phineas Redux , I, 93 

(2) Ibid ., 1, 168 








- 

‘ 

\ 

' 

. 




' 






1 





I 

I 


i 














235 

as may be extracted,— but probably without 
such compensation as may be desired. In other 
trades, professions, and Mb lines of life, men 
are paid according to tneir worlt. Let it be so 
in the Church. Such will sooner or later be the 
edict of a utilitarian, reforming, matter-of- 
fact House of Parliament• ’* (1) 

(The Stanhope, referred to by Trollope, was an unusually 

iwealthy parish covering a very large area of thinly-popu- 

lated country. Its value to the Incumbent was almost five 

thousand pounds per annum, for which he had to care for 

the spiritual needs of only 4800 people*.) (2) 

■ 

The most discussed activity in the mid-Victorian Churcn 
was the Oxford Movement. Cardinal Newman dates the Movement 
as beginning on Sunday, July 14th, 1833, when Keble preached 
a solemn sermon against the anti-religious aspects of the 
lew 1 2 3 4 5 liberalism.* (3) The following winter,^address signed 
by 7000 clergy and by 23,000 laymen assured the Archbishop 
Df Canterbury of 11 their adherence to the doctrine, govern- 
aent, and formularies of the Church. ,9 (4) The great leaders 
if the Oxford movement were Rose, Palmer, Keble, Froude, 
Newman, and Pusey.(5) Edward Bouverie Pusey, Regius Profes- 
3or of Hebrew at Oxford, after Newman and others seceded to 


1) Framley Parsonage 154-5 

2) Social England , VI,134 

3) Ibid ., VI, 135-6 

4) Idem 

5) Idem 














- 


. 

. 







♦ 

. 

- 
















, 



236 


the Roman Catholic Church, became the storm centre of cri¬ 
ticisms levelled against the Tractarians (as members of the 
Movement were called), as he continued in his dignified 
battle for the traditions of the Continuous Church, 1 2 Pusey 
is mentioned in Trollope’s novels. In one place, the clergy 
of Barchester is said never to have "committed themselves 
to tendencies, which are somewhat too loosely called Pusey- 
ite practices*”(1) The practices meant were the ritualistic 
ones of Rome; and Trollope is correct in saying that they 
Iwere mistakenly attributed to Pusey* In another place we 
jfind: - 

"’Sir Anthony reforms, leaves off drinking, and 
takes to going to church every day. He becomes 
a Puseyite, puts up a memorial window to the 
Baron, and reads the Tracts* At last he goes 
over to the Pope, walks about in nasty dirty 
clothes all full of vermin, and gives over his 
estate to Cardinal Wiseman*’” (2) 

"Cardinal Wiseman" is very likely meant to be Cardinal New¬ 
man* 

A very good description of the Oxford movement is to be 
found in Funk and Wagnail’s Unabridged Dictionary , under the 
heading, Tractarlanism : - 

"Beginning^! th Keble’s sermon on ’National Apostasy* 
in July 1833, which declaimed against the Erastia- 
nism, rationalism, and formalism of the day, the 
Oxford Movement, or Tractarlanism, was the effort 
of the writers of the ’Tracts for the Times* to 


(1) Barchester Towers * 41 

(2) The Three Clerks , 219 

















237 


show frfcgiHrew the Catholicity of the Church of 
England by establishing abatena of tradition 
between that Church and tne Church of the Fa¬ 
thers, through the teaching of such Anglican 
High-church divines of the 17th and 18th cen¬ 
turies as Laud, Andrews, Overall, and Water- 
land. The Movement culminated in the publica¬ 
tion of ’Tract 90,* which aimed at showing 
that the ’Thirty-nine Articles’ might in cer¬ 
tain aspects be reconciled with the teachings 
of the Council of Trent. It came to an end, or 
rather developed into the Neo-Catholic movement, 
when Newman, Wilberforce, Ward, and others se¬ 
ceded to Rome in 1845* Beside^restoring cere¬ 
monial observances and emphasizing the symbo¬ 
lism of ritual, the Movement gave strength to 
the claim of the Church of England to be consi¬ 
dered a branch of the visible Church Catholic 
with apostolic succession and a visible magis- 
terum." 

Archdeacon G-rantly is said to have "believed confiden¬ 
tly in Oxford, in the bench of bishops, in Sir Abraham 
Haphazard, and in himself.”(1) His friend, Arabin, "took 
up the cudgels on the side of the Tractarians, and at Ox¬ 
ford he sat for a while at the feet of the great Newman."(2) 
But most of Trollope’s high-churchmen -- and they were 
very high -- looked at things pretty much as did "Dr. 
G-wynne", who, "felt no sympathy with men who could not 
satisfy their faiths with the Thirty-nine articles. He re¬ 
garded the enthusiasm of such as Newman as a state of mind 
more nearly allied to madness than to religion."(3| Such 
high-churchmen as he,shared with the evangelicals their 


(1) The Warden , 90 

(2) Barehester Towers, 170 

(3) Ibid ., 172 















258 

extreme distrust of anything Roman Catholic. Only a few 

among them, like Mr. Oriel, 

“delighted in lecterns and credence-tables, in 
services at dark hours of winter mornings when 
no one would attend, in high waistcoats and 
narrow white neckties, in chanted services and 
intoned prayers, and in all the paraphernalia 
of Anglican formalities which have given such 
offence to those of our brethren who live in 
daily fear of the scarlet lady." (1) 
in 

Most Curch of Englanders, high and low, looked with unmistake 

i 

able disfavour upon such Romish affectations as silk vest¬ 
ments and candles (2), cruxifixes (3), and the rubric.(4) 

Lady Lufton was inclined to distrust Miss Dunstable, who 
was friendly with a certain prelate “who was supposed to 
favour stoles and vespers, and to have no proper Protestant 
hatred for auricular confession and fish on Fridays.“(5) 

The frequency with which Trollope pokes fun at such 
critics might lead one to suspect that he was not averse to 
a bit of colour and ritual in Church services; and that, 
although most of his clerical “heroes” are not extremely 
ritualistic, he has a special affection for such Tractarians 
as his Arab in, and his Oriel. Nor is he above making orieof 
his most attractive lay characters, Phineas Finn, a Roman 
Catholic. His irony is at its witfiest when he laughs at 
unthinking opponents of ritualism and Roman Catholicism; for 


(1) Doctor Thorne , 381. (2) The Belton Estate, 14 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhampt on, 114 

(4) BarChester Towers , 50b 

(5) Framley Parsonage , 182 


















, 


■ 








* 




. 


. 


. .. ' 

. 


... .. ,C'i .v.U, 














.. ■ ■ ' ■( 

••■•r'.:.: : * .L f 

. 


















239 


example:- 

11 Sir Abraham Haphazard was deeply engaged in pre¬ 
paring a hill for the mortification of papists, 
to he called the * Convent Custody Bill, 1 2 the pur¬ 
port of which was to enable any Protestant clergy¬ 
man over fifty years of age to search any nun 
whom he suspected of being in possession of trea¬ 
sonable papers or Jesuitical symbols; and as there 
were to be a hundred and thirty-seven clauses in 
the bill, each clause containing a separate thorn 
for the side of the papist, and as it was known 
that the bill would be fought inch by inch, by 
fifty maddened Irishmen, the due construction and 
adequate dovetailing of it did consume much of 
Sir Abraham* s time. The bill had all its desired 
effect. Of course it never passed into law; but 
it so completely divided the ranks of the Irish 
members, who had bound themselves together to 
force on the ministry a bill for compelling all 
men to drink Irish whiSkey, and all women to wear 
Irish poplins, that for the remainder of the ses¬ 
sion the C-reat Poplin and Whiskey League was ut¬ 
terly harmless.” (1) 


Trollope* s genius expresses itself best in his charac¬ 
ter-studies of English clergymen. 

“No odour of sanctity and no ecclesiastical dimnesa 
hangs about his clerical portraits. The reader finds 
that the clergy are men of mixed motives like him¬ 
self, not godless, but not. altogether godly, and 
very anxious about sublunary matters.” (2) 

Trollope is not concerned with his parsons as parsons, but 

as men. He does not tell us much about their daily tasks in 

their parishes; but discusses their personal problems, their 

home life, and their opinions on matters ecclesiastical. 


(1) The Warden , 87-6 

(2) The Spectator , May 3, 1913, 74b. 












240 


"Most of nis parsons are worldly enough, triougn 
I ao not tmnK it correct to say, as Michael 
Sadleir in an unguarded moment says, that they 
might as well have been agnostic schoolmasters. 

For the purposes of his stories, as with Jane 
Austen’s, it suffices that they should he world¬ 
ly, hut they are so in a decent way. There are 
plenty of intrigues, hut they are seldom petty 
or mean. Cne part of these men’s lives alone is 
shown. Thus we know next to nothing of Archdea¬ 
con G-rantly* s life and work in his own parish 
or even when he is performing "archidiaconal 
functions. 1 11 " (1) 

I would like to discuss all of Trollope's parsons, hut 
space will not allow me to do so. However, I shall mention 
a few of them: - 


Among the high-and-dry clergy^ Archdeacon Theophilus 
G-rantly stands as a giant of high-church rectitude. He seems 
to spend all his time guarding the rights of the Established 
Church against the inroads of the reformers, and in preven¬ 
ting such ungentlemanly low-church parv enus as Mr. Slope 
and Mrs. Froudie from acquiring the effective control over 
cathedral mattera that they are so ambitious to have. He is 
a man of high position, great wealth, and expensive^gentle^ 
tastes. Strict Sabbatarian regulation of behaviour is, to 
him, unintelligent and abhorrent. Although he is a close 
friend of Mr. Arabin's, Roman Catholicism and Nonconformism 
are equally distasteful to him; but Evangelicalism as repre¬ 
sented by the Slopes, the Froudies, and the Thumbles, he 


(1) G-.Oswald Smith, "The Parson in English Fiction," Cana ¬ 

dian Jour nal of R elig ious T h o ught , March-April, 1930 
















• 


t 

r 







- 






. 








?1 




. 





- 

* 




* 


■ 






- 




. 





. 


- 








. 






, 






















' 










. 




* 








. 




241 

regards with the most active impatience and contempt 


Under his father, the Bishop, — but not so successfully 
under Bishop Proudie and wife — he manages the diocese, 
hejmanages his friends, h^nanages his relatives,— and his 
wife manages him.(l) 

Directly opposite in character to the worldly, domi¬ 
neering G-rantly is the self-effacing, trusting, gracious, 

( 2 ) 

and simple Septimus Harding. He has only one enemy in the 
world,-- his conscience. Even those who would deprive him 
of his emoluments can feel no dislike of the man. Were he 
left to himself, he would be content to live quietly in his 
lovely little home, to play his* cello, to conduct the cathe¬ 
dral choir, to drink wine with his old friend the Bishop, 
to worship his daughter Eleanor, to do as he was told (but 
strictly within^ the limits set by his conscience), and to 
"achieve more than a dozen clerical busy-bodies by simply 
being what he is." ( 3 ) 

One of Trollope 1 s most interesting characters is the 

( 4 ) s 

Rev. Josiah Crawley, for apescription of whom I shall quote 
a better writer than Is- 

"In Mr. Crawley of Hogglestock we have ’a singular 
man, so humble and meek, so unutterably inefficient 
and awkward in the ordinary intercourse of life; 
but so bold and enterprising, almost eloquent on 
the one subject that was the work of his life.* 


, _ . (2) Idem. 

(1) |he Warden ( 3 ) OTsmith, Op. cit. 

Ippapli: 141 isseiuss^ 

TheJ^ast Chronicle of Bar se t, 





















- 











■■ • ; 





■ 

■ 


. 




. ; 



' 



1 i ■ 

. 

■ 





- 






“ • 


■ 







- 









. 



■ « ' 







. 






• 











. 


* 










■ 







, 






, 




. 

, 




242 


Like Parson Adams, he is very poor, and ignorant 
of the world, yet possessed of alstrong sense of 
his vocation. But unlike Adams, ne is very un¬ 
happy, and scarcely ventures out of his parish. 

"It h a s been said that the man who could draw 
the picture of Crawley, a gentleman in rags, must 
himself have been a great gentleman. In doing so 
Trollope draws a saint also, with all a saint’s 
irritating faults; and he himself must have had 
an understanding of saintliness with which he 
has not usually been credited." (1) 

Arabin, and Oriel, I have already dealt with in this 
chapter,— also Dr. Hartford. Another very likeable 
clergyman is Frank Fenwick (2), who conducts a bitter fight 
with the Primitive Methodist,Mr. Puddieham, on the most 
gentlemanly terms of utter fairness, understanding, tole¬ 
rance^ anc^politeness. He also stands alone among all the good 
people of his parish in an almost Christ-like pity, forgive¬ 
ness, and helpful concern for the poor 1 2 3 fallen woman, 1 Carry 
Brattle. 

(3) 

Opposed to Fenwick is the Prebendary, Mr. Chamberlaine, 
comfortable in the possession of great wealth, a self-indul¬ 
gent gourmand, blithely indifferent to the sins snd pains 
of lesser mortals. When Fenwick asks him what can be done 
for such unfortunates as Carry Brattle, Chamberlaine suavely 
replies," 1 There are penitentiaries and reformatories, and it 
is well, no doubt, to subscribe to them ... The subject is 


(1) G-.O.Smith, Op. Cit. 

(2) The Vicar of Bu ll hapmt on 

(3) Idem 


















243 


so full of difficulty that one should not touch it rashly. 
Henry, where is the last Quarterly ? 1 ” (1) 

Although Trollope finds many faults with his high- 
church clergymen, he is usually kind to them. He is not so 
with his Evangelicals, as a rule. 

His most brilliant portrait of the kind of vulgar, 
pushing low-church clergyman that he disliked the most, is 

\) 

the one he gives us of Obadiah Slope.(2) Something has alread 

4 

been said about his strict Sabbatarianism. 


This portrait reminds one strongly of Dickens*s Uria h Heep , 
who was no whit more likeable than Obadiah Slope. 

(!) Ibid., 186-7 

(2) Bar ch este r Tower^. (3) ibid., 24-6 


”He is gifted with a certain kind of pulpit elo¬ 
quence, not likely indeed to be persuasive with 
men, but powerful with the softer sex. In his 
sermons he deals greatly in denunciations, excites 
the minds of hisjweaker hearers with a not unplea¬ 
sant terror, and leaves an impression on their 
minds that all mankind are in a perilous state, 
and all womankind too, except those who attend 
regularly to the evening lectures in Baker Street. 
... As he walks throught the streets, his very 
face denotes his horror of the world* s wicked¬ 
ness; and thare is always an anathema lurking in 
the corner ofjhis eye.... 

”... Hispeet and hands are large ... but he 
has a broad chest and wide shoulders to carry off 
these excrescences.... His hair is lank, and of a 
dull, pale, reddish hue ... His face is nearly 
of the same colour as his hair, though perhaps a 
little redder.... 

11 1 never could endure to shake hands with Mr. 
Slope. A cold, clammy perspiration always exudes 
from him; the small drops are ever to be seen 
standing on his brow, and his friendly grasp is 
unpleasant.’* (3) 







































* 


. 
















” . . ; 









244 


Samuel Prong comes close to "being as unattractive a 
clergyman as Mr. Slope. Mr. Prong (1) spoke much about 
"preaching the gospel". He was "an energetic, severe, hard¬ 
working, and ... intolerant young man, who bestowed very 
much laudable care on his sermons."(2) He looked upon his 
fellow clergymen as careless in their work. He had a mean 
mouth, and "there was about his lips an assumption of charac¬ 
ter and dignity which hisjcountenance and body generally 
failed to maintain.... He was a devout, good man ... but 
deficient in one vital qualification for a clergyman of the 
Church of England; he was not a gentleman."(3) 

Most of Trollope 1 s low-church parsons are long-winded 
in their sermons; but his high-church friends are comfor¬ 
tably brief: Archdeacon G-rantly 1 s sermon, even on a special 
occasion, "sermon, text, blessing and all, was concluded st 
within the half hour."(4) Mr. Comfort usually preached a 

(5) 

half hour, and Dr. Hartford "never exceeded twenty minutes." 

There is only one fairly adequate picture given in the 
novels I have read of a Nonconformist pastor, and that one 
is of Mr. Puddleham, the Primitive Methodist minister of 
Bullhampton. ( 6) Frank Fenwick, 

(i) Rache l Ray . (2) Ibid ., 51. (3) Ibid ., 7 T 

(4) B arChester Tower s, 213 

(5) Rachel Ray , 53 

(6) The Vicar of Bu l lhampton . 

















245 

"in his inner heart, rather likes his rival, Mr. 
Puddleham ... because Mr. Puddleham is an ear¬ 
nest man, who, in spite of the intensity of his 
ignorance, is efficacious among the poor. But 
Mr. Fenwick is boun<A,o keep up the fight; and 
Mr. Puddleham considers it to be his duty to put 
down Mr. Fenwick and the Church Establishment 
altogether." (1) 

Mr. Puddleham 

"had always previously enjoyed the privilege of 
being on bad terms with the clergyman of the 
Establishment. It had been his glory to be a 
poacher on another man’s manor, to filch souls, 
as it were, out of the keeping of a pastor of 
a higher grade than himself, to say severe things 
of the shortcomings of an endowed clergyman, and 
to obtain recognition of his position by the 
activity of his operations in the guise of a 
blister. Our Vicar, understanding something of 
this, had, with some malice towards the gentle¬ 
man himself, determined to rob Mr. Puddleham of 
his blistering powers.... He was painfully con¬ 
scious of the guile of this younjg man, who had, 
as it were, cheated him out of that appropriate 
acerbity of religion, without which a proselyting 
sect can hardly maintain its ground beneath the 
shadow of an endowed and domineering Ohurch. War 
was necessary to Mr. Puddleham."(2) 

It may be unfitting for me to close this chapter on suet 
an un-Trollopian figure as Mr. Puddleham. The interested rea- 
de^fr may study other, more representative , or more interes¬ 
ting clergymen of Trollope’s for himself.(3) 


(1) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 2. (2) Ibid ., 242-3. 

(3) Mr. Athill in Doctor Thorne , 234 

Mr. Wright in The Belton Estate , 22-3. 

Mr. Clavering in The Claverings , 14, 15, 108 

Mr. Thumble in The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 113. 

Dr. Tempest, Ibid ., II, 30, 32. 

Parson John, The Vicar of Bullhampton , 147, 151, 203 
Emilius, in The Eustace Diamonds ; and Phineas Redux . 
Mr. Puttock, The American Senator , 76-7, 287 
Dr. ,-vortle, Doctor Wortle’s School , 13; ch. XIII 
























. 











' 



' 
































246 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 
POLITICS 

/< k ) Par l i a-yv\g>\~t 

Trollope does not give us a studied account of the 
political history of his times; nor does he set out to give 
a complete picture of the political and parliamentary ar¬ 
rangements of his day* Nevertheless, he does manage to make 
lively material out of political incidents, characters and 
rivalries in five of his novels: phineas ffinn , The Eustace 
Diamonds , Phineas Redux , The Prime Ministe r, and The puke * s 
Children * 

In these novels his political characters seem so real, 
and are concerned with such actual matters of history that 
•safe it is difficult to deny that/Trollope intended them as 
portraits of real people. I have tried to establish a. real 
identity for each of these fictional politicians, but withou* 
success. In one place Trollope makes such a politician so 
much like Peel, or Gladstone, or Disraeli, that the reader 
has no doubt of an intended portrait; but a few pages fur¬ 
ther on, this same politician will be connected with an 
incident that flatly contradicts the truth of such a portraST 
The task of trying to identify Trollope’s politicians with 
actual Victorian parliamentarians would give ample material 
for a separate thesis. I have neither the space nor the 



































• - 5 



.. -,‘vy . . 
















. 




« 






t 
















. 


















247 


t 

skill in history to dtscuss the matter here. As an example 
of the disagreement which exists over this question I quote 
the following:- 

"How far Trollope’s politicians are portraits it 
is not easy to say. Mr. Frederick Harrison, who 
writes a charming little introduction to this 
new edition of an old book, will not allow that 
they are portraits at all. Mr. Daubeny is, of 
course, intended to suggest Disraeli. The poli¬ 
tical volte-face which he makes at a critical 
juncture in the nation’s affairs will seem fami¬ 
liar to all those who have lately read Mr. Mony- 
penny’s second volume: ’That speech of Mr. Dau¬ 
beny’ s will never be forgotten,,.’ The old Prime 
Minister listened apparently unmoved.’Mr. Mild- 
may sat and heard him without once raising his 
hat from his brow or speaking a word to his neigh¬ 
bour, ’ So sat Peel, Mr. Gresham may have been 
Mr. Gladstone — at the time the book was written 
this was supposed. ... Monk is, of course, inten¬ 
ded for John Bright, though a much less grand 
figure." (1) 


It is wrong to say that Trollope was not interested in 
the political activity of his time. Hot only did he write 
several excellent novels about such activity, but there is 
also constant reference, in most of his books, to political 
movements and events. Of course, he does not dwell upon 
these, for his purpose was to write novels, not historical- 
political treatises. We catch the exciting spirit of Eng¬ 
land’s imperial and commercial activity -- and Trollope’s 
own awareness of this spirit -- in his frequent mentionings 
of such things as the following:- 

0 ) '' 3, /9/3 , 7V&- 7 






- 



































- 












, 

»; . n, , nj 


















«& 48 - 


The question of Decimal Coinage. 

The slave trade. 

The French Revolution. 

The Divorce Bill. 

Danubian Principalities and the French Alliance. 

The war in India, in Russia, in Austria,, in hew Zealand, 

The American Civil War 

The Ballot, Church Reform. Flection Reforms. Catholic 
Emancipation. The Franchise. Rights of Jews. Free Trade. 

The Corn Laws. 

Panama Canal, 

African exploration. 

Strikes, Tenant right. Education. Enclosures. Income 
Tax. Drainage. 

These are only a few of the many political questions 
that Trollope mentions. I have given no book and page refe¬ 
rences for these, because they appear almost everywhere. 

His references to other matters of political interest 
are just as miscellaneous and frequent. It may be interesting 
to mention these just as I find them. Whether these matters 
were peculiar to Trollope’s own time, or are to be found in 
England to-day, does not concern mes- 

Perhaps not as it is to-day: ’’Parliament was a club so 
eligible in its nature that all Englishmen wished to belong 




o ■; 




■ 

. 

. 

. 

. 

V 

\ 

♦ 


.. . 5 



* 

n * ‘ 

. 

' " : ; 














249 


to it. They who succeeded were acknowledged to he the cream 
of the cream."(1) The size of the House of Commons in 
1869 is indicated hy a division in which the vote was 333 
to 314, a total of 647. This was not necessarily the full 
membership; hut it was close to it, for "so large a number 
of members had never before voted at any division."(2) 

The members of the House were diligent in their work, if 
late sittings are an indication of diligence. During impor¬ 
tant debates they kept their places until one a.m. and two 
a.m, (3), even until .three a.m. (4); and over a particularly 
momentous question, until five a.m.I (5) 

In the year of Parliament which Phineas Pinn (1869) 
discusses, the size of the Cabinet was fourteen members. 



The Parliamentary session usually started in February; 
and, if it was of ordinary length, lasted until the end of 
June(8); but was known, under pressure,to last until as late 
as August 23rd.(9) Autumn sessions, though most unusual, 
were sometimes held.(10) Under all but the most pressing of' 


(1) The Duke’s Children , I, 198 

(2) Phineas Finn , I, 73 

(3) Ibid., I, 60 

(4) Ibid ., I, 71 

( 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 ) Phineas Redux , X, 394 

(6) Phineas Pinn , I, 104 

(7) Ibid., I, 139, 404 

(8) Ifrid .> I» 340 

(9) Ibid ., II, 99 

(10) Ibid ., I, 363; The Prime Minister , II, 439 





















250 


circumstances, there was no session on Wednesday evenings, 

nor on Saturday evenings.(2) 

A Member of Parliament could not resign his seat:- 

"And very wise men in Tankerville were much sur¬ 
prised when they were told that a Member of Par¬ 
liament cannot resign his seat,-- that when once 
returned he is supposed to be, as long as that 
Parliament shall endure, the absolute slave of 
his constituency and his country, and that he can 
escape from his servitude only by accepting some 
office under the Crown. 1 ' (3) 

Members of Parliament received no salaries nor 1 sessio¬ 
nal indemnities;’ and were paid only if they were members 
of the Cabinet or if they were appointed to some civil 
commission. (4) Perhaps this disadvantage was offset to 
some extent by the fact that Members were immune from arrest 
for indebtedness and all ordinary civil offenses.(5) 

It is interesting to follow in Trollope’s novels the 
gradual political recognition of Jews. We discover that 
Jews were not allowed to sit in parliament in 1858.(6} In 
1863, however, we find one of them running for parliamentary 


(1) Phineas Pinn , I, 325; phineas Redux , II, 53; 

■ The Way We Live how , II, 294; The Prime Minister , 11,125 

( 2 3 4 5 6 ) Phineas Finn , II, 364 

(3) Phineas Redux , II, 337 

(4) Phineas Finn , I, 34, 46, 53; The Puke’s Children, II, 15: 

(5) Phineas Finn , I, 80, 240; 

Pramley Parsonage , 37 

(6) The Three Clerks, 433 
Doctor Thorne, 189 































. 




’ 

. L . 




. 






. 

■ 

. 













t 


t t 




<■ 4 












■5 

4 1 « 

, 






























251 


office, but much to the horror and dislike of the more 
conservative people.(1) This same dislike is evident in 
novels published in 1865 (2), 1874 (3), and 1876 (4); al¬ 
though by the latter date we find that there were a large 
number of Jewish Members of Parliament.(5) 

(b) Political Par ties ' 

More interesting than the above collection of miscel¬ 
laneous facts, are the discussions in Trollope of the social 
and political attitudes of the various Parties. 

The Conservative attitude is nicely defined by Trol¬ 
lope’s great Liberal, the Luke of Omnium:- 

” ’The Conservative who has had any idea of the mea¬ 
ning of the name which he carries, wishes, 1 sup¬ 
pose, to maintain the differences and the distances 
which separate the highly placed, from their lower 
brethren. He thinks that God has divided the world 
as he finds it divided, and that he may best do his 
duty by making the inferior man happy and contented 
in his position, teaching him that the place which 
he holds is his by God’s ordinance*’” (6) 

Trollope’s Conservatives are, generally, a pessimistic 
lot when they are discussing matters of government: 

’’Ho one is any longer fit to rule himself, or those 
belonging to him. The Government is to find us all 


(1) Rachel Ray , 236, 238, 332. 

(2) The Belton Lstate , 93 

(3) The Way he Live How, II, 93 

( 1 2 3 4 5 6 ) The Eustace Diamonds , 404 

(5) Idem 

(6) The Prime Minister , II, 319-20 
























2 52 


in everything.”(1) 

Their usual cry was that the country was ’going to the 

dogs; 1 and that ’the good old days’ were to be regretted. 

Typical of them all is Prank Greys took’s father, who was, 

”a fine old Tory of the ancient school, who thought 
that things were going from bad to worse, but was 
able to live happily in spite of his anticipations. 

The dean was one of those old-world politicians ... 
They feel among themselves that everything that is 
being done is bad,-- even though that everything is 
being done by their own party f It was bad to inter¬ 
fere with Charles, bad to endure Cromwell, bad to 
banish James, bad to put up with William. The House 
of Hanover was bad. All interference with preroga¬ 
tive has been bad. The Reform Bill, was very bad... 
Every step taken has been bad. And yet to them old 
England is of all countries in the world the best 
to live in, and is not at all the less comfortable 
because of the changes that have been made. These 
people are ready to grumble at every boon conferred 
on them, and yet to enjoy every boon. They know too 
their privileges, and, after a fashion, understand 
their position. It is picturesque, and it pleases 
them. To have been always in the right and yet al¬ 
ways on the losing side; always being ruined, always 
under persecution from a wild spirit of republican- 
demagog ism,-- and yet never to lose anything, not 
even position or public esteem, is pleasant enough. 

A huge, living, daily increasing grievance that does 
one no palpable harm, is the happiest possession 
that a man can have. There is a large body of such 
men in England, and, personally, they are the very 
salt of the nation.”(2) 

also 

The Duke of Omnium asfego has a word to say^in definition 
of Liberalisms - 

"The Liberal, if he have any fixed idea at all, must 
I think have conceived the idea of lessening distan¬ 
ces,-- of bringing the coachman and the Duke nearer 
together.” (3) 

“ { 1 ) • (z) >2*^ J 27-r- 

(3) j J-L , 2-/ 














- 










. V: . p :: 


. 

. 

.*. ■ ■ « 

, 




. 


* 














. 




■ 

. 

■ ¥ V ■> ■ • •;)“ 

■; . J. . 










' ' ' ' / 

s ■" ' ■ , 

< ' « 

, 




' 












l • 

- « : 

. 











255 


Trollope finds the Liberal Party, in 1873, more aris¬ 
tocratic than the Conservative Party:- 

11 .among the old Whigs a halo of statecraft has, 

for ages past, so strongly pervaded and enveloped 
certain great families, that the power in the world 
of politics thus produced still remains, and is even 
yet efficacious in creating a feeling of exclusive¬ 
ness. They say that *misfortune makes strange bed¬ 
fellows 1 2 . The old hereditary Whig Cabinet ministers 
must, no doubt, by this time have learned to feel 
themselves at home with strange neighbours at their 
elbows* But still with them something of the feeling 
of high blood, of rank, and of living in a park with 
deer about it, remains.” (1) 

While concerning themselves with the bringing together 
of the upper and lower classes, the Liberals, nevertheless, 
did not believe in absolute equality. "Equality is an ugly 
word and shouldn’t be used,” says Mr. Monk, Si It misleads, 
and frightens, a,nd is a bugbear.” (2) Generally, the Party 
followed the lead of the ”old-Whig moderate Liberals,”(3) 
and only the more advanced bothered with such reforms as the 
Ballot and Church disestablishment. Lord Silverbridge is of 
the opinion that there is little to choose between the Con¬ 
servatives and the Liberals,-- that it is just a matter of 
deciding which of two groups of men, as men , one would rathei 

associate with, (4/ But his friend, Tregfir, maintains that 

a 

the Liberals, whether they wish it ot not, are bound to go 


(1) Phineas Kedux , I, 433 

(2) Phineas Finn, I, 156. (3) Phineas Redux , I, 4 
(4) The Duke’s Children, II, 143-4 



















e ' 




















. 














' 




. 










« 

.. ! ' , 

” .. 


« • 






1 


- t 












2 54 


from one reform to another, to the logical conclusion of 
complete social revolution, by the very nature of their 
party policies and because of the pressure of their more 
extreme members.( 1 ) 

If the Conservatives and the Liberals-were similar to 
each other in policy, they were both quite different from 
the Radicals. A Radical was a man who had no use for esta- 
blished institutions. He looked upon himself as a servant 
of ’ the people 1 rather than of *Tne Crown.* (2) Such a 
politician as this was Mr. Turnbull, who found his strongest 
support among the people of Manchester:- 

"Progressive reform in the franchise, of which man¬ 
hood suffrage should be the acknowledged and not 
far distant end, equal electoral districts, ballot, 
tenant right for England as well as Ireland, reduc¬ 
tion of the standing army till there should be.no 
standing army to reduce, utter disregard of all 
political movements in Europe, an almost idolatrous 
admiration for all political movements in America, 
free trade in everything except malt, and an abso¬ 
lute extinction of a State Church,-- these were 
among the principal articles in Mr. Turnbull’s poli¬ 
tical catalogue." (3) 

The radical voter was profee to believe that a king was 
not only a bad man, but a worse man than any other.(4) Some 
of the Radical .Members of the time advocated the establish¬ 
ment in England of a "Red Republic."(5) Such people were 

known as "Democrats( 6 ) They found support among the w Bri- 
(1) Idenu ~(2) Rhine as Finn , I TdQ-lfiTTiP > Idem' 

(4) The Small House at Ailington , II, 269. 

(5) Phineas Redux, I, 358 ( 6 ) phineas Pinn 9 157 
























. 

































< 






















' . 

■ 

. 




! 

u 






* 


































255 


tish Fenians.”(1) For the most part, the Radical members of 
the House of Commons were economists and argumentative 
philosophers,-- "men of standing and repute, who are always 
in doubtful times individually flattered by Ministers(2) 

As one or the other of the other parties ventured further 
and further along the roads of reform, they absorbed the 
philosophies of the Radicals if not the Radicals themselves. 

(C) g t «<L C-t < QT\ S 

Trollope has a lot to say about Flection Reforms and 
about electioneering. 

As late as 1877, he has his irrepressible American, 
Flias Gotobed, criticize the inequalities of electoral 
representation in the House of Commons.(3) ”£opulation," he 
says,”hardly bears upon the question.”(4) He cites instances 
of unequal respresentation: A tom of 15,000 with 2 members; 
one of 400,000 with only 3 members; and another of 50,000 
with one. A certain village of 200 voters sends one member 
to Parliament, while the city of London, with 25,000 voters, 
sends only four. 

This inequality of representation, the discrepancies 
in size of constituencies, the complete control exercised 

< 6.1 ) The Rustace Diamonds,' 2 75 

(2) The Duke 1 2 3 4 s Children , I, 69 

(3) The American Senator , 356-7. 

(4) Idem . 





















256 


over some boroughs by the local magnates, and the extension 
of the franchise to a greater number of people, were the 
chief concerns of the several Reform Bills passed and mooted 
during Trollope's life. All through his political novels he 
mentions these various problems; but he gives us no parti¬ 
cular information on any of them, except, perhaps, on the 
question of 'Rotten Boroughs. 1 Mr. Turnbull, the Radical, 
considered it to a much greater honour to be the freely 
elected member for a commercial constituency, than to be 
returned from a county or small town where the electorate 
was more than likely controlled by a local landowner.(1) 

The towns of Barsetshire are described as places,"which 
return members to Parliament, generally,-- in spite of Re¬ 
form Bills, past, present, and coming -- in accordance with 
the dictates of some neighbouring land magnate.”(2) One such 
magnate, the earlier Duke of Omnium, is described. Election 
statements in support of his candidate, 

”.... did not say one word of the Duke of Omnium, 
though everyone knew what the Duke was supposed to 
be doing in the matter. He was, as it were, a grand 
Llama, shut up in a holy of holies, inscrutable, 
invisible, inexorable .... But, nevertheless, it 
was he who was supposed to rule them. Euphemism 
required that his name should be mentioned at no 
public meetings in connection with the coming elec¬ 
tions; but, nevertheless, most men in the county 

(1) Phineas Finn , I, 203 
(2/ Doctor Thorne , 1. 











. 

' 










« 


















. 

• l: - : . 








. 






.... 


■ J ] 




« 


... 




* . • 







t 





























257 


believed that he could send his dog up to the 
House of Commons as member for West Barsetshire 
if it so pleased him."(1) 

When being Elected 1 in such a rotten borough, phineas 
Finn had no more to do thald deliver one speech, after which 
two other men ma.de a speech each in proposing him and secon¬ 
ding him. And he was elected!(2) The ’owner 1 of such a 
borough sometimes used his control for the benefit of his 
Party, sometimes to provide a seat in parliament for his 
son, or even as a means of making money by actually selling 
the seat to anyone who cared to pay for it.(3) 

The pfrwer that a landowner had in such a rotten borough 
arouse odt of the fact that there were very few electors 
in the borough, and that the landowner could bring strong 
economic pressure to bear upon those of his tenants who 
would not vote as he wished them to. He could allow them to 
hold their land under very short leases, which he could can¬ 
cel if they were disobedient; he could prevent them from 
killing game on their own farms, from selling hay off the 
land, from taking money for anything but their corn and thei 2 
cattle. He could make difficulties for them over the rotation 
of their cropit^All these possibilities he could hold over 
their heads as threats of punishment for any political 

intractability. The mere existence of the threat was usually 

(1) Framley Parsonage, 400T T^T"Phineas Finn, 379 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 2-3 

(4) Ibid., 113-4 









. 




' - 











- 



































J . 1 


... ... 








- 








- . 

r • 


















* 


. 

t ... 












2 58 


enough to guarantee the tenant’s good, behaviour. The Reform 
bills gradually eliminated many of these rotten boroughs; 
and the controllers of some others relinquished their con¬ 
trol as a matter of conscience* But such boroughs continued 
to exist to Trollope*s latest day:- 

”»• *There is Braxon,’ said the Duchess energetically* 
’where the Marquis of Crumber returns the member 
regularly* in spite of all their Reform Bills; and 
Bamford.* and Cobblesborough;— and look at Lord 
Lumley with a whole county in his pocket, not to 
speak of two boroughsl What nonsense, Plantagenet] 
Anything is oo nstitutional* or anything is unconsti¬ 
tutional, just as you choose to look at it. ,{l (1) 

In constituencies where there was no domination by the 
landowner election campaigns we re exciting and hard-fought 
feattles. The first thing a candidate did was to appoint an 
election agent, whose duties were the same as those of a 
modern ’campagin manager.* Some of these ”parliamentary 
agents” were in great demand, and were paid high fees for 
their work. While the candidate went around canvansing the 
electors, his agent was busy organizing them, propagandizing 
them, and, unofficially, bribing them. They took advantage 
of every foible in the opposing candidate to print squibs 
and lampoons and caricatures which they posted all over the 
constituency. They kept close day-to-day records of each 
voter’s sentiment; and, accordingly, advised their candidates 
where and how to expend their canvassing energies. As the 

(1) The Prime Minister « I- 314-5. (2) Pramley Parsonage ,513. 



















. 



















































i 





• 





« 





? 
















? 










, 








. 




; s ■ 


.. , .. 







, 



, 



















- 

. 













■ 















voting day approached, the candidate, his agent, and his 
friends would go from house to house earnestly soliciting 1 2 
each citizen’s vote; platforms would be erected from which 
loud, sometimes uncomplimentary, statements would be made. 
All the workers on one side watched all the workers on the 
other to see if they could detect the least evidence of 
bribery; for, according to election laws, the smallest proof 
of bribery on the part of any candidate or his agents could 
give cause for a petition to declare th^election illegal. 

If the election was very close, such a petition was 
almost automatically f^led; for almost any act on the part 
of the candidate could be interpreted as bribery,-- even 
the buying of a drink for a friend, if that friend was also 
a voter. (I have listed references to bribery and petitions 
in the footnotes.) (1) 

Running for parliamentary office was not a poor man’s 
game: Aside from the fact that a successful candidate mm 
received no sessional indemnity, the cost of his election 
can paign was usually excessively high. Frank Gresham sr. 
spent ten thousand pounds in one contest. (2) This, howe-ver, 

(1) Doctor Thorne , 194-5; 201-2; 215; 264-8. 

Phineas Redux , 1, 10} 40; 44; 60; 15. 

II, 34, 40 

(2) Dogtor Thorne, 5. 























' 




, 


. 












J r 




























. . ... 




, 

■ 










? 

< • « 












260 

was exceptionally high. The borough of ! Tillietudlem* 
usually cost its candidate two thousand pounds.(1) But 
a rotten borough might not cost any more than six hundred 
pounds(2), or even as little as £247 15s. 9d.(3) 


(1) The Three Clerks » 358-9. 

(2) Idem . 

(3) phineas Finn , I, 379 













261 


)|i 

CHAPTER TWELVE 
TRANSPORTATION 

(a) By Road. 

Our modern mechanical means of transportation are so 
different from the means used in mid-Victorian times that it 
is difficult for us to realize the number and variety of 
horse-drawn vehicles used in those days, We are also so 
accustomed to travelling upon improved highways that it ta,kes 
some effort to recall that England had few paved roads out¬ 
side the large cities, and only roads roughly macadamized 
with local gravels wherever the heavier traffic passed throu 
the country.(1) 

The following means of transportation by road are men¬ 
tioned by Trollope:- 

The donkey-cart (2): Used in this instance by a town 
carter for the carrying of luggage. Usually a. four-wheeled, 
springless cart, drawn by a donkey or by such an inferior 
work-horse as a man of this class could afford. 

The tax-cart: A farmer’s vehicle, used for general 
hauling about the farm (3)# It was also used by the gentry, 

on occasion, with horses hitched to it in tandem, for short 

(1) G.M.Young, Early VicTorian England , (London, 1954) 1, 22 

(2) Rachel Ray , 111 

(3) Barchefc&er Towers, 229 


>(R ; 




























, 

' 















. 

■ 

. 

, 

. 














. . • 





















262 


for the short journeys of several men to ana from the 
estate in the country.(1) 

The spring-cart: A four-wheeled cart fitted with 
springs, and used by farmers.(2) 

The gig: A light, one-horse vehicle, suitable for two 
people, usually open on all sides. These were oftened owned 
by country people, and provided an economical and convenient 
ireans of travel for clergymen in their parochial duties.( 3 ) 
They were also used by farmers who could afford more than 
their work-carts.(4) They also provided a popular means of 
transportation from railway stations to homes in the country 
and were usually hired from inn-keepers for such purpose! 

Other vehicles commonly let out for hire were the fly, 
the cab, and the post-chaise. The fly was a one-horse 
vehicle, usually closed in and with windows that could be 
opened or closed.(6) They could be hired from innkeepers(7), 
or could be had on the streets, much like the modern taxi (8)* 
However, the "common street flies 81 (9) were beneath the 

(1) Doctor Thorne , 231 

(2) Orley Farm , I, 403 

(3) Bardies ter Towers , 485; Praia! ey Pa r sonage i 18, 74 

(4) Barchester Towersm 419 

( 0 ) fframley Parsonage , 73; The Belton Estate , 28; 

The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 125 

(6) Barchester Towers , 459; Doctor Thoren , 430 

(7) Barchesterv Towers , 110 

(8) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 63 

(9) Idem 




























263 


dignity of those who could afford to hire anything “better. 
Such people might hire a fly ” done up to look like a private 
brougham.”(1) 

The cab was the commonly hired vehicle in London and 
other larger centres. It was to these cities what the fly 
was to the towns and country places. It was the same enclosed 
kind of hansom cab that is still seen in some cities* par¬ 
ticularly since the restrictions on gasolene. Gabs were to 
be had from the many n stands” in London* or might be found 
roaming the streets. (2) Gab-drivers are called ’’haunters of 
the streets by /night."(3) These vehicles were sometimes 
leased or hired as private cabs;(4) and .some young dandies 
used^enjoy driving their cabs themselvess ”Silverbridge does 
at night, when he thinks people won’t see him... He was out 
once without the man and took up a fare,-- an old woman, he 
said. And when she was going to pay him he touched his hat 
and said he never took money from ladies.”(5) 

Whenever people in the country wished to go somewhere 
in a hurry, or whenever they wished to make an impression, 
they hired a post-chaise drawn b}^ four horses. In such a 
contraption they would travel at a good clip over the country 
roads, and pull up at their destination with a great noise ff 

(1) Orley Farm , I, 144 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 245 

(3) The Way We Live How, II, 199 

? he Lukpig Childre n, li 2 63. (3) ibid ., 335 

















. 










. 




' 




, 

■ 


. 


, 




• i 




. 












■ 








• 



/ 

. 
















9 


















264 


of grinding wheels and stamping horses.(1) The use by a 
traveller of a post-chaise and pair was enough in itself to 
suggest the importance and urgency of his journey; to use a 
post-chaise and four horses was even more impressive.(2) 
Such equipage was jis t the thing for honeymoon couples on 


their departure: u She and Alaric were whirled av^ray by a post- 




chaise and post-boy, done out with white bows, to the Hamp¬ 
ton Court station.”(3) The post-chaise was usually to be 
had from the innkeeper. 

The Pony Carriage, sometimes called a pony chair, was 
a small, two-wheeled cart, drawn by one horse. It was a 
safe means of travel for ladies, curates and old men.(4) 

The Phaeton was also popular with such people. It was 
usually drawn by two horses; but there were, also, one- 
horse phaetons.(5) It was a four-wheeled affair.(6) Such 
vehicles were used in country places by the squires and the 
clergymin! Dr. Century* for example, droved about in an old- 
fashioned phaeton that rumbled in its progress. (3) 


(1) Doctor Thorne , 405 

(2) Pramley Parsonage , 405 
Orley Parm , II, 43 

(3) The Three Clerks , 182 

(4) The Harden, 125, 197; The Claverings , 20 

(5) The Belton Estate , 11 ; The Vicar of Bullhampton , 466 

(6) The Vicar of Bullham pton, 466 

(7) Pramley Parsonage , 60; 

Rachel Hay , 251, 344 

(8) Doctor Thorne , 375 























■ 






















~ 











. 

' 

- ; 

■ 












265 

The dog-cart was smaller than either the phaeton or 
the pony-carriage, huilt rather for convenience than for 
comfort, and was used by country people for short trips 
to and from town and the railway station,(1) 

The trap is mentioned in only one place, as a high¬ 
wheeled vehicle owned by young Peregrine Orme, and used by 
him at his father 1 2 3 4 5 6 s country estate.(2) 

Another vehicle found on country estates was the drag. 
This was a large cart, with four wheels, and usually drawn 
by four horses. Whenever several men had to travel together 
the drag might be used.(3) Its commonest uses were to carry 
guests and their luggage to and from the station, and to 
take people to hunt meets.(4) 

In most of their ordinary comings and goings, the 
standard private vehicle of well-to-do people was the brou¬ 
gham. This was definitely a private kind of carriage.(5) 
Such^wea-lthy clergyman as Dr. Grantly kept one for his per¬ 
sonal use and used it in most of his clerical business.(6) 
Such a well-to-do and fashionable physician as Dr, Pillgrave 

v 1 ) Orley Farm II, 396 

The Belton Estate , 223 

(2) Orley Farm I, 514 

(3) The American Senator , 477 

(4) Phineas Pinn , 173 

The American Senator , 506 

(5) Orley Farm , I, 144 

(6) Tlie 'Warden, 104 ; Barchester Towers , 42, 151, 257 



















































. 


- 


* 

„ 




* 













266 

made most of his professional visits in his own brougham.(l) 

The elder Duke of Ommium, when making a rather questionable 

visit upon Madame Goesler, went to her home in his private, 

dark green, curtained brougham.(2) 

But the aristocrat of all vehicles was the private 

carriage, with its driver up front and its two powdered 

footmen behind^ and sometimes painted with coloured panels, 

and with a monogram on its door.(3) In such a carriage the 

Proudies drove,’’with a loud rattle and such noise as great 

men and great women are entitled to make in their passage 

through the world.”(4) When the|wealthy Miss Dunstable want 

down to the country for a visit, though she travelled by 

train, she ’’brought with her her own carriage, her own horses 

( 5 ) 

her own coachman and footman, and her own maid, of course.” 
The possibility of owning her own carriage was a very impor¬ 
tant consideration to any young lady contemplating marriage 
with this or that man.(6) In fact, the carriage, was the 
surest badge of high social standing, and something for the 
ownership of which many ladies would sacrifice much more 
essential and less expensive comforts. If one did not own 
a carriage, she could hire a ”private-looking” one for as 

long as she required to make a good impression.(7) _ 

T‘11" "po cTo r Th o rne , 143 

(2) phineas Firm , II, 211. (3) The Three Clerks, 428 

(4) Barchester Towers , 346. (5) Doctor Thorne , 190 

(5) Ibid ., 451 (67 The Small house at Ailington , II, 289 















' 













* 

























* 


■ 8 






. 




















* 















. 

' 







. 




■ 



























. 

























































, 







■ 




. 




• c 

t 














267 

The omnibus was known in London as early as 182 9; but 
they were not popularly used until after 1855, when a French 
company bought up all existing lines and organized a cheap 
#l&ns of public travel. Trams w$re not tried until 1861, 
when, after a short experiment, the rails were taken up and 
the service discontinued.(1) Four hundred omnibuses were put 
into use between 1850 and 1337, most of them being used to 
transport London workers to the city and back to their subur¬ 
ban homes.(2) Trollope mentions such an omnibus running out 
to Dulwich.(3) In another place he mentions the fare as 
being four pence (4), rather high for the labourer. The Rev. 
Mr. Harding is described as journeying "back sadly to the 
Chapter Coffee House... in a clattering omnibus, wedged 
in between a wet old lady and a journeyman gla.zier returning 
from his work with his tools in his lap.”(5) We are told 
that omnibuses were by no means comfortable, and n the straw 
(in them) always stinks.** (6) These huge, horse-drawn 
vehicles were used in towns outside of London, At Barchester 
there was always one at the station to meet the train.(7) 

At Courcey, one took passengers from the station to the Red 

(1) G.M.Young, op. cit ., I, 22 

(2) Ibid ., I, 173 

(3) The Small House at Allington , II, 548 

(4) The Three Clerks, 197 

(5) Tiie T Jar den , 199 

(6) Orley Farm , II, 121 

(7) The Warden, 241 





























. 

. 



. „ 

. 




, 


' 






. 

. 

... 







. 




1 1 






6 







. 


. 





















1 • 
















268 


Lion inn$ and at Allington and Guestwick the "Ma,gpie" inn 
operated another) while the town of Loring boasted two inns, 
with an omnibus from each "competing with great ardor" for 
the luggage of travellers.(3) 

There was a great deal of riding about on horse-back. 
Young John Bold seems to have used this me&hod of transpor¬ 
tation exclusively.(4) The Rev. Mr. Arabin also used it(5); 
and he was given a wedding-present of a "cob" by his father- 
in-law, Archdeacon Grantly.(6) The squire would keep a 
"hack" for the express purpose of "going to cover." (7) Li*. 
Thorne did all of his professional visiting on one of his 
two horses, carrying his medical equipment in a, saddle ba 
On occasion, Mark Hobarts would prefer to ride one of his 
horses to travelling in his gig.(9) The only ladies who 
rode seem to be those few who indulged in fox-hunting: The 

''i 

much less exciting and safer donkey was provided to Mary 

Thorne for her daily amusement,(10) 

Wherever people went, they rode or drove. Only the very 
■... .— —■—-— — i,, r — —~—•—— —- ——————————.———--—- 

(1) Doctor Thorne , 182 

(2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 283 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 201 

(4) The Warden , 146 

(5) BarChester Towers , 280 

(6) Ibid., 503 

(7) Doctor Thorne , 364 
8) Ibid ., 116, 137, 152 

(9) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 209 

(10) Doctor Thorne , 332 


























' 




, 


' 




• * 

i . 


f * 































269 

poor were reduced to walking, such were Mr. and Mrs. Crawley, 
Mrs. Crawley once walked nine miles to Silverbridge.(1) 

Her husband, on a friendly mission to Mark Robarts at Rram- 
ley, walked a return journey of fourteen miles i (2) 

The most often mentioned item of luggage is the car¬ 
pet bag, used by people on Iheir train journeys, or on their 
visits to friends in their country neighbourhood.(3) When 
carrying a lot of clothes, as he would when a house guest at 
some country place, a man would use a portmanteau.(4) A 
lady, in addition to a carpet bag or portmanteau, might use 
a dressing case (5), and band boxes. (6) 

(b) By Railway. 

At the beginning of Victoria’s reign railways had hard¬ 
ly touched the life of England; but a short thirty years 
later saw them operating as fully formed and gigantic sys¬ 
tems that had changed the face of the country. All of this 
took place in Trollope’s time. His books are full of little 
mentions of railway travel. Realizing the newness of such 

(1) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 29 

(2) Rramley Parsonage, 168 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhanrpton , 201 

Barchester Towers , 110; The Three Clerks , 25, 38. 

The small House at Allington , II, 71 

(4) Rramley Parsonage , 23; The Last Chronicle of Barset ,Im296 

(5) Doctor Thorne , 139 

(6) The Claverings , 492 




























, 

■ 

’ 

' 






. 


* 




. 


















. 








, 

♦. • 























. 


































270 


m&ans of travel at that time, one wonders if Trollope’s 
novels were just as exciting and up-to-the-minute to his 
readers as modern novels which mention aircraft and wireless 


are to us. 

"When Pickwick began to appear in 1856, though the 
air was full of railway projects, England of the 
roads was almost untouched. Gig and coach, ostler 
and guard, and the great ritual of changing horses, 
seemed barely threatened. There were railways; but 
they were local affairs, mostly in the coal-fields, 
largely engaged in mineml traffic, and some of 
them still using horse traction. But the projectors 
and constructors were at work, and their leaders 
already had clearly in mind not just railways, but 
a railway system... By December 31, 1848" C90 there 
were 5,127 miles of railway open in the United King¬ 
dom, and over 2000 miles more under construction by 
an army of about 175,000 navvies and miscellaneous 
work-people. Coaches were extinct on all the main 
routes. All thought of making more canals, or of a 
national road policy, had faded away... Projectors, 
engineers, and navvies had clone their ?/ork quickly 
and well. And already, by that administrative com¬ 
bination of the railway lines first constructed in 
which George Hudson excelled., the skeletons of the 
great companies, as they existed down to 192 3, were 
taking shape. By 1865 they had almost reached their - 
final forms." (1) 

The newness of the railway f and yet the rapidity with 
which people accustomed themselves to it, are suggested by 
Mrs. Ray’s attitude s- 

"^thought the train never would get to the Baslehurst 
station. It stopped at all the little stations, and 
really I think I could have walked just as fast. 1 A 
dozen years had as yet not gone by since the velocity 
of these trains had been so terrible to Mrs. Ray that 
she had hardly dared to get into one of them!" (2) 


X, 19-20 ( 2 ) Rachel Ray , 280-1 


(1) G.M.Young, Op. Cit., 














i 




' 






? 

. 

c « : : 








* 
l 








2 71 


The growth of railways had a serious effect upon coun¬ 
try life;- 

"A speedy and uninterrupted journey to the destined 
spot replaced the picturesque tour with its .Rl^sure- 
ly pauses. The inn, one of our national glories, 
deteriorated into the hotel, a national disgrace... 

Mine host gave way to that less estimable national 
type, the landlady of a lodging-house. Villages, 
which had been in touch with the great world, and 
thrived as halting-places for the coach and the post- 
chaise, declined again into isolation. The Dover 
Road no longer greeted returning exiles with its 
almost continuous flower gardens. Shop-keepers in 
the smaller towns suffered; Lancashire housewives, 
for example, formed the habit of going by rail to 
shop in Manchester.” (1) 

For an excellent description of how the railways affecte< 

A 

the life of a small town, the reader is referred to Doctor 

Thorne , pages 182-4, This description is too long to quote 

mere. Some of the inn-keepers who had lost their coaching 

trade turned their inns into hunting centres, where hunting 

men could hire horses and live^ ;- 

”The Willingford Bull was an English inn of the old 
stamp, which had now, in these latter years of rail¬ 
way travelling, ceased to have a road business,-- for 
there were no travellers on the road, and but little 
posting,-- but had acquired a new trade as a depot 
for hunters and hunting men. The landlord let out 
horses and kept hunting stables, and the house was 
generally filled from the beginning of November till 
the middle of April, Then it became a desert in the 
summer, and no guests were seen there, till the pink 
coats flocked down again into the shires.” (2) 

In 1850 the urban population of England was only slightly 

(1) G.M.Young, Op, Git., II, 295-6 

(2) phineas Finn , I, 260 

































' 

« • t 

- , 

3 




. 







































t 





j 




























„ 








































272 


larger than the rural population. But 

"The gap was widening fast during the following 
decades, with the help of a completed railway 
system; hut not until 1881 would the urban popu¬ 
lation he more than double the rural. In 1861 
it stood to it in the ratio of 5 to 4. n (1) 

"London had been growing by about a quarter of a 
million a decade before the railway terminal 
stations were designed. They helped it to double 
that rate of growth in the decades following 1841. 
Concurrently, they hastened the dispersion of the 
more comfortable Londoners into suburbs, a process 
which had set in more than a generation earlier. 

But it was not until the end of the early Victorian 
age that they did anything to spread out thinner 
the whole London papulation. Even the emptying of 
the City, its change from a place of residence to 
a place of business, did not begin until the fif¬ 
ties. The emptying began slowly somewhere about 
1855, and did not become marked until after 1861, 
when it was helped by the Metropolitan Railway, 

* the underground*, opened in 1863. The early empty¬ 
ing was not, effectively, into suburbs or into the 
country; only into other parts of central London -- 
Seven Dials, perhaps, or 3t. Giles*; or across the 
river into the pestilent undrained slums of the 
Surrey side." (2) 

Trollope mentions the ’underground railway*.(3) It is 
interesting to compare the above quotation from Marly Vic ¬ 
torian England , with one from one of Trollope’s novels 

"It is very difficult nov^adays to say where the 
suburbs of London come to an end, and where the 
country begins. The railways, instead of enabling 
Londoners to live in the country, have turned the 
country into a city. London will soon assume the 
shape of a great starfish. The old town, extending 
from Poplar to Hammersmith, will be the nucleus, and 


(1) G.M.Young, On. Cit ., I, 3-4 

(2) Ibid ., I, 21-2 

(3) The Eustace Diamonds, 136 














. . 

. . 




















. 






. 

. 

t ' 


















, . 




. 












. . 

* * 
















2 73 


the various railway lines will he the projecting 
rays. 

"There are still, however, some few nooks wi¬ 
thin reach of the metropolis which has/e not been 
be-villaed and be-terraced out of all look of rural 
charm, and the little village of Hampton, with its 
old-fashioned country inn, and its bright, quiet, 
grassy river, is one of them, in spite of the triple 
metropolitan waterworks on the one side, and the 
close vicinity on the other of Hampton Court, that 
well-loved resort of cockneydom."(1) 

The extent to which the face of London was being ves. 
altered by the laying of railway tracjfs and the building of 
stations is suggested by Trollopes ironical remark:- 

"On that day her husband was very fully engaged,-- 
having to meet a synod of contractors, surveyors, 
and engineers, to discuss which of the remaining 
thoroughfares of London should not be knocked down 
by the coming railways." (2) 

The average spded of various trains was 29 to Z6 miles 
per hour, exclusive of stops.(3) Yet, Mrs. Ray complained of 
their slowness(4); and it was said that the railway jour¬ 
ney to London was slower than a carriage journey.(5) 

Travelling by rail was not particularly pleasurable. 

The trains were cold, judging by the wraps and shawls that 
travellers carried. (6) On long journeys meals had to be- 
eaten from hampers carried on the train, or taken hurriedly 


(1) The Three Clerks , 22 

(2) The Claverings , 330 

(3) 0.K.Young, op. Cit ., II, 294-5 

(4) Rachel Ray , 281 

( 5) The Duke T s Children , I, 332 
(6) The Small Piouse at Allington , II, 284 
The Belton Estate, 258 


























. 









\ X 

t-' 

s • 




y . 





■ 



* 

■ 












. 



















* 



























c* ... 

, 

















03 ^ H 


274 


at station stops on the way.(l) "By 1850 ... the Refresh- 
ment Room with its hoiling soup and leathery bun, was an 
established institution.”(2) 


) The Belton Estate , 309 
) Rhineas Redux , I, 111 
} Cr.M.Young, Op. Cit. t II, 2 95 















275 


CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
MISCELLANEOUS NOTES 

The information I have found in the novels on some 
topics is not sufficient to warrant a separate discussion of 
any one of them. Therefore I have lumped all such topics 
together in this miscellaneous chapter. 

(a) London 

Although some of Trollope*s novels deal a great deal 
with London, there is disappointingly little information to 
he gleaned from them about the city and its people. This is 
largely due to the fact that Trollope was interested in 
people and their individual characters ra,ther than in types 
of people and their environment. 

Most of all, he mentions London streets;just mentions 
them,and nothing more. A study of questionable value might 
be made of these streets to determine which of them were 
fashionable in Trollope f s time; but I am ins lined to believe 
that the information in the novels is so soimpy that no 
trustworthy conclusions could be drawn from such a study. 

We learn that London was acquiring its”third million 
of inhabitants” in 1858 (1); and the same vague figure of 
three million is mentioned again in 1869.(2) 


(1) Doctor Thorne , 185. (2) Vicar of Bullham.pton, 493 











' 








- 



































. 


















276 


In the summer time people were apt to be bothered by 
the flies(l), and the dust (2), and the stinking river.(3) 
Owing, possibly, to the great commercial growth, the buil¬ 
ding of railways, the planning of streets, and the construc¬ 
tion of many new buildings, "all the streets were pulled 
up.* 1 2 * 4 5 (4) We are reminded also of the street illumination 
by gaslight.(5) 

And that is about all. 

In one place, at least -- and only in this place, as 
far as I could find — Trollope gives a lively glimpse of 
London life. It is London after midnights- 

H He walked from Norfolk Street into the Strand, 
and there the world was still alive, though it 
was now nearly one o'clock. The debauched misery, 
the wretched outdoor midnight revelry of the world 
was there, streaming in and out from gin palaces, 
and bawling itself hoarse with horrid, discordant, 
screech-owl slang... 

"He.went along the Strand, over the crossing 
under the statue^ of Charles on horseback, and up 
Pall Mall Bast till he came to the opening into 
the park under the Duke of York's column. The Lon¬ 
don night life was all alive as he made his way. 

Prom the Opera- Colonnade shrill voices shrieked mak 
out at him as he passed, and drunken men coming 
down from the night supper-houses in the Haymarket 
saluted him with affectionate cordiality. The hoarse 
waterman from the cabstand, whose voice had perished 
in the night air, croaked out at him the offer of 
a vehicle; and one of the night beggar-women who 



(1) Doctor Thorne , 537 

(2) The Three Clerks , 249 

( s ) Bhineas Finn, II, 99 

(4) The Vicar olHSullhampton , 488 

(5) The Dustace Diamonds, 430 


























' 









: 

- 

* 

■ 




. . • f - ~ I 




f . 

_ 

t 

' * • * 

. 

. 

. 


































277 


cling like burrs to those who roam the street 
at these unhallowed hours still stuck to him, 
as she had done ever since he had entered the 
Strand." (1) 

Aside from this rather sanctimonious description, and 
another/ one of a robbery by night in St. James Park, there 
is little in all the novels to convince the reader that 
London was anything but a collection of more or less fashio¬ 
nable streets, inhabited by well-to-do people, who went to 
their clubs, to the House of Commons, to teas and to balls; 
and that during the off-season there was any soul in town 
besides* the crossing-sweepers and the few unfortunate Civil 
Servants who had to stick to their posts. 

Por amusement, of a commercial kind, people went to 
the opera, the pantomime, the music hall, the theatre, or 
to Madame Tussaud f s. But what they saw there, Trollope does 
not say. Those who could afford it went riding in the Park. 
An unattached young man without lady friends, like Johnny 
Barnes, usually contented himself by .walking the streets, 
going to the theatre, or spending an evening in a divan.(2) 
The Rev. Mr. Harding found the cigar divan to be a restful 
places (3) On entering what seemed to be a cigar store, one 
would pay a shilling and receive a cigar and a ticket for 

(1) The Three Clerks, 235-6 

(2) The Small House at Aldingto n, II, 551 

(3) The Warden , 211-2 

















. 

. 







1 


' 
















- 




































? 























■ 

. 










278 


coffee. This ticket would admit one to an upstairs room 
fitted with quantities of hooks and periodicals and long 
rows of sofas. There one would he offered coffee by a 
waiteri and might play a game of chess,or read a hook, or 
simply dose off on one of the sofas. For a more active and 
exciting form of amusement, a footloose young man might go 
to a gin-palace, or even to a dance-hall such as "the 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Sa¬ 
lon de Seville dansant, f at the bottom of Holhorn Hill."(l) 






Outside of the inns and hotels, meals could he bought 

in the public "eating-houses,” most commonly found in the 

■ 

Strand.(2) Some of the inns mentioned in the novels are: 

The Chapter Hotel and Coffee House (3), a most sedate old 
place frequented hy visiting clergymen; Gray*s Inn Coffee 
House, popular with lawyers (4); Fowler 1 s Hotel! and Paw- 
kins's Hotifl 'both in Jermyn Street; and an old Cromwellian 
inn, the Goat and Compass.(7) 

Most of Trollope*s London gentlemen belonged to clubs. 
Among the clubs, real or fictitious, mentioned are: The 
Beaufort, and Sebrights (8); the Rag (9); the Universe (10); 

(1) The Three "clerks,~161 

(2) The Warden , 209-11; The Small House at Ailington, II, 542 

(3) The Warden , 198 

(4) Doctor Thorne , 536 

(5) Phineas Redux , I, 20 

(6) The Small House at Allington , I, 412 

(7) Framley Parsonage, 353 

(8) The Small House at Al li ngton , I, 20 

(9) The Coverings , 176 . (ioT~ Phineas Redux , I, 372 



































* 



. 




* 















« ... " . ...... 

. 

. 

. 

. 

, ■ ■ ; 







‘ 
























■ 














279 

the Travellers (1); the Shakespeare (2); the Beargarden ( 3 ), 
Clubs whose membership was chiefly drawn from political 
circles, and whose interests were predominantly political 
were: the donservative Carlton (4); the Reform (5); Brooks^l- 
and the libera,! Progress. (7) This last-mentioned club not 
only discussed politics but even gave financial support to 
its favoured parliamentary candidates. '’Special clerical 
clubs" (8) were: the Oxford, the Cambridge, the Old Univer¬ 
sity, and the Athenaeum. 

Depending upon their individual characters, most of 
these clubs had their dining rooms, their smoking rooms, 
their billiard rooms, and their card rooms, lion-members were 
usually admitted only to the stranger's room (9), particu¬ 
larly if they might turn out to be creditors or other such 
unwelcome visitors. Members would spend their time dining, 
smoking, reading, playing cards or billiards, or just M stan¬ 
ding in the window.” (10) In such a, place as the Beargardei^' 

(l) Phineas Pinn , I, 206. (2) Ibid ., I, 241 

(3) The Way We hive how . 

(4) Phineas Pinn 

1 5) Ibid . 

6) Ibid. 

7) The Prime Minister 

8) Phineas Redux , I, 351 

9) The Small House a,t Allington , I, 475 
(10) Phineas Pin n, I, 206 
(11) The Way he Live How 























V ' 















. 




•S 







* 
















. 

* 











t 


t 

- 










t 






















280 

which was open only after three o’clock^ in the afternoon, 
the young bloods worked hard at the card tables, gambling 
for exceedingly high stakes and paying each other off in 
each others* I.O.U's. 


(b) prices and Wages* 

The following are the commodity prices and service 

charges I have found to be exactly stated in the novels 

A roast-goose dinner at a London eating-house (1) 

.. 1- shilling. 

A meal at a Thames Street eating house (2) 

. 10 pence 

A public dinner at a country tovra inn (3) 

.. 3 shillings, 6 pence 

A meal at a luncheon-house near Lincoln*s Inn (4) 


........ 1 shilling. 

A dinner at a London club (5) . 2 guineas 

A dinner at a country town Inn (6) 

in the public dining room ....... 3 shillings 

in the "commercial room" .. 2 shillings 

Meat (unspecified) (7)... .. 9 d. a pound 

Mutton chops, per pound (8 )...... 6 d. to 9 d. 


Turkey (9) weighing 24 pounds . 1 guinea. 


(1) Orley Farm, I, 121 

(2) The Three Clerks , 544 

(3) Rachel Ray , 362 

(4) phineas Finn , I, 9 

(5) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 406 

(6) Orley ?arm, ‘I, 119. p?) The Last Chronicle of B . I, 33 

(8) The Pay T/e Live how , L, 19 

(9) Orley Farm, I, 335 













































281 


A complete dinner for eight people brought 

into a home and served by a caterer (1)... £25 9s, 6d. 

For 90 dozen bottles of Bordeaux wine(2)., 104 pounds. 

Himalaya wines (5) .,.per doz. 22s, 6d. 

Champagne, from a grocery store (4) per doz. 6 s. 


Claret (5) . per doz.... 96 s. 

Beer (6) .. per pint... 2 d. 

Bitters (7).. per glass.. 3 d. 

Board and lodging for a girl, cheap, in 

London (8) ....per week 10 s. 

Lodging in one bare room for a country 

curate (9), per annum... 10 pounds 

Board and lodging for a young man in 

London (10) per annum... 48 pounds 

Cheap sitting room and bedroom in London,(11) 

per week ... 7 s. 


Two drawing rooms, a dining room and a bed¬ 
room, expensive, for a lady in London (12) 

per week.... 7 guineas 


A bed at an inn near London (13) per night -§■ crown 


Use of an inn sitting room (14) per day ... 10 s. 


i l) The Prime Minister II, 104 

2) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 2 57. (3) Ibid ., 382 
4) Rachel Hay , 91 
5) Doctor Thorn e, 411 

Rachel Ray , 2 9. (7) The La,st Chronicle of Barse t 1,244 

(8) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 332 

(9) The Claverings , 358 

(10) The Small House at AHington , I, 75 

(11) The Three Clerks , 516 

(12) The Clave rings , 51 

(13) The Three Clerks , 33 

(14) The American Senator , 193 























' 










«1 

■ 

: 




















282 


The minimum cost of clothing a family per 

person, per annum (1).. 

( 2 ) 

Material to make a girl’s party dress...., 

Horses, hunters, each: (3 

4 

5 

6 


Pony, used simply for getting about (7)... 
The feeding of such a pony (8), per week.. 
Keeping a horse in London (9), per annum.. 

The hire of a pony (10), per day . 

A rick of hay (11) ... 

Wheat (12), per quarter .... 


The hire of a cab in London, 

” off the stand” (13) . 

from the station to the home(14 
a distance of six miles (15)... 
per quarter-hour (16) .. 


(1) . The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 33 

(2) Rachel Ray , 71 

(3) Phineas Finn , I, 267 

(4) Orley Barm , I, 392 

(5) The Rustace Diamongs , 277 

( 6 ) IMd., 168 
(.7) Ibid . , 168 

(8) Ibid., 292 

(9) The Three Clerks , 398 

(10) The Rustace Diamonds , 169 

(11) Ibid ., 277 

(12) Doctor Thorne , 170 

(13) The Small House at Ailington , II, 548 

(14) The Claverings , 310 

(15) The Last Chronicle of Barset, I, 386 

(16) Ibid ., II, 211 

The Bustace Diamonds, 40 


10 pounds 

2 pounds 

70 pounds 
150 pounds 
160 pounds 
250 pounds 

10 pounds 

18s. 6d. 

70 pounds 

18 d. 

£75 15s. 6d. 
80 s. 


6 d. 

) -J- crown 
3 s. 

6 d. 
















































283 


The hire of a gig (1), 15 miles . 1 sovereign 

10 miles ( 2 ) . 15 s. 

Pare and all expenses , London to Florence 

and return (3) . 40 pounds 

Railway fare (4), 80 miles ... 10 s. 6 d. 

Rentals:- 


For 300 acres of land (5)# per annum .... 400 pounds 
For the privilege of shooting on an estate, 


(6)per annum .... 30 pounds 

Farm land (7) per annum,.per.acres....... 17 s. 

(8; per annum, per acre ....... 30 s. 

Rent and upkeep of a London house (9) per 

annum .. 1000 pounds 

A house in Bs.rchester, costing £600, (10) 

per annum.... 70 pounds 


Indemnity paid to a farmer whose land was 

hunted upon, (11) per acre. 7 s® 6 d. 

Cost of building a country house (12)....£22419 4s. 6d. 

Value of part of a country estate (13)... 25,000 pounds 
Land (14), per acre ..................... 20 pounds 

Revenue from a country estate (15)per annum £4000. 


(I) . Fragiley Parsonage , 73. (2) The Bustace Diamonds, 190 

(3) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 433 

(4) Rachel Ray , 2~807 ('5) "OrTey Farm , I, 10 

(6) The Belton Fstate , 39. (7 ) IbTcU , 5 

(8) The American Senator , 238. (9) The Claverings , 173 

(10) The Last Chronicle of Barset , II, 35 

(II) The American Senator , 21 

(12) Doctor Thorne , 424 

(13) The Belton Rstate , 370 

(14) The Bustace Diamond s, 235 

(15) Ibid., 12 







































284 


The following are some of the incomes enjoyed toy 
Trollope’s characters 

Squires (in pounds per annum) :- 

2,000 (1); 3,000 (2); 4,000 (3); 14,000 (4); 

20,000 (5). 

Noble landowners (in pounds per annum) 

20,000 (6); 40,000 (7); 60,000 (8). 


Allowances given to sons (in pounds per annum) 
300 to 400 (9); 600 to 700 (10); 800 (11); 


7,000 (12). 

Widows ( in pounds per annum) :- 

1200 (13); 300 (14) This widow, with two daughters 
was considered poor; 400 (15) “Moderate enough for 
all the wants of a gentleman’s family.” 

A wealthy parliamentarian (Mr. Turnbull, the Hadical), 
30,000 pounds per annum. (16) 

(17) 

A foreign diplomat in Patagonia, 3,000 pounds per annum. 


(1) The Belton Estate , 2 

(2) The Small House at Aldington, I, 8 

(3) Phinee,s Redux , I, 314 

(4) Doctor Thorne , 13; Ibid ., 559 

(51 Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 1 

(6) Framley Parsonage , 272 (7T~ The American Senator ,lit 

(8) The Claverings , 13 (9) Doctor Thorn e, 548 

(10) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 176. [llj Ibid ., I, 18 

(12) The Small House at Aldington , II, 238 

(13) The Belton Dstat e, 11 

(14) The Small House at Aldingt on, I, 32 

(15) The Three Clerks , 2,5. ” (16) Phineas Finn , I, 196 

(17) The American Senator, 219 




































285 


The following are some of the salaries and wages paid 


to people of various occupations in Trollope’s novels:- 


A young girl teaching in a private 

3 pounds 


school (l) 
per month. 


A private governess 



60 pounds per annum 
50 pounds per annum 


A lady’s companion (4) . 70 pounds per annum 

(Another, "without salary, in¬ 
deed,-- but receiving shelter, 
guardianship, and bread and meat 
in return for her services* 1 2 * * * * * * *) (5) 

Cook (6) .. 70 pounds per annum 

(7) ... (60 pounds per annum 

(16 pounds per annum 


"A working lad" about the house. (8) 

10 shillings per week' 


Nursemaid **to find her own tea and 

wash for herself." (9) ..... 12 pounds per annum 

Gardener (not particularly ex|>erl) 1 guinea per week 

Gamekeeper (11) .. 5 or 6 shillings per week 

Village post-mistress (12): ’’Tuppence farden a day." 

"Managing clerk" (13) ....... 1,000 pounds per annum 


(1) The hast Chronicle of Barse t, I, 88 

(2) Bar Chester Towergf , 111. ~~ (3) The Eustace Dia,monds2 54 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds , 164. (5j lb id ., 254 

(6) Barchester Towers , 111 

(7) The Small House at Allington , II, 441 

(8) Ibid ., I, 31 

( 9 ) The Way We Live Now , II, 285 

(10) The Eustace Diamonds, 158 

(11) Ibid ., 169 

(12) The Small House at Allington , II, 570 

(13) The Claverings , 64 



































286 


Junior clerk (1) 



Brickmaking labourer (2) ... 


Witness fee (3) , 



Brewery worker ( 

after forty 
on the job] 

years 

(4).. 2 pounds per week 

Common labourers 

(5) .. 


(6) . 


Rural labourers I 

[7) . 


8 ) . 



(c) Meals, 

The most frequently-mentioned hour for breakfast is 
nine o 1 clock;(9) although the favoured hour in the country 
seems to have been eight o T clock.(10) Other times mentioned 
^re: half-past nine (11), ten o'clock (12), and eleven 

clock;-- this last-mentioned time being at a country house- 
party. (13) 

Prayers were usually said before breakfast.(14) The 
hostess, or, when only the family was present, the mother, 

. ^resided w at the bottom among the teacups.” (15) _ 

‘ (l) Phineas Finn II,“^T2"5T~72T ^The Last Chronicle , I, 122 

(3) Idem . (4) Rachel Ray , 320 

(5) The Bustace Diamonds , 184. ^~6T ^TheAme rican s e n a tor ,557 

(7) The Vicar of Bullhampton, 2 84 

(8) The American Senator , 6 

(9) The Bustace Diamonds , 255; The hast Chronicle , II, 308 

10) Ibid ., II, 69, BarChester Towers , 337 

11) The Prime Minister I, 462 ~ (12) The Three Clerks , 10 

13) The Small House at Ailington , 451-2 

14) Or ley Parm, I, 519; ~(15) _lhid., I, 300 

The Last Chronicle of Bars .,1,2 30 
Ibid., II, 308 










































287 


The following are some of the foods eaten for break¬ 
fast : - 

Tea "made in an urn”, rolls and toast, eggs, fresh 
butter, and devilled leg of fowl.(l) 

Coffee.(2) 

Bacon, dry and buttered toast, bread and butter, and 
a cold shoulder of mutton. (3) 

A slop-bowl full of tea, bread and butter and eggs.( 4 ) 



An omelette, German sausage, and a cutlet 


Other foods mentioned, but not eaten at one particular 
breakfast, are: mutton chops (6), devilled kidneys (7), 
fish (8), cold pheasant (9), and game-pie (10). 


Lunch was a comparatively unimportant meal in Trollope 1 (II) 5 
time in England* In fact, some people argued that it was 
*'a bad thing.” (11) At any rate, it was never a heavy meal; 
and it was generally considered that "meat was an abomina¬ 
tion in the middle of the day.” ( 12 ) 


(I) Barchester Towers , 337. (2) Ibid ., 158 

(3) The harden , 232 ( 4 ) Doctor Thorne , 35 

(5) Phineas Redux, I, 115 (6) Orley Farm , I, 250 

(7) The Way We Live how , I, 113; Ibid ., II, 332 

(8) Ibid ., II, 332 

(9) Rachel Ray , 114 

(10) The American Senator, 264 

(II) The Small House at Ailington , I, 213 

(12) Qrley Parm , I, 259 






































i 


• 


■ 

. 







■ 




" • 










. 



* 


. 

- 



















, 





• ; « 




: 


* 


- 




■ 

I 


. 














288 


In the few places that lunch time is mentioned by 
Trollope the hour is always at or near two o’clock. (1) 

Some of the lunches mentioned consist of the following 
foods and drinks:- 

Chicken, ham, and port wine. (2/ 

A biscuit,or bread and cheese, and a glass of sherry.( 3 ) 
Bread and cheese, and beer, eaten in tbe office by a 
Civil Service clerk.(4) 

A game-pie and a pint of champagne, at the club. (5) 

Cold roast beef, hot potatoes, and Madeira wine. (6) 


Dinner, however, was not just a meals It was an "impor¬ 
tant ceremony." (7) Trollope’s people always "dressed" for 
dinner. Bach gentleman always gave his arm to a lady when 
"going down" to the dining-room,-- even when the dinner was 
an ordinary, everyday family affair (8);-- even in a fairly 
common London boarding houseI(9) The father usually sat at 


(1) The Small House at Allington , II, 346-7 

Orley Barm, 1, 202 ~ 

The" Bustace Diamonds , 2 56 
The Way We Live How , II, 28 

(2) Barchester Towers , 209 

(3) Orley Barm , I, 109 

{ The Small House at Ailington , II, 345 

(4) Ibid ., II, 202 

(5) The Duke’s Children , II, 262 

(6) Framley Parsonage , 165. (7) Barchester Towers , 113 

(8) Barchester Towers , 263 

(9) The Small House at Allington, I, 542 




























289 

the bottom of the table (1) , and. the mother at the top. ( 2 ) 
After the dessert, the ladies usually retired, leaving the 
gentlemen, after the cloth was drawn, to drink their wine 
at the bare mahogony table. Usually the gentlemen were 
entirely alone at such times: even the butler left them.( 3 ) 
Sometimes, however, particularly when only the family was 
present, the ladies would stay while the wine was being 
passed, when they might eat thein/dessert, nibble at some 
nuts, or, in the case of the mother, have one glass of wine 
with the gentlemen. (4) Grace was usually said, before din¬ 
ner (5); sometimes it was said both before and after. (6) 

Many hours are mentioned by Trollope as being dinner 
time,-- all the way from one o’clock in the afternoon to 
half-past seven in the evening. But the later one had his 
dinner, the more fashionable he was considered to be.(7) 
Among the unstylish people who dined early were the Quiver¬ 
fuls ( three o’clock) (8), and the Tappitts and the Rowans, 
who dined at three o’clock in the winter and at one o’clock * 

(1) The Small House at Allington , II, 554 

(2) Doctor Thorne , 65 

(3) The Small House At Allington , I, 323 

( 4 ) Doctor Thorne , 363 
Orley Barm , I, 192 

(5) Ibid., II, 399 

(6) The Small House at Allington , II, 441 

(7) Barchester Towers , 227 

(8) Idem . 




















♦ 

. . 


' 




■ 













• : 




















* 









’> v 

: <i 


* 


























290 


in the summer. (1) Lady Amelia Gazebee, who was a stickler 
for propriety and stylishness^dined at five o’clock on 
Sundays (2), and at seven o’clock on week-days.(3) The 
Hardings dined at four o’clock in the summer (4), and at 
six o’clock in the win^jt.(5) All the other times mentioned 
are between five o’clock and half-past seven. 

Trollope is full of the ceremony of this evening meal, 
"but he has very little to say about the foods eaten at it. 
These are some of the foods he mentions 
Soup. (6) 

Sweethreads and sea-kale (7) 

Stewed beef. (8) 

Beef steal: pie. (9) 

Cold mutton and potatoes. (10) 

Fresh gooseberries for dessert. (11) 

He never neglects, however, to mention the drinking of 
wine after the meal. The wines he mentions as passing among 


(!) Bachel Ray , 135 

(2) The Small House at Aldington , II, 87 

(3) Ibid ., I, 462 

(4) The Warden, 25 

(5) Ibid., 120 

(6) The Small House at Aldington , I, 543 

(7) Orley Farm , II, 108 

(8) The Small House at Aldington , II, 441 

(9) Rachel Ray, 70 
(1°) Ibid ., 53 

(11; Doctor Thorne , 363 






















291 

the gentlemen, "steadily in transit," (1) are Claret, 

Port, and Madeira, Sometimes, as a concession to righteous¬ 
ness, wine was not served on Sunday.(2) Gentlemen of lower 
taste, or lower income, sometimes preferred "steaming gin- 
and-water" (3), or "brandy-and-water (4) after their meals. 


Almost a separate little meal in itself was "Tea", 
served hy the hostess in her drawing-room to the ladies and 
gentlemen, after the latter would join the former following- 
dinner. Tea/ was evidently never poured until the gentle¬ 
men arrived from the dining-room, no matter how late they 
might he.(5) Sometimes hread-and-butter was served with the 
tea (6); and sometimes coffee, instead of tea., was served^ 
It was not uncommon for an overstuffed host or hostess to 
fall sound asleep in the drawing room at tea time.(8) 

To people like the Tappitts, who had their dinner at 
noon, "tea" meant the evening meal, eaten at about half- 
past seven. (9) ' 


1) The Small Hous e at Aldington, I, 131 
Ibid., II, 91 
Ibid., II, 91 
Ibid ., II, 324 
Doctor Thorne , 368 
Orley Farm , I, 428 
The Darden , 123 
Orley Farm , I, 567 

The Small House at Allington, I, 117 
Ibid ., I, 410 
Rachel Ray , 151 


3 ) 

s) 

( 6 ) 

( 7 ) 

IS) 




















. 
















292 


CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
THE CHANGING TIMES 

In writing this thesis I have said that this or that 
custom was thus and so. There is a, danger in this; and it 
must he remembered that what was true at one particular 
time may not have been true a few years later or a few years 
earlier. The years covered in this thesis were in an era 
of transition. When Trollope began writing his novels Eng¬ 
land was emerging from the rather insular, feudal, and some¬ 
what licentious times of the Georges. As one of his novels 
follows another we see the change to a more sober, indus¬ 
trious, earnest and moral society. And towards the end of 
his career we begin to find ourselves in the extravagant, 
imperial, commercial, democratic England which came after 
the ’retirement 1 of the Queen and-with the growing, influence 
of the prince of Wales. 

I. have noted, in passing, some of the changes in Eng¬ 
lish life,-- particularly in my chapters on Costume and on 
Transportation. In this chapter I shall draw attention to 
some others. 

There are many little evidences in the novels of the 

tvi evfbcrh 

breaking down of the caste system. These I shall just 

as they occur in my notess- 












































. 








' 


















, 


' i 

« 















295 


Concerning 1 proper T marriages, Augusta Gresham says * - 

"I hear some people say that these sort of things 
are not so much thought of now as they were once, 
and that all manner of marriages are considered 
to he comme il faut .” (1) 

It is not to be doubted that Judge Stavel.ey would have 
been accepted in almost any society; but he had never been 
a hunting man, because “when he had been a young man it had 
not been the custom for barristers to go out hunting." (2) 

By 1869, when The Vicar of Bullhampton was published, 
"marquises were not very different from other people...(ana) 
... every man was entitled to as much obedience as his money 
would buy, and to no more. This was very lamentable to the 
Marquis; but nevertheless, his son was the coming man, and 
even this must be borne. 81 (3) 

By 1873,we learn, (4) that noblemen' think nothing of 
taking up commercial careers as mine owners, brewers, ban¬ 
kers, gamblers and politicians, Mr. Maule was of the opinion 
that 


‘‘The grace and beauty of life will be clean gone 
when we all become useful men... Here are sons of 
noblemen going into trade on every side of us. We 
have earls dealing in butter, and marquises sen¬ 
ding their peaches to market,” (5) 

“City people” were becoming 11 just as good as West 3nd 

people;” (6) and it was becoming “a met ter of i nd ifference 

(1) Doc to r Thorne" , 4 52 . ~ TsT Or ley Barm , I, 409 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 305-6 

(4) Fhineas Redux , I, 259 (5) Ibid ,, I, 326 

(6) The Way We Live Hot;, I, 89 






















2 94 


whether anybody was Jew or Christian." (1) 


There were, in the very moral earnestness of the Vic¬ 
torians, the seeds of that moral leniency which was later 
to characterize the Bdwardians, and which begins to appear 
in Trollope*s latest novels. Michael Sadlier has expressed 
this very well:- 

11 Forced to maintain the social rectitude that was, 
as it were, their charter, but willing at the 
same time to emulate the legendary dissipation 
of their predecessors, they evolved the curious 
blend of public virtue and private license, which, 
under the name of *British respectability,* was 
to become the affliction of their grandchildren 
and the mockery of foreign nations. 11 (2) 

In 1858, when Doctor Thorne was published, reference 
is made to the passing of "old fashioned courteous ways;"(3) 
and five years later, in Hachel Ray , these extinct manners 
are called "the stiff urbanity of former days." (4) If, in 
1875, a lady curtseyed, she had to remind herself "that in 
these days only housemaids ought to curtsey." (5) 

In love-making, the mid-Victorian considered it old 
fashioned to kneel at his lady’s feet, or put his hand on 
his heart. (6) By 1865 gentlemen had "laid aside the humble 


(1) The ¥ay We Live How , II, 92 

(2) Michael Sadlier, Op. Cit ., 24 

(3) Doctor Thorne , 179 

(4) Hachel Ray , 345 

(5j The Prime Minister , II, 433 
(6) Or ley Bam , II, 367 


































I 






4 



’ 

* 








' 






















, . . 

■ 

- 








- 










e 















. 









295 


way of making love for the last twenty years at least.” (l) 

11 Such kneeling on the part of lovers used to be 
the fashion because lovers in those da.ys held 
in higher value than they do now that which they 
asked their ladies to give,-*- or because they 
pretended to do so. The forms at least of suppli¬ 
cation were used; whereas in these wiser days 
Augustus simply suggests to Caroline that they 
two might as well make fools of themselves to¬ 
gether,-- and so the thing is settled without the 
need of much prayer.” (2) 

Whereas it was the general mid-Victorian rule that a 
wife had to do everything her husband ordered her to do, 
without/, question, we see emerging, in 1876, a new freedom 
for wives; Mrs. Carbuncle tries to pacify two quarreling 
lovers by saying, "As if each of you won’t have to do what 
the other suggests.” (3) In the same year we are told that 
M girls in these days are not expected to be their father’s 
slaves” (4) in matters of courtship. Three years later a 
father is made to say, ”A man in these days cannot dictate 
to his daughter what husband she should marry,” (5| 

In the Last Chronicle of Barset (1867) we find some 
men and women (6) treating each other with much less for¬ 
mality and much more intimacy than in any of the earlier 
novels; - ___ 


(1) The Belton Estate, 26 

(2) Ibid ., 379 

(3) The Prime Minister , I, 46 

(4) The Eustace Diamonds , 325 

(5) The Vicar of Bullhampton , 218 

(6) The Last Chronicl e of^Barset , I, 400-2, 407 



















■ 




« 




**. ■ 












- 








- 


















* 

' 





























.. 





















296 


""It’s the way of the world just at present that 
ladies should submit to that sort of thing from 
gentlemen. T 

"’What sort of thing, Miss Demolines? 1 2 3 4 

"’Chaff, as you call it. Courtesy is out of 
fashion, and gallantry has come to signify quite 
a different kind of thing from what it used to dow"(l) 

This new freedom between the sexes was due to the fact 
that women were becoming less helpless in their attitudes 
and to a growing disregard for the stricter proprieties:- 

"We unprotected females in these days are so self- 
reliant that our natural protectors fall off from 
us, finding themselves to be no longer wanted... 

"There used to be a time, and that not so long 
ago either, when young gentlemen and ladies were 
thought to be very dangerous to each other if they 
were left alone. But propriety is less rampant now, 
and upon the whole virtue and morals, with discre¬ 
tion and all that kind of thing, ha/ve been the 
gainers." (2) 

Mrs. Pipkin 

"had not been allowed to go to the theatre with a 
young man when she had been a girl,-- but that 
had been in the earlier days of Q,ueen Victoria, 
fifteen years ago (about 1860), before the new 
dispensation had come." (3) 

And in matters of courtship, 

"It is certainly part of the new dispensation that 
young women shall send and receive letters without 
inspection." (4) 


(1) The Last Chronicle of Barset , I, 407 

(2) Phineas Finn , II, 85-6 

(3) The Way We Live Bow, I, 399 

(4) Ibid ., I, 454 
















297 


In Trollope's first novel on English life, The harden , 
we meet charming clergymen of the old pre-Sabbatarian 
school. We catch a glimpse of comfortable old Bishop Grant- 
ly, who takes his post-prandial bottle of port as a matter 
of course, and does not concern himself with the temporal 
peccadilloes of his flock and its pastors. There is Arch¬ 
deacon Grantly, who keeps as sumptuous a table as any world¬ 
ly gentleman, and, but for his clerical garb, is no diffe¬ 
rent than any wealthy, indulgent country squire of his day. 
Such men lived graciously and well, and saw no evil in 
the wining and dining and dancing and Gard-playing of so¬ 
ciety. 

But they very soon have to do battle with such militant 
Sabbatarians as Mrs. Proudie and Mr. Slope. They are quickly 
put in the wrong and called upon to defend the innocence of 
their ways. Before long the graciousness of their lives is 
a thing of the past, the Sabbatarians are in control, and 
most of Trollope’s characters accept supinely the dicta of 
earnest morality, propriety, and respectability in everything 
they do. Well within the active period of a man’s lifetime 
these violent changes occur; and Archdeacon Grantly, remi¬ 
niscing with Mr. Harding, is able to recall the recent ’good 
old days’ as if they were fond memories of a distant, golden 
past:- 












' 




■ 

' 









, 















































* 




* 










. 














298 


"’’Goodness gracious, when one thinks of it! Do 
you remember how we used to play cards? 

"’Every night regularly;-- threepenny points, 
and sixpence on the rubber, * 1 * 3 said the archdeacon, 

” ’Dear, dear! How things are changediyAnd I 
remember when the clergymen did more of the dan¬ 
cing in Barche$ter than all the other young men 
in the city put together,’ 

’’’And a good set they were;-- gentlemen every 
one of them,,!” (1) 

•Mr. Clavering, in the same vein of reminiscent regret, 
says:- 


’’’But clergymen were gentlemen then, I don’t know 
what the church will come to; I don’t indeed*’” ( 2 ) 

It is interesting to note that Trollope recognizes 
this changing attitude as a change in the times themselves, 
and not just as a change in particular men; for he makes 
Archdeacon C-rantly himself admit this fact:- 

’’’Dear, dear,’ said the archdeacon, as he stood 
afterwards on the rug before the drawing-room 
fire (at the Bishop’s palace), ’how many rubbers 
of whist I have seen played in this room,’ ’I 
sincerely hope that you will never see another 
played here,* said Mrs. Proudie. ’I’m quite sure 
that I shall not,* said the archdeacon, For this 
last sally his wife scolded him bitterly on their 
way home, ’You know very well,* she said,’that the 
times are changed, and that if you were Bishop of 
Barchester yourself you would not have whist played 
in the palace,’ ’I only know, 1 said he,’that when 
we had the whist we had some true religion along (3) 
with it, and some good sense and good feeling also.’” 

But there came a reaction against this strict morality; 

and, in some of the later novels, we find men treating 

(1) The Last Chronicle of""Barset , I, 224-5 

(2Y The Claverings , 356 

( 3 ) The Last Chronicle of Bar set , II, 37 













■ 




• 









■ 



















. 














■ 



* ’ 






































, 







, 















„ 





• 
















■» 


























; 











299 


lightly even the matter of church attendance itself. It is 
notable that all such men in the novels were attractive 
people, and that Trollope did not find it necessary to make 
excuses for their attitudes. There were, for example, Lord 
Ghiltern (l), and ’Dolly’ Longstaffe (2), and Mr. Quicken- 
ham, the lawyer, who preferred to take a walk to Brattle*s 
Mill to going to church:- 

"Any such investigation as this which he had on 
hand was much more compatible with his idea of 
a holiday than attendance for two hours at the 
Church Service. On Easter Sunday he would make 
the sacrifice,-- unless a headache, or pressing 
letters from London, or Apollo in some other 
beneficent shape, might interfere and save him 
from the necessity. Mr. Quickenham, when at home, 
would go to church as seldom as was possible, 
so as to save himself from being put down as one 
who neglected public worship.” (3) 

That moral, industrious, earnest, and proper ’respec¬ 
tability’ which has earned the name of ’mid-Victorianism’^ 
started to give way after the death of Prince Albert in the 
1860’s. The Queen went into retirement: n From dowdy society 
is withdrawn the very reason for its dowdiness.”(4) In the 
1870’s-* 

”The Prince of Wales steps to the centre of the 
stage. Pashion of a new and cosmopolitan kind 
comes violently to life, and with it license. The 
Prince seeks money a,nd pleasure where they may be 
found, . 

(1) Phineas Pinn ; Phineas Reaux . 

(2) The Duke’s Children, I, 317 

(3) The Vicar of Bullhamnton , 300 

Michael Sadlier, o- p . c jt. , 20 




















* 

■ 












■ 

i ■ 






















•> 

. 


















• 
















t 








































300 


t 


11 The agricultural prosperity comes to an abrupt 
end. The former ruling class draws into retire¬ 
ment or invests its wealth in trade. The now 
triumphant money-power launches the country on 
the viVid adventure of Imperialism. 

"The self-sufficiency of England is over. 

"Mid-Victorianism -- as Trollope knew and loved 
it -- is at an end.” (1) 9 



(1) Michael Sadlier, Op. 0it. 9 20 












501 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

(in the list of Trollope’s novels, the date in 
■brackets is the date of first publication. The 
other date is that of the edition consulted in 
the writing of this thesis.) 

Trollope, Anthony, The Warden , (1855) 1939 

B ar che s t e r To wers , (1857) 1939 

Pramley Parsonage , (1860) 1939 

Doctor Thorne , (1858) 1941 

The Three Clerks , (1858) 1929 

Orley Parm , 2 vols. (1860) 1906 

The Small House at Ailingto n, 2 vols. 

(1861) 1906 

Rachel Ray , (1863) 1924 

The Belton,Ustate j (1865) 1930 

The Glaverings , (1867) 1929 

The Last Chronicle of Barset , 2 void. 

(1867) 1932 

Phineas Pinn , 2 vols. (1869) 1937 

The Vicar of Bullhampton , (1869) 1933 
Sir Harry Hotspur of Humblethwaite , 


(1870) 1928 
























302 


Trollope, Anthony, phineas RecLux , 2 vols. (1873) 1937 

(continued) The Way We hive How , 2 vols., 

(1874) 1941 

The prime Minister , 2 vols., 

(1875) 1938 

The Eustace Diamonds , (1876) 1930 

The American Senator , (1877) 1931 

The Duke’s Children , 2 vols. 

(1879) 1938 

Doctor Wortle’s School , (1881) 1928 

(in the above list. Orley Farm , and The Small House at 
Allington , were studied in the Bodley Head edition. 

All the otherv titles were studied in the World 1 s 
Classics edition.) 

Trollope, Anthony, "Mfc. Freeman on the Morality of Hunting," 

Fortnightly Review ,(Dec., 1, 1869) 616-25 
Trollope, Anthony, "Public Schools," Fortnightly Review , 

(Oct., 1, 1865), 476-87 

"Trollope’s Mode of Work,” London Society , (1883) vol. 4, 

347-53. 

"Bnglish Characters and Manners as Portrayed by Anthony Trol¬ 
lope," Westminster Reviev/ , Vol., 123, 1884, 53-100 
























303 


,r A political Novel," The Spectator , May 3, 1913, 746-7 

Smith, G. Oswald, "The Parson in English Fiction," Canadian 

Journal of Religious Thought , March-Apri1, 
1930. 

Sadlier, Michael, Trollope: A Commentary , (London, 1927). 

Traill, H.D., and Mann, J.S., ed®, Social England , (London, 

1904), vo1« VI. 

Walkup, F.P., Dressing the Part , (New York, 1938). 

Wingfield-Stratford, Ssme, The Victorian Tragedy , The Victo¬ 
rian Sunset , The Victorian Aftermath , 
(London, 1930). 

Young, G.M., ed., Marly Victorian England , I & II (London, 


1934) 


















































