THE UKRAINIAN SETTLERS AND THEIR SCHOOLS 

With Reference to Government, French 
Canadian, and Ukrainian Missionary 
Influences 

1891 - 1921 

J. SKWAROK, O.S.B.M. 










©X JIBBI* 
aiBilWlBSK 





THE UKRAINIAN SETTLERS AND THEIR SCHOOLS 

With Reference to Government, French 
Canadian, and Ukrainian Missionary 
Influences 

1891 - 1921 

J. SKWAROK, O.S.B.M. 






Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/ukrainiansettlerOOskwa 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


8 (0 
4 ^5 


THE UKRAINIAN SETTLERS AND THEIR SCHOOLS 

With Reference to Government, French Canadian, 
and Ukrainian Missionary Influences 

1891 - 1921 

A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 

MASTER OF EDUCATION 


DIVISION OF SECONDARY EDUCATION 


BY 


J. SKWAROK, O.S.B.M. 
EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


1953 






ABSTRACT 


This thesis is a brief historical survey of the 
educational opportunities offered the pioneer Ukrainian settlers 
upon their arrival in Western Canada* The thirty-year period 
under investigation begins with the arrival of the ! first* 
Ukrainians in Canada in 1 $ 91 . This study attempts to gauge 
and evaluate the educational influences of government, missionary, 
and private forces concerned with the school problems of the 
Ukrainian settlers* The study is introduced with a review of 
the factors relating to the Ukrainian immigration and a short 
history of the Ukrainian immigration in Canada. The Basilian 
Fathers and Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate were the first 
Ukrainian religious groups to play an important role in the 
educational history of the Ukrainian Canadian settlers. The 
immediate work of the Basilian Fathers in education was closely 
linked with the contribution of the French Canadian missionaries 
who strove to provide educational facilities for Ukrainian 
children. An interesting aspect of the educational growth of 
Ukrainian Canadians in Western Canada was the establishing of 
the government-sponsored training schools before the First World 
War for Ukrainian students in Winnipeg, Brandon, Regina, and 
Vegreville. These schools prepared the students for the university 

iii 


? T 


X 


or the provincial normal schools, and in the case of the 
Brandon school, offered a three-year teacher-training program 
permitting the graduates to teach in Manitoba. This thesis 
also records a short history of two Ukrainian private schools, 
Sacred Heart Academy and St. Joseph’s College, which were founded 
in the times of the Ukrainian settlers in Saskatchewan and are 
successfully in operation today. The work and difficulties of 
the early Ukrainian teachers with particular reference to Alberta, 
and the use of the Ukrainian language in the schools, are discussed 
in Chapters VII and VIII. This study is based on a unique 
collection of relatively unknown original and primary sources. 

The included appendix on Ukrainian Canadian literature has been 
added as related information of general interest. The writer 
hopes that this work may contribute towards bridging one of the 
gaps in the educational history of the Canadian people. 


iv 







* 




1 






:■ '■ .0 















v.o 








FOREWORD 


Since the Second World War, a continuously growing 
interest has been revealed in Slav studies. Canadian universi¬ 
ties are becoming more and more concerned with the establishing 
of departments of Slav studies and are beginning to found lib¬ 
raries for the growing number of students interested in research 
in this and related fields. The Canadian press makes frequent 
reference to the increasing interest in the Canadian Slav groups, 
the Slav languages, and in the history and culture of the Slav 
peoples. 

One of the largest ethnic groups to immigrate into 
Canada was the Ukrainians The large-scale exodus from the 
Ukraine began with Wasyl Eleniak and Ivan Pillipiw who arrived 
in Canada in 1$91* The history of Ukrainian pioneering begins 
with these two men. At the beginning of the First World War, 
there were over 150,000 Ukrainians in Canada. With their arrival 
and settling in the prairie provinces, the various provincial 
governments and the Ukrainians themselves were confronted with 
a new problem in education. Schools and teachers were required 
for thousands of Ukrainian children who had little or no know¬ 
ledge of the English language. It is the purpose of this history 
to determine what steps were taken to meet a growing challenge 
ineducation during the pioneering life of the Ukrainian settlers 


v 


; L' : , : '- ■ ■■ ' '■ V 

. 

. 

« 

, c 

. 


. 

« 

* 

* 

„ i ■ 

. 

* 










and whenever possible to evaluate the effectiveness of the pro¬ 
cedures adopted* 

Very little research has been done on the history of 
the Ukrainian settlers in Canada, but in latter years Ukrainian 
Canadian university students in particular are beginning to take 
an interest in this relatively unopened field* Amongst others, 
there are one or two studies in assimilation, such as C. H* 

Young’s The Ukrainian Canadians * and Paul Yuzyk’s Social History, 
which is limited to the Ukrainians in Manitoba * At the moment 
other writers are preparing theses and dissertations on Ukrainian 
orgarizations, the Ukrainian Catholic press, and the educational 
achievements of the Ukrainian Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate 
during the past fifty years* 

The present work, which is limited to the Ukrainian 
settlers and their schools, deals with that difficult period 
between 1391 and the end of the First World War when the Ukrainians 
were confronted with the problem of settling down, opening new 
lands, and educating their children* It is hoped that this and 
other similar works will serve as a guide to sources and biblio¬ 
graphy, as well as encourage other graduate students who may 
desire to do research in a new and relatively unexplored field* 

In almost all instances the sources used are primary. 

When possible, interviews were held with pioneer teachers and 
early school organizers, or reference was made to written memoirs 


vi 










„ • 



' 

- 

t <. .• :. f 


* 

: t < 








< ' 








< 













< 










. 

■ 

, 

c • 












■ 

■ 



c . 





; 


v;'J . 











' 





■ ■: :h .• < 




or newspaper articles. It has been necessary to search old files 
of early pioneer Ukrainian newspapers, and often difficulties 
occurred because complete files of the earliest years are extremely 
rare. In many cases only one or two original copies of a paper 
or pamphlet remain and are museum pieces. Another valuable 
source, but unfortunately very rare and incomplete, is the early 
Ukrainian Calendar-Almanacs which are rich in information on the 
early Ukrainian pioneering life. In some instances it has been 
possible to examine original documents, or photostats of them 
which have been preserved through the care of the Basilian 
Fathers’ Archives and Museum at Mundare, Alberta. 

The writer is extremely grateful to the Very Reverend 
Father Josaphat Jean, O.S.B.M., who, although of French-Canadian 
descent, became one of the first Ukrainian-Canadian teachers. 

Father Jean, who himself has experienced the Ukrainian pioneer 
life as a missionary and teacher, has generously made a large 
personal collection of documents, letters, photographs, photo¬ 
stats, very early newspapers, calendar-almanacs, and pamphlets 
available to the writer. His compilation of materials on the 
early Ukrainian Canadian school problems has proved invaluable 
in the preparation of this work and as a guide to further original 
sources. The writer also wishes to thank the Very Reverend ¥. 
Shewchuk, O.S.B.M., of the Basilian Fathers in Canada for his 
unfailing interest and encouragement throughout the preparation 


vii 





















' 


* 

' 











: t ■ 

< ' ' < ■ : « - ' i: ' ' : ' " 

■ * - < ? 


■ 5 ** " * * * ' 

' ■ ■. .77 ’ ■ 1 ‘X :0 i .v,.'- 







j; '.7 



of this work. 

My sincere thanks go to Dr. B. E. Walker, Acting 
Chairman of the Division of Secondary Education, in the Faculty 
of Education, of the University of Alberta who has faithfully 
offered his time, counsel, and criticism during the entire 
writing of this work, and who has painstakingly made detailed 
corrections and observations throughout its writing. In addition, 
the writer is grateful for the advice, help, and cooperation he 
has received from Dr. W. D. McDougall and Professor W. Pilkington 
of the Faculty of Education, who generously agreed to become 
members of the Committee arranged for the critical observation 
of the writing of this thesis* 


viii 




* 

• 

•' 













' 


















<':: : 











t 












<5 


£ . 




. 









•: • *a 



■ 

% 


c 







■. u 



. 






• 




: ' 









< 




■ 




■ ; 









*, i 



* 






TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

FOREWARD v 

Chapter 

I THE HISTORICAL FACTORS RELATING TO THE 

UKRAINIAN IMMIGRATION . 1 

Introduction . 1 

Ukraine Under Austria . 4 

The Life of the Ukrainian Serf .... 5 

Economic Effects of the Abolition . 

of Panschyna . 7 

Indemnity .. 7 

Servitudes .. 8 

Propination . 8 

Conclusion . 10 

II A SHORT HISTORY OF THE UKRAINIAN 

IMMIGRATION IN CANADA - 1891.. 12 

Introduction .. • 12 

Immediate Causes for the Immi¬ 
gration . 14 

Difficulties in Emigrating... 16 

The Psychology of Parting .. 17 

The Pattern of Immigration ... 18 

Religious Faith and Customs.. 22 

Education and Social Status . 25 

Conclusion . 28 

III THE UKRAINIAN MISSIONARIES AND SISTERS 29 

Introduction . 29 

The Arrival of the Basilian Fathers 

and Sisters Servants . 32 

The Ukrainian Girls 7 Night School . 32 

The Ukrainian Sisters 7 School at 

Beaver Lake (Mundare) .. 35 

The Basilian Fathers and the 

Teacher Training School . 39 

The Sisters 7 School in Edmonton ... 41 

The Schools in Sifton and Yorkton . 42 

St. Nicholas School in Winnipeg ... 43 

Conclusion... 47 


ix 


























T 


Page 


Chapter 


IV THE FRENCH CANADIAN MISSIONARIES AND 
THEIR CONTRIBUTION TO UKRAINIAN 

EDUCATION . 49 

Introduction . 49 

Latin Rite Priests Enter Upon the 

Ukrainian Mission .... 49 

Efforts Towards the Establishing 

of Schools . •••... .. 51 

The Memorandum and Memoir of 

Archbishop Langevin ... 53 

The Missionary School at Sifton 9 57 

Program of Studies 9 St. 

Josaphat’s Missionary School in 

Sifton .. 59 

Conclusion .. 64 

V THE UKRAINIAN TRAINING SCHOOLS IN 

WESTERN CANADA. 66 

Introduction . 66 

The Characteristic Plight of the 

Ukrainian Schools .. 6? 

The Ukrainian Training School in 

Winnipeg . ... • 12 

The Ukrainian Training School in 

Brandon . • • • .. 74 

The Ukrainian-English Seminary in 

Regina ... 77 

The English School for Foreigners 

in Vegreville . 79 

Conclusion. £3 

VI THE UKRAINIAN PRIVATE SCHOOLS ...... 35 

Introduction . 35 

The Ukrainian ’Bursas 1 or Hostels 36 

St. Joseph’s College, Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan ... 39 

Sacred Heart Academy, Yorkton, 

Saskatchewan . 94 

Conclusion . 97 

VII THE UKRAINIAN LANGUAGE AND THE 

SCHOOLS .. 100 

Introduction... 100 

Developments in Manitoba. 102 

Developments in Alberta .. 105 

Conclusion ... <> 115 


x 





























Page 


Chapter 


VII THE UKRAINIAN TEACHERS AND THE SCHOOLS. 119 

Introduction . 119 

The Ukrainian-English Readers .. 119 

The Ukrainian Teachers 1 Conventions. 123 
The Work of the Ukrainian Teachers . 123 

Ukrainian School Names . 133 

Conclusion . 135 

IX SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION .. 139 

BIBLIOGRAPHY ........ 149 

APPENDIX - A BRIEF HISTORICAL SURVEY OF UKRAINIAN 

LITERATURE IN CANADA . 160 

Definition of the Problem. 160 

Anglo-Saxon Interpreters.. 163 

Ukrainian-Canadian Interpreters and 

Critics . 164 

The Generation Before 1914 .. 166 

The Emigre Poets . 16? 

The Canadian-Born or Canadian-Bred 

Group . 167 

Ukrainian Drama ..« 169 

The Ukrainian Prose Writers .. 1?0 

Elias Kiriak and his Epic, Sons of 

the Soil .. 172 

Conclusion. 173 

Bibliography ... 176 

APPENDIX - GLOSSARY OF TERMS . 130 





















1 




CHAPTER I 


THE HISTORICAL FACTORS RELATING TO 
THE UKRAINIAN IMMIGRATION 

Introduction 

This chapter attempts briefly to outline those pre¬ 
disposing causes and immediate economic effects of the 
abrogation of serfdom in the Ukraine in 1$4$> which led to 
the mass emigration of the Ukrainian peasant in the early 
1370’s* It does not touch upon the role of the Ukrainian 
intelligentsia who, painfully aware of the tragic lot of their 
peasant brothers, the soul of the Ukrainian state, did all in 
their power by means of their writings and their teachings in 
foreign controlled universities in the Ukraine to alleviate the 
unhappy lot of the vast peasant class held in bondage through 
the centuries* 

What made the Ukrainians come to Canada? For 
hundreds of years Ukraine has been a submerged nation* This 
land of forty million people has had its ethnographic boundaries 
overrun constantly through the centuries by its enemies* It 
has suffered subjugation, persecution, enslavement, and barbaric 
cruelty* Occasionally the world’s press makes casual reference 
to the Ukraine and its people which today as an enslaved satellite 
of the U.S.S.R* continues to be moved by a fierce restlessness 
of spirit and hunger for its independence* 


It may seem strange to the reader that Ukraine, once a 


E Hli ■ 


■ v : 


. 








e: . } ■ . ’ 


v'i'l . ' . ' . ■ v .L : -i. 

( ■ I..:.'! : : e -E. 'Ll e‘ ' ■ .■ i . . E ".0 t ' ‘.eS 

\ ‘ : . 0 

. .■ ♦ 7 ■ 

. , 1 vi C '/•: e • ' 

■■ c ■ t ■ 


cj :;. s : rjy .. ir . oe , e , : ;ev; ee //.a-.n ■ Je ,ee ! hug n 


Ei ■■■ • • e- e . e . ; ■ . 1 ■ < e. 


‘" S . O . ’ i , ■ ■ ) 


* 

. i . »• \ E 

. 

c < e: , E. j 

7 • : 




■ 


• 




■ ' o )i i : . 3 < 3 

. , * , 



.ee:e.e.; ,j .i :■■ E; Eiio'.:.. ee:): : ;ilUee hii'.: E'.’/.r.i: /; -‘.eO 


!>J ext e ; 


. 


c 


: ) 0 !;' 







2 


nation of glorious dynasties having diplomatic relations with 
all the important countries of Europe and feared by its enemies 
during the saga of its Cossack epoch, should eventually be 
reduced to a state of servitude and bondage. 

From the chronicles of Tietmar von Merseburg dated 
1017 one reads: 

The wide dynastic connection between the Kievan 
princes and the western European courts contributed 
to the preservation of historiographical sources per¬ 
taining to the strength, wealth and culture of the 
Kievan princes* 

Princess Anna, a daughter of Yaroslav the Wise, 
is mentioned in many French historical documents* 

The second wife of King Henry I of France, she out¬ 
lived her husband and became the regent for her minor 
son Philip I..••• 

Another daughter of Prince Yaroslav the Wise, 
Elizabeth, was married to the Grown Prince of Norway, 
Harold the Bold, a famous warrior who lived a long time 
in Ukraine and who later became King of Norway.1 

Writing on the same subject Paul Yuzyk says: 

Owing to her power, prosperity, and high level of 
culture, Kievan Rus developed wide dynastic and diplo¬ 
matic relations* Emperor Yaroslav was married to the 
daughter of the Swedish king, Olaf, and later to the 
daughter of the Byzantine emperor. One of his daughters 
was married to the Norwegian king, Harald Haardraade, 
claimant to the English throne. Another daughter, Anna, 
married King Henry I of France and ruled as queen during 
her son Philip 1 s minority. Other marriages took place 
with German, Hungarian, Greek, and Polish rulers. Before 
ascending the English throne King Edward the Confessor 
had sought refuge in Kiev, as did many others. Later 
Volodomir Monomachus (1113-25) another powerful ruler of 
the Kievan state, married Gytha, the daughter of King 
Harold of England.2 


IVolodymyr Sichynsky, Ukraine in Foreign Comments and 
Descriptions , p. 37. New York: Published by Ukrainian Congress 
Committee of America, Inc., 1953. 

2 Paul Yuzyk, The Ukrainians in Manitoba , a Social 
History, p. 7, Toronto: The University of Toronto Press, 1953. 









b 


:• 









t 


< 






< 











c c 



f 







t 








3 


It is also interesting to note that Edmund Ironside, King of 

the English (1016) sought refuge in the Kievan court of 
3 

Jaroslawo 

By 1667 Russia and Poland had divided Ukraine between 
them and re-established the feudalistic aristocratic order in 
spite of Cossack resistance under Hetman* * Peter Doroshenko and 
later Hetman Ivan Mazeppa. One of the last dynamic efforts at 
resistance, under the Zaporozhian Sich, was finally destroyed in 
1775 by the Russians* 

Ukraine’s former alliances with Russia under Hetman 
Khmelnitsky gradually paved the way for the infiltration of 
Ukraine by Russian overlords and absorption into the Russian 
Empire. Only an instinctive sense of self-preservation has led 
the Ukrainians to keep their identity as a nation distinct from 
that of Russia to this day.. Harassed from the north by Russia, 
the Ukrainians west of the Dnieper River were held under the 
tyrannical subjection of the Polish landlords. It was in parti¬ 
cular the thumb of the Polish nobility that the Ukrainian peasant 
had held over him during his long period of serfdom. The dire 
subjection of the peasants under the Polish landlords is a story 
in itself. It is a story of cruelty, tyranny, and the loss of 
human dignity. Here it is sketched rapidly to show those economic 
factors which led to the mass Ukrainian emigration,, 

^N. Polonska-Wasylenko, "Kniaza Doba”, Encyclopedia of 
Ukraine in two volumes, Vol. I, pp. 411-431• Edited by Volodymyr 
Kubijovyc and Zenon Kuzela. Munich - New York: Shevchenko Scien¬ 
tific Society, Inc., 1949* 

*For Glossary of Unusual Terms, see p. l£>0 o 











' s' - " t 1 

* 

- 

* 

, . < * -• 

. . .. '■ 


. - • * 

■ 

. 

, 

■ .. ■.?7: .. •: Lc\. .. 7 vC \irl^o 

• . 

c < 

. 




— 




. 






♦ { » - : 









4 


Ukraine Under Austria 

In 1772, 1793> and 1795 Poland was partitioned by 

Russia, Prussia, and Austria* Western Ukraine, including the 

province of Galicia, fell into the hands of Austria and Maria 

Theresa* It was her son Joseph II of Austria, who by his patent 

of April 5, 1782, relieved the Ukrainian peasant of that extreme 

form of bondage and servitude known as ff kripatstvo Tf 

Joseph II of Austria was a humane man. In spite of 

the wrath of the Polish nobility and landowners it was his 

clear purpose to free entirely the Ukrainian peasant from his 

pitiable conditions of serfdom. On February 10, 1789, he 

issued a patent to do away with serfdom which was to become 

effective on November 1, 1790. Unfortunately this man died on 

February 20, 1790, and his good intentions went with him.^ 

His successor Leopold II immediately recalled the revolutionary 

measures of Joseph II and proclaimed that the landowners would 

continue to enjoy the same privileges they had under Maria 

Theresa. So for another half-century the Ukrainian peasant was 

to remain in bondage. Panschyna or servitude to the landlord 

continued to exist until it was finally abolished by the famous 

6 

patent of Ferdinand I of Austria on April 17, 1848. 

4 . . 

Dr. Ivan Franko, Panschyna ta yiyi Skasovanie 1848 r . 

v Halychyni , (Serfdom and its Abolition in 1848 in Galicia ) pT""56. 

Second Revised Edition. Lwiw: Ukrainsko-Ruskoi Vydawnychoi Spilky, 

1913. 

5 Ibid .. p. 72 . 

6 

Ibid., p. 168. 













. 


C ' c 



















t . 













c 









c * 





5 


The Life of the Ukrainian Serf 

How cruel the life of the Ukrainian serf, rustic 
peasant, or "chlop", as he was called, was - can be visualized 
by a short description of his relationship to the Pan or land¬ 
lord. ? The system of Pansehyna was that of extreme inequality 
between the lot of the Pan and that of the Ukrainian peasant 
serf. 

When three hundred feet from the feudal mansion the 
,f chlop n was required to take off his hat. He could not marry 
without permission of the feudal lord or Pan. Whereas the Jew 
could present himself before the Pan for redress of his 
grievances, the "chlop" would not be admitted. If the "chlop’s" 
cattle were sick and he was unable to work the feudal land, he 
would be told to harness himself and his wife. The feudal 
landlords frowned upon the education of the "chlop*s” child. 

If the child received any education at all, it was only with 
permission of the Pan. If the youth incurred his displeasure 
he would be enrolled for military service in the army. Since 
the age level for admission into the army was eventually 
reduced from twenty years to twelve, and once a youth entered 
the army he rarely returned home, it was a convenient form of 
liquidation. 

The life of the Ukrainian serf differed very little 
from that of the working cattle. He had a hut and a small plot 


7 Ibid., p. 175. 





' 

‘ " c', : ' < ' 

-r ■ ■ ■ 












' ' , C ' ■ 

{ ' 

* 


c 

* 


: 






: 


< 

' 




: 






* 

' ■ 



6 


of land on which he worked, but for the rest he belonged to 
the Pan* Without permission of the feudallord, he could not 
buy or trade, increase or decrease his worldly goods. His 
free work on the lord’s fields was capital for the Pan, although 
the landlords themselves had forgotten through the centuries 
why the serf was working for them. Actually the land did not 
belong to the Pan for he could not take it away from the serf. 

On the other hand it did not belong to the serf who lived on 
it, worked it, paid tithes and taxes on it, but could not sell 
it. He could not divide the land amongst his heirs without 
permission, make loans on it, or improve it. He was simply 
chattel on the lord’s manor. The Pan was his judge, master, 
taxer, and final administrator. He also had patrimonial rights 
over the poor serf which meant that he could punish him corporally 
and there were no laws limiting the measure of this punishment. 

In addition to working his own strip of land the serf 
was obliged to give so many days a week working the lord’s 
fields, who cared little if these work days fell on a Sunday 
or Feast Day so important to the deeply religious serf. The 
Pan took his share of the serf’s produce on his own land 
whether it be eggs, honey, hens, wheat, fruit, etc. The serf 
was subject to innumerable forms of taxation.^ There were taxes 
on the salt he used, the fruit he grew, on every wagon going to 
market, on the gifts given to the lord’s officials, on permission 


8 Ibid .. p. 19 
%bid .. p. 59 











c 










c 


< 




c 


r 










) 


? 


S 


c 


c c t <: 


c 




c 




T 






« * 


? * 



7 


for marriage, and many, many others. Many of the landlords 
annually forced the serf to buy a definite number of quarts 
of whisky from the lord’s distillery which was to be paid for 
by extra work on the lord’s lands. 

The system of panschyna was a record of man’s 
inhumanity to man, of cruelty, ignorance, a nightmare of 
suffering and humiliation, and a loss of human dignity. When 
Joseph II of Austria tried to correct these conditions in 
spite of the fierce opposition of the landlords, his first 
success was with the patent of April 5, 17$2, which relieved 
the peasants of some of the pressure upon them. His noble desire 
to abolish the system completely failed with his death in 1790, 
and it was not until April 17, 1$4$, under Ferdinand I of 
Austria that the system of panschyna was clearly and definitely 
abolished. 

Economic Effects of the Abolition of Panschyna 

Freedom from serfdom was costly for the Ukrainian 
serfs. Although the immediate shackles were drawn from them, 
the years that followed involved the matters of: 1) Indemnity, 

2 ) Servitudes, and 3) PropinatIon<,^® 

Indemnity : The patent of 1$4$, which freed the serfs, 
gave the landlords the right of compensation for the losses 
they had suffered. By 1$5£ when payments of indemnity were to 

1 Q Ibid «. pp. 137 - 217. 





* ■ 

.. , : . /. - 


f • 


f 


..o 


. 


I 




^ : 5 ' ( 

* ... { 










. 


7A a.\ 

V.c A :. . . :> < . 5 


.. . 










i: . . : ... 1. ... ! 1 i’i■... . 























c * 









8 


begin, Eastern Galicia had been assessed 5&,$53,842 marks and 
Western Galicia, 3$>123,163 marks, or in terms of peasant 
holdings, 157 marks for every ? hospodarstvo f in Eastern Galicia 
and 223 marks for every ’hospodarstvo* in Western Galicia. 
Although the original plan called for the complete payment of 
the indemnity within forty years, Western Ukraine had paid on 
the original assessment and accruing interest a total of 121 
million marks within that time and still owed nine million 
marks. An extension of time until 1908 was given to pay off 
this remaining debt. 

Servitudes (Fields and Pastures): The patent of 
1848 required that the peasant pay the landlord for the use of 
his woods, forests, and pastures. For years the villagers had 
used sections of forests and pastures as those "belonging to the 
village”. These were the servitudes. But now the landlords 
claimed these, and the outraged peasants were permitted to 
seek redress through round-about political courts. In i860, 
of 32,000 servitude processes in the courts controlled by 
Polish interests, the Ukrainian peasants lost 30,000. The 
loss of the servitudes struck at the roots of the national 
economy. Whole villages were often reduced to such straits 
that the villagers were forced to go begging, and for many 
years agriculture as an industry was at a standstill. 

Propination (Drink)s By propination is meant the 
right of the landowner to manufacture and sell hard liquor on 
the territories of his own jurisdiction. The landowners took 





< 


c 


f 


T 




...0 i 




' 






- - 1 > 




5 


* 






9 


tremendous, advantage of this privilege, and in the year 1$?6 
the province of Galicia was spending 54 million rynsky on 
liquor. There was no village without a tavern controlled by 
the landowner. In the year 1&?6 there were 23,269 taverns in 
Galicia, and for every soul there were 26 litres of liquor 
sold.-^ 

One can imagine the tremendous damage done to a 
peasant class where the powers that be encouraged and drove 
these humble people to drink. Overburdened by taxation, unable 
to meet their most meagre needs, and lacking sufficient land 
to support themselves properly, they drowned their despair in 
drink at the tavern. A forlorn people, almost a lost hope. 

When the Ukrainian Canadian child today views a comedy on the 
many Ukrainian stages throughout the country, he wonders at 
the great number of drunken tavern scenes. Actually he is watching 
satire, for hundreds of Ukrainian comedy plays were written by 
indignant Ukrainian patriots who, seeing their country going to 
ruin through alcoholism, produced these plays to show the 
tragedy that was befalling a nation. 

From this short review it is not difficult to under¬ 
stand the lot of the Ukrainian peasant prior to the emigration. 
Poverty was his watchword. Extreme need and indigence were his 
heritage. Buffeted about by the landlord, by the powerful rich, 
and by oppressive governments, lacking the soil which he loved 


William Navrotsky, Pianstvo i Propinatia na Halychyni 
(Drunkenness and Propination in Galicia) ,~Vol. 5, pp. 55-567” 
Geneva: Hromada, 1$$2. As found in Dr. Ivan Franko, op.cit., 
p. 214. 













. 












'j 




c 


‘ 

■ 

< • 

■ ;‘ ; . ..■ r :\». .1 \ .:: -.0 : 

: .. \. • < 

* • . :-.rd t 

; r ■ •- - 

c • 

. 

5 

, 

• : 

„ 

^ .. L ■ : : i ■ ■ * .• . ; 

. ? i r,.) ■■ . • ;; 

' j; ’ ■ i ; ' / 

« ; 




. 




T . y. . 






10 


so dearly,, he was deeply proud of his religious faith and the 
glorious past of his people. 

Above all, the peasant wanted land, for the Ukrainian 
people were true sons of the soil. A man who owned ten morgs 
(about 15 acres) was considered a rich man. It is reported 
that in 190$: 

Eighty per cent of the agricultural properties 
were less than twelve and a half acres in size, and 
almost fifty per cent less than five acres. In the 
fifty parishes in the political district of Skalat 
thirty-two per cent of the 'rustical 1 holdings were, 
in 1$$2, less than one and a half acres; nearly sixty 
per cent were under four and a half acres. It is 
estimated that a man must have fourteen and a half 
(ten yokes) to get his living by working his own land 
and to fully occupy his time. Over seventy per cent 
have not more than half this, and only one tenth Is 
above this minimum of independent farming. 

As the years went by the population grew. When the 
farmer's sons were ready to marry he had little enough to share 
with his heirs in their new start in life. Soon many Ukrainian 
peasants were found landless. 

Somehow they must break away from the shackles which 
bound them so tightly. 


Conclusion 


The foregoing has been sufficient to show the pre¬ 
disposing causes and immediate reasons leading to the Ukrainian 
need to emigrate. A simple rustic folk forming the backbone of 


12 

Emily Greene Balch, Our Slavic Fellow Citizens , p. 13$. 
New York: Charities Publishing Commission, 1910. As quoted in 
Paul Yuzyk, op.cit ., p. 2$. 









♦ 



\ 


? ■■ 




r ft - 

* 





■ . 

. 

. 


J 





. 



























X " 

T . : 1 


— 






t 




* 










■ \ 


1 


) 


; ' 


■ 












• *■ . ■ 


. 



«< < . ' : . ; t 


T 

- 

. 




11 


of the nation, lovers of the soil, but having no soil on which 
they could produce those necessary economic fruits, lovers of 
their nation and conscious of their glorious historical past, 
they were continually harassed by foreign governments to the 
point where they were forbidden to speak their own language 
under pain of fines and imprisonment* Driven and encouraged 
to drink by a profiteering land nobility, taxed beyond their 
means, in desperation they turned about and sought means to 
leave the land of their ancestors and seek refuge in less 
forbidding soils* 

Above all they thirsted for land* In the early 70 ? s 
and 80 f s the migration began; some sought refuge on the conti¬ 
nent in Prussia, others crossed the seas to Argentine, to Brazil, 
and to the United States. Then they heard stories, unbelievable 
at first, that for ten dollars it was possible to obtain more 
land in Canada than they ever dared dream about. In 1891 the 
first Ukrainian immigrants came to Canada* These were Wasyl 
Eleniak and Ivan Pillipiw of the village of Nebiliv in the 
district of Kalush of the Province of Galicia in Western 


Ukraine 






< . v; t 

« 


• ,, } :? 


t 














c 




...V Y 














c 

t: f 


. ' ■■ 




ud --jLio uj has 








CHAPTER II 


A SHORT HISTORY OF THE UKRAINIAN IMMIGRATION 
IN CANADA - 1891 

Introduction 

The Ukrainian movement overseas was underway by 
1870* The earliest groups emigrated to South America, and by 
1879 the Ukrainians had found their way to and established 
themselves in the United States* The movement to Canada began 
later and probably resulted from glowing reports of the country 
by Germans who were working in Ukraine and had relatives already 
established in Canada. It is estimated that 147,375 Ukrainians 
entered the United States between 1899 and 1910* By 1918 there 
were over 60,000 Ukrainians in Brazil and another 10,000 in 
Argentina* 

Wasyl Eleniak and Ivan Pillipiw were the first 
Ukrainians to arrive in Canada in 1891* It is possible that a 
few may have filtered into Canada from the United States prior 
to this date. After visiting Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and 
Alberta, Pillipiw returned to his home for his family. His 
glowing accounts of the wonders of the new lands caused such a 
furor in his native and neighboring villages that he was 
arrested and jailed for disturbing the peace* Nevertheless he 

“^Charles H. Young, The Ukrainian Canadians , pp* 3$-40. 
Toronto: Thomas Nelson and Sons Limited, 1931<* 

js« 

For a more detailed description of early Ukrainian 
immigration to the United States see W. Halich, Ukrainians in the 
United States * pp* 19-22, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1937o 
























c 


a 

' • if i ■ ■ . , v . . ■ 

« . . 

■ 

'ci j; . ■ .. 

* 

• t. t . o 

• c : 

;.i . .T.';. •,;) 

. c- 

: . - * <, 


13 


finally returned to Canada with his family and settled near 
Star, Alberta* Eleniak and Pillipiw are regarded as the first 
Ukrainian pioneers in Canada* They came from the same village of 
Nebiliw, district of Kalush, province of Galicia in Western 
Ukraine* Wasyl Eleniak, who was born in 1$59, arrived in Canada 
in 1391, and died at the venerable age of 97 on January 19, 1936, 
a distinguished citizen of Canada whose memory will always be 
revered by succeeding generations of Ukrainian Canadians*^ 

The memoirs of Wasyl Eleniak, which have been recorded 
by the Basilian Fathers of Mundane, Alberta, reveal the typically 
difficult life of the pioneer settlers during the first years 
in Canadain describing his coming to Canada he said that 
there were six persons in his family in the village of Nebiliw* 
Their wealth consisted of three morgs (about five acres of land), 
one cow, a pair of oxen, and four hens* They had nothing else. 

In the winter they ate potatoes, cabbage, beans, peas, and corn- 
meal mush. Married at twenty-three he first heard of Canada from 
the Germans when working amongst them. He worked at log hauling 
for which he was paid three *rynsky* per day in the summer and 
one f rynsky* per day in the winter. He finally accumulated two 
hundred ’rynsky* through his work, by the sale of the oxen, 
and by obtaining a loan. In this way he was able to buy a 
passport and passage from Hamburg to Montreal for about 110 

p 

^Wasyl Eleniak, Memoirs , recorded by the Basilian Fathers 
in a personal interview* Mundare, Alberta: Sept. 21-22, 1940. 

3 Ibid. 













C 








{ 




1 




' 






.) f[T 






: 






n .. 




? ■ 1 










t 




< 








14 


f rynsky f . The ocean crossing took eighteen days. He found 
his first work in Manitoba where he earned one hundred dollars for 
his first year and one hundred and twenty dollars for his second 
year of work. 

At the end of his second year he was able to return 
to Nebiliw for his wife and family. In Canada again he worked 
four years at Gretna, Manitoba. His earnings then enabled him 
to charter a freight car for forty dollars on which he loaded 
two cows, a pair of oxen, a wagon, a plough, thirty chickens, 
twelve bags of flour, and sundry materials. With this wealth 
he moved to Chipman, Alberta where his brother Peter now had a 
homestead. He settled near him and began to build his first 
home. During the day he hauled in logs on a rough wooden sled 
which had to be repaired each night. "How we suffered those 
first years," he related, "But my wife was strong, and the 
work went ahead." 

Immediate Causes for the Immigration 

The two pioneers, Eleniak and Pillipiw, who first 
visited Canada and then returned to their homeland to tell others 
about its great opportunities caused many families in Galicia to 
follow their' footsteps. Another factor in the immediate immig¬ 
ration of the Ukrainians to Canada was the visit of Dr. Osyp 
Oleskiw which was sponsored by the Prosvita (Enlightenment) 

Society of Lwiv in 1$95* Such interest in Canada as a new 


„ » 7 1 

i.tlcvj ;,fi dho b^u'XBS 0|{ • n.£ >b;o 

: ■ ■■ • - . / 

1 , eld s f '. . m: ■ i '. ! . 

. 

c 

oj. •...[ '• ’ \ ■ : : V ; . 

t t ^ 

+ ^ 

. 

, 

. ' ' t ; *... t ■ 

. 

■ 

c t • 

■ 

<, 

» 



15 


homeland was shown by the Ukrainians in the Old Country that 
this organization sent Dr. Oleskiw to Canada to confirm the 
facts. After touring Western Canada, Dr. Oleskiw prepared two 
pamphlets entitled f 0n Emigration* and *0n Free Lands* which 
did much to encourage the Ukrainians to come to this country.^ - 
Today, unfortunately, there are only a few of these pamphlets in 
existence, and what is available are the reprints of these 
articles in the Ukrainian newspapers of the day, e.g. Svoboda , 

New Jersey, New York, U.S.A. 

Another source of encouragement to prospective settlers 
was the Government of Canada. In 1$96 the new Liberal govern¬ 
ment under Laurier came into power, and Clifford Sifton as 
Minister of the Interior ventured upon an ambitious program of 
immigration. Sifton did all that was possible to bring new man¬ 
power into the relatively unopened West. He advertised in 
Europe, established agencies throughout Galicia and Bukowina, and 
these agencies received commissions for every head brought into 
the country. The Canadian Pacific Railway was interested, too, 
for it had already spanned the prairies. As the new settlers 
prospered they would require tools, machines, and this meant 
the use of their freight service.^ 

The prospect of land, employment, shorter hours, and 
higher wages, the stories of the agents, the flood of propaganda 

^Paul Yuzyk, The Ukrainians in Manitoba . A Social 
History, p. 30. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1953* 

5 

Ibid ., pp. 2S-29. 












T 




























< 






t 




C ‘ 




< 


c 


c 






t 



* 




c 





16 


in the form of pamphlets, and the writings of Dr, Osyp Oleskiw 
as well as those of Father N. Dmytriw who had visited the 
first Ukrainian settlements, captured the imagination of the 
Ukrainians and the mass migration was on. 

It is estimated that between 1&96 and 1914, about 
200,000 Ukrainians entered Canada®^ It is difficult to establish 
a correct figure, for the Ukrainians came into the country under 
many different names. If the immigrant came from the Province 
of Galicia he was recorded as Galician; if from Bukowina as a 
Bukowinian. If that part of the territory he came from was 
under Poland he was registered as a Pole. Since much Ukrainian 
territory was under Austria the immigrants were often listed as 
Austrian. When he used the old Ukrainian term ’Rusin’ or ’Husky’ 
he was labelled a Russian. Another term widely used to designate 
the Ukrainians was the word Ruthenian. The word Ruthenian is 
derived from the Latin ’Rutheni’ which was used by the Church of 
Rome in its communications with the Ukrainians. 

Difficulties In Emigrating 

It was not always easy for the Ukrainian to leave 
his homeland. The move demanded great courage, depleted 
available resources, and drew upon the native ingenuity of the 
emigrant. With the growing emigration the Austrian government 
became concerned for its national economy and often discouraged 

6 

Ibid ., p. 31© 









' 




■ 


c 




















i 


. ■ • ■ i- 
















. 


o: j;. i 




? 










. . 


f ? 

t • . 

t • 

. 

; 










17 


would-be emigrants* There are cases where the Austrian 
emperor was personally contacted for permission to leave the 
country when all other methods failed. In this regard Peter 
Hnatiw at the age of eighty-eight tells how he left the 

country.? 

He lived in the village of Kodybysche, district of 

Brody, and on applying for a passport was refused by the village 

mayor. Having served in the army he was determined to see the 

Emperor Franz Joseph in Vienna and eventually was admitted into 

the presence of the Emperor at a place outside the city. On 

hearing his request the emperor replied, 

,f It is permissible for other people to come to my 

country, and for my citizens to depart for foreign lands, but 

shame to those mayors who do not conduct their civil affairs in 

such a way that my people would not find it necessary to leave 

A 

their native land.” 0 

The emperor then gave him a letter which allowed him 
free railway passage for his return home plus the twenty-five 
f rynsky f he had expended for his initial trip to the emperor. 

The Psychology of Parting 

The Ukrainians loved their homeland. Many of them 
left with intentions to return to their own country after they 

?Peter Hnatiw, ”Rozkaz pro Sebe fT (A Memoir), Provldnyk , 
Kalendar Kanadiyskich Ukrayintsiw . ( The Leader, an Illustrated 
Calendar-Almanac for Canadian Ukrainians ). p. 31. WinnipegT~St. 
Raphael*s Ukrainian Immigrants Welfare Association, 1931* 

^Ibid., p. 32. 










• : : 


e - 




. • 






■ 




_ 







. 

: ■ t : 

c 





. - , ' • ■. ' -■ < . Vi - 

• ... : •; o : . / ■<.:'- r-;u: 1 / ,•••> . •. .. v.< 

0 

I • • \ 

.. . - : tq \ ■ - •. . ' 

t ::, ■ ■ • < ■ ■ ■: 

: ';;V.V. : .l'./'.u ...-J • ;; . . • ,-,/i ob o. ,o oJ- *j 


■■ 

i ? 












■ 


(. : ' ' ■ 

t : . ..j 1 ; j • . _ .1 ' " 

5 . ' 










had made their fortunes in their self-imposed exile 0 Others 
felt that they were leaving for ever, for a fate comparable with 
death, and their departure was marked with the gloom surrounding 
a funeral. Instinctively they realized they would never come 
back, and all that was dear to them would be left behind for 
ever. Many of them brought little lumps of their native black 
soil tied in kerchiefs which they wept over after reaching 
Canada. 

Some left in the spirit of high adventure, but for most 
it was the shearing away of all they loved most. Their partings 
from their loved ones often took the form of testimonials wherein 
they designated a stone cross, a hillock, a stream as a token 
of their memory.^ As they left they felt their very roots were 
drawn up after them, and the hazards of transplanting loomed 
ominously in the unknown future. 

The Pattern of Immigration 

The arrival and settling down of the first Ukrainian 
10 

settlers took on a pattern. They arrived with almost all of 
their worldly wealth upon their backs and the few knotted 
bundles they took with them. From 1$99 to 1910 inclusive, based 

^Wasyl Stefanyk, Ty Kaminy Chrest ” ( The Stone Cross ), 
Yuvileyny Kalendar Ukrayinskoi Rodyny ( Jubilee Calendar-Almanac 
of the Ukrainian Family ), Second yearbook, pp. 70-78. Mundare7~ 
Alberta; Basilian Fathers, 1941* 

■^This pattern of immigration is expressed excellently 
in the novel by Elias Kiriak, Sons of the Soil . Vol. 1, Edmonton, 
Alberta; Author, 1939. 



















. 


< 




* 
















,0 






. 




c 














c 















c 





c 





c 







19 


on the number admitted it is estimated that on arrival they 
possessed $12.£6 per capita. 11 

After docking at a Canadian port each little family 
or groups of families would undertake the long, tiresome 
journey by train to and over the western prairies. Upon their 
arrival at a central city they would be herded to an immigration 
hall where they often would spend their first night, sometimes 
in hunger and cold. If they found a Ukrainian voice amongst 
the strange people around them they wept with joy to find a little 
bit of their own in this strange bewildering land. Then eagerly 
they asked for instructions on what to do, where to go, and how 
they could possess their own land. 

If they had relatives, former neighbors, who were 
already settled, they attempted to find land near them. Sometimes 
having no one to turn to, they followed the first Ukrainian they 
met and settled near him tied by bonds of race, language, and 
religious tradition. Often they were at the mercy of agents 
and government officials who directed them where they pleased 
and placed them on lands which others had given up as untenable. 
The railway lines played an important role in placing them in 
unopened are^s with the hope that these eventually would become 
freight producing. 

The fact that the Ukrainians settled in blocs is a 

■^Report of the Immigration Commission, Wash., 1911, 

Vol. 1, p. 103 as found in C. H. Young, op. cit ., p. 44* 












c : ■. ■ ■ ■ 

* 5 

■ ■ ■- 


' c '■ ' •' ' 

i ■' c 

. ? 

‘ • c 

t . t ' ' '■ - 

. 

■ 




: 

: ' ' h:>Li 

. 




s.i o .no,ui r.\ 




. 





20 


natural phenomenon, for the gregarious instinct is the very 
basis of human society. 

In other words, the Ukrainians have simply done 
what the Scotch did before them in Cape Breton, Pictou, 
Glengarry, etc., the French in Quebec and Acadia, and 
the English in the Barr colony under the leadership of 
Bishop Lloyd. 12 

Young comes to the conclusion that the direction to the movement 
was wholly inadequate, and that to a great measure the government 
was itself responsible. 

There is no doubt that much of the submarginal 
land in eastern and northern Manitoba, for instance, 
should never have been opened up for settlement. That 
it was opened up, and this with the cognizance of the 
officials who were perfectly aware of the nature of the 
land, is unfortunately too true. The following excerpt 
from a report at the time of the first settlement in 
southern Manitoba, about 16>96, gives this impression: 

1 The quality of the land does not make so much 
difference to him (the Galician). For instance, 
the first party of Galicians sent out settled 
east of Emerson. The greater part of that dis¬ 
trict was settled in 1$72 by some of the soldiers 
who went out with Lord Wolseley; but there were 
6 or 7 townships of very inferior land, and the 
government showed the Galicians that land and 
they took it up. ? 

Does not this sound more like the story of an old- 
fashioned horse trade rather than an account of the 
settlement and establishment of future citizens of the 

Dominion. 

The journey to their new home sites often took days. 
They were forced to cross streams and muskeg, to skirt lakes and 
ravines. Attracted by the bush, for wood was scarce in the old 


12 

C. H. Young, op. cit ., p. 77. 
13 Ibid .. p. 57. 








c 








c 


n:. 



c * 




v.i 










C 








T 












t 




4 ' ' 1 >cl -J - o' 



< . 




21 


country, they settled in areas where trees were plentiful. 

Upon arrival their first concern was shelter. Often they simply 
dug holes in the ground or built rude huts from the trees and 
branches which protected them from the elements until work on 
their first home could begin. Then began the clearing of land, 
the uprooting of stumps, and the seeding of their first little 
acre with the seed they had brought from the old country. 

At first the tools they owned were pitiably few, 
perhaps a scythe, a spade, an axe, or some other crude cutting 
instrument which they had brought from the old country. The 
mother of the family had prepared beforehand and from one of 
her bundles she would draw forth garden seeds for the first 
garden. Sometimes five or six such families would begin together 
on their chosen sites. They visited, comforted each other, 
and took turns in helping one another build a first home. They 
became tightly bound to each other in this mutual helping 
relationship, and although there was competition amongst themselves 
for the first clear acre, for the first seeding, etc., they had 
a deep and loyal affection for each other, for in this strange 
land there was no one else; they were all alone. On Sundays they 
would meet and reminisce, sing sad songs, church hymns, and often 
as not shed bitter tears over their pitiable plight and the 
families they left at home. 

With the coming of summer the father of the family left 
the homesite to find work. This was absolutely necessary if they 







c 






<L 




• : I 

• ■ • ' • . - i 


■ ■ 






t 




c 






. 





22 


were to exi.st at all. During the long winter they had subsisted 
on a few potatoes, a bit of meal or borrowed flour. They needed 
salt, tools, flour, perhaps a hen or two, and if fortune favoured 
them, a cow. The father then began the long trek for work. 

Today, those pioneers who are still living like to tell of their 
long fifty, sixty, one hundred, and two hundred mile walks. 
Unskilled in the fine Canadian arts, but hale, hearty, and willing, 
they found work on the roads, on the railways, on farms, in the 
mines, and in the lumber camps. Working at tiny wage levels 
they would remember their families in tribulation at home, deny 
themselves the least comfort or unnecessary good, and by summer’s 
end would have accumulated a fortune of forty to eighty dollars. 

On their return they led home a cow, a calf. If they 
were very fortunate, they might have had an ox, a wagon, a rude 
plough, and a few hens. The new settlers rejoiced in their hard 
earned wealth. In it they saw hope and a fresh will to master 
the elements about them. The garden had flourished and yielded 
its harvest; the acre of grain had ripened, and there would be 
flour and seed. The bitter memories of the first winter were 
shed aside as they looked to a brighter future. 

Religious Faith and Customs 

The most distinguishing characteristic of the Ukrainians 
was their deep religious faith. In the old country the village 
church was the centre of all their community efforts. The few 















<• 




t y. < 


c « 


t 




o 




* 


: ; ) 


t 


c 


t 







23 


dignitaries, in the typical village were the priest, the mayor, 
the church cantor, the town scribe, and, of course, the village 
gendarme. 

No one can understand the Ukrainian Canadians unless 
he understands their deep religious background. The majority 
of the Ukrainian settlers came from Western Ukraine which is a 
Catholic country. It was unthinkable for one to miss church on 
Sunday, and this in villages where there were as many as three 
to five thousand souls. Children were brought to the church to 
be baptised the day they were born. Marriages were planned in 
the rectory and solemnized in the church only when both parties 
knew their catechism thoroughly. People were born, baptised, 
married, and buried in the same village by the same priest. It 
was not unusual for the same priest to preside in his parish for 
twenty, thirty, and even forty years. The priest was the object 
of their highest respect. When they met him along the way they 
would bow profoundly and kiss his hand for this was the tradi¬ 
tional custom. Mothers and grandmothers dated events from the 
leading Feast Days of the church year. Ivan was born two days 
after St. John the Baptist’s Day; Maria married after St. Peter 
and Paul’s; and Petro died the week of the ’cold’ St. Nicholas. 

It is not surprising, then, that when the first 
Ukrainian immigrants came to Canada, penniless, living in holes 
in the ground, and with hardly their first few acres seeded with 
the grain they brought from their homeland, they began to build 


f 


z 








. 


z 


q;' . . < • /. 








» ■ • < 'C 


i. ,7 u:I 


o 










•J 


:-VS , 


d OU 





c 


c 












10 




? 



T • •; t 
















■ i ‘ : •: y. V ' i .. . . . w 





24 


churches. They built these before there were priests to fill 
them. 

While etching their way slowly into the Canadian soil, 
their greatest longing was for their own Ukrainian priest. There 
were baptisms to be performed, marriages to be blessed, and the 
early accounts of the first Ukrainian Basilian missionaries give 
testimony to the overwhelming spiritual demands of the Ukrainian 
settlers as they visited them from colony to colony. 

So great was this longing for their own church services 
that they all went to their church on Sunday even though there 
was no priest to come to them. The Ukrainian pioneers tell of 
how in the early bushlands they heard what they took for church 
bells and rushed for miles to find the church only to discover 
that the sound came from flocks of wild partridges ff whamming” 
into the air. When Bishop Budka arrived in Canada in 1912 
Ukrainians massed at each railway station along the way to get 
a glimpse of their first Bishop and shouted in chorus, fT Slawa, 
slawal (Glory, glory!) 

On this religious background lies the whole history of 
the Ukrainian settlers in Canada. Without this understanding it 
is difficult to appreciate their religious, political, or 
educational struggles. Because of the initial ignorance of the 
Canadian government in these matters the Ukrainians suffered as 


Rev. J. Bala, Kyr Nikita Budka (The Most Reverend 
Nikita Budka ). The First Ukrainian Bishop of Canada, p. 34* 
Winnipeg: Centrality of the Ukrainian Catholics of Manitoba, 1952. 








25 


a national.group. They were misunderstood, sometimes mis¬ 
treated and looked upon as unpreferred people. The Honorable 
Frank Oliver, who represented first Alberta, and then Edmonton, 
in the Canadian House of Commons from 1$96 to 1917, referred 
to the Ukrainians as "undesirable neighbors”. 


Education and Social Status 

The Ukrainian Canadian settler had little opportunity 
for schooling in the typical village of the Old Country. The 
fortunate child who was spared from the routine daily chores 
at best received three or four years of schooling in the ”narodna 
shkola” where he learned to read and write. Mot many youths 
could be spared from the common struggle for existence. Economic 
conditions (see Chapter 1) discouraged the making of even a 
normal livelihood. For them it was a question of work or starve, 
and every helping hand in the family was so much added insurance. 
During the first decade of the life of the Ukrainian settler 
these same conditions carried over in their new homeland and was 
a vital factor in the matter of attendance in the schools. 
Sometimes the town scribe or the church cantor would teach the 


15 

^Dr. Bohdan Kazymyra, "Ukrayinski Poselentsi v Kanadi” 
(The Ukrainian Settlers in Canada), Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayintsiw 
K atolykiw Saskatchevany (Jubilee Book Ukrainian Catholics of 

Saskatchewan )'» p. 25. Saskatoonl"'Ukrainilm'1^ of 

Saskatchewan, 1955* 

9&C 

For a further description of the inferior social 
position of the early Ukrainian Canadians see T.C. Byrne, The 
Ukrainian Community in North Central Alberta t pp. 1-3. Unpub¬ 
lished Master’s Thesis, University of Alberta, 1937. 


































■ , 5 •.' 



c 



i. , 








C ‘ 

. 

- 

■ 

■ ! 

• ' • " ; '■ 

, 

: 

t i. 


_ < . ' . '. ’ . . . • .. ) 

; c , 

* 

) no.^uqj: , iDa.ojD & rtQi 

■ - 

* e 

< ? ' 


26 


children letters. Often the village priest would take charge of 
an exceptional boy, teach him privately, and if possible arrange 
for his further education. For the rest educational opportunities 
were limited. 

The pioneer settler took advantage of the schools 
which may have been within the reach of his children. If 
attendance was irregular it was not because of any disrespect 
for or misunderstanding about the values of an education. An 
inspector of schools at Vegreville writes: 

In the majority of cases the parent desires 
the best for the children because he realizes the 
magnitude of his own shortcomings and handicaps.^ 0 

At first in many cases there was no school to attend, but when 

these slowly began springing up in the prairies, the Ukrainian 

children went to them if they were not absolutely needed at 

home. By 190? special attention was given to the organization 

of schools for Ukrainian children in Alberta.^ By 1912 about 

ninety schools had been organized for Ukrainian districts in 

1$ IQ 

Alberta. By 1914 there were about one hundred and thirty. 


■^Report of inspector at Vegreville. As quoted in C.H. 
Young, op. cit., p. 201. 

17 

C.H. Young, op. cit .. p. 191® 

1 $ 

R. Fletcher, "Education in Foreign Settlements," 
Seventh Annual Report of the Department of Education of the 

Province of Alberta, 1912. p. 6d 0 Edmonton: J.W. Jeffery. 

Government Printer, 1913® 

19 

R. Fletcher, "Education in Foreign Settlements, " 

Ninth Annual Report of the Department of Education of the Province 

of Alberta. 1914. P. 67. Edmonton: J.W. Jeffery. Government~~ 

Printer, 1915® 










i 












t 








.t 







27 


When attendance varied at these schools, it was because the 

pioneer mother was forced to stand by the side of her husband 

and do the hard physical work of a man* It was usually the 

oldest girl who took charge of the household duties and the 

tiny children, the eldest boy who did the farm chores while his 

parents opened up the land* 

Although it is estimated that about fifty per cent 

of the Ukrainian settlers were illiterate it was noted that 

Ruthenian children are as a rule bright and 
intelligent, and even with the handicap of acquiring 
a new language, they keep abreast with the children 
of English-speaking parents. The use of the English 
language is becoming prevalent throughout the colony 
among adults and children alike. 

In Manitoba the first Ukrainian school was opened in the Stuart- 
burn area in 1$9&* Others followed in 1$99, 1900, and 1901* 

In 1903 the Department of Education engaged Theodore Stefanik 
and in 1910 Paul Gigeychuk to organize schools for the 

pi 

Ukrainians* 


What opposition the Ukrainians had for the English 

schools was a continued perseverance in the struggle for their 

national identity which they had struggled for in the Old Country* 

In the early period the Ukrainians themselves 
were in many instances opposed to English schools and 
English teachers, on the ground that these were instru- 


20 

R. Fletcher, "Education in Foreign Settlements", 

Tenth Report of the Department of Education of the Province of 

Alberta* 1915 * P> SI* Edmonton: J.W* Jeffery, Government Printer. 

1916 . 

21 

Paul Yuzyk, op* eit *, pp. 144-145* 








. 


'/ ii.i 


. : • ,, r ■ - : ' •' ■ 
ixo . . . ; : ' ‘ : 

' i 

ort ' • . • < .• •: . ’ 




* 




* 

- 

' ■. : • . ' i ‘ 

- 

V. ... 

{ s‘>‘ 


: i , 






?' 






C 


:• : 3-jS. 

ri. 









C * . . 












2$ 


merits of assimilation employed to wipe out their 
nationality and culture* Mistakenly, they con¬ 
sidered the situation analagous to the one in Galicia, 
where the ascendant Poles forced Polish schools on the 
Ukrainians and denied the Ukrainian people a separate 
existence* ^ 


Conclusion 


The above is a brief resume of the story of the 

first Ukrainian settlers* True nsons of the soil,” "they 

have been sending their roots deeper and deeper into that 

23 

soil until now they are ineradicable”* In discussing the 

book of the same name by Elias Kiriak, Prof* C. H. Andrusyshen 
of the University of Saskatchewan says, 

It is a rare psychological and sociological study 
of a people who battle against terrible odds and finally 
emerge victorious* In this story the Ukrainian element 
may be said to be representative of all the Immigrant 
groups that came to Canada about the same time. It is 
a genuinely Canadian epic because what it contains is 
part of Canadian history, that history which is not 
written with letters of blood on the fields of battle 
where man struggles for the sustenance of God’s creatures 
and where the only thing tamed and laid low is the rigidity 
of nature and its laws* There too are heroes; but they 
are the unsung ones, the unproclaimed ones, whose only 
monument is the memor}?- of them and their superhuman labor 
that remains in the minds of grateful and respectful 
generations that follow *** 


22 Ibid ., p. 145 . 


Quoted in a letter of M. Luchkovich of Edmonton, 
Alberta, to the Editor of Svoboda, New Jersey, N* Y., published 
on March 17, 1956* 






c 




O 0 ; 








. 


\:o ■ :jn 














* 


' - x ' o •: - . u ’ 

O' I: 

c 

: * 

t i 

* 





' /o:.; 


to ... 




r:o 










CHAPTER III 


THE UKRAINIAN MISSIONARIES AND SISTERS 

Introduction 

It is estimated that by 1900 there were 60,000 
Ukrainians settled in Western Canada**** One must realize that 
the vast majority of the Ukrainian settlers were Catholics 
but of the Eastern rite as distinguished from their brothers in 
faith, the Catholics of the more familiar Latin rite. In the 
Catholic Church there are many rites. These differences in 
rite are usually expressed by a varietur of liturgical languages, 
externally different forms in vestments, ceremonies, church 
architecture, etc. All these rites are subject to the same 
spiritual head, the Pope in Rome, and hold to exactly the same 
tenets of faith and dogma. The teaching of the Church through 
the centuries has always expressed itself through a variety in 
rite but unity in faith. 

Spiritually and educationally neglected, the Ukrainians 
became the serious concern of the French Canadian hierarchy, who 
did all in their power to obtain Ukrainian priests and teaching 
Sisters for the new settlers. With this in mind, Archbishop 
Adelard Langevin of St. Boniface made his f ad limina ! visit to 

1 

Archbishop Langevin, Memoire to the Emperor Franz 
Joseph of Austria . St. Boniface, July 2, 1904* St. Boniface 
Archives. 



























%j ').!! j’i t . ■ 






< 




' 






. ) , ... > 


c 


T 









30 


O 

Rome in 1896. He was advised to press the matter with the 
Ukrainian Cardinal SembratoVich in Lwiw, Western Ukraine. When 
this bore little fruit he sent his two suffragan bishops, 
Monsignor Pascal of Prince Albert and Monsignor Legal of St. 
Albert to Europe on October 30, 1898.^ In 1900 Archbishop 
Langevin sent Father Albert Lacombe, the great Canadian 
missionary, as his personal representative to Rome, Lwiw, and 
Vienna where the matter of Ukrainian missionaries was urgently 
pressed.^ 

Before the arrival of the first Basilian missionaries 
and Ukrainian Sisters in 1902, due in great part to the efforts 
of Archbishop Langevin, five Ukrainian priests visited the 
Ukrainian settlers on separate occasions.^ These were the visits 
of Father N. Dmytriw who visited the Ukrainian people at Edna 
and Limestone Lake, Alberta in 1897 from Jersey Gity, U.S.A. 

Rev. Paul Tymkewich visited these people on April 8, 1897 to 
November 5* 1897® Father Damascene Polywka, O.S.B.M., came to 
Winnipeg on October 21, 1899 where he organized the first parish 


2 

Dr. Bohdan Kazymyra, Monsignor Adelard Langevin and 
the Ukrainian Canadians , p. 15, Library of Catholic Action, No. 7, 
Edmonton, Alberta, 1952. 

3 

Rev. Josaphat Jean, O.S.B.M., and Dr. Bohdan Kazymyra, 
Piadesiat Rokiw v Kanadi , ( Fifty Years in Canada ), p. 3, Library 
of Catholic Action, No. 12, Edmonton, Alberta, 1952. 

^Dr. Bohdan Kazymyra, op. cit ., p. 16, 

%eil Savaryn, O.S.B.M., Rolia Otsiy Vasilian v Kanadi 
(The Role of the Basilian Fathers in Canada ), pp. 13-14. Educa- 
tional Letters, No. 6, Mundare, Alberta: Basilian Fathers, 1938. 










? - • ■ t 



* 





c 


c 


c 


c 







31 


before leaving for the United States. In 1900 Rev. M. 

Zaklynsky made a short visit to the Ukrainians in Edmonton, and 

then he too went to the United States. A fifth visiting priest 

was Father Basil Zoldak of Western Ukraine who inquired into the 

needs of the Ukrainians of Manitoba and the West and then 

returned to the Ukraine in May, 1902, to make his report to 

Metropolitan Sheptytsky.® Father Zoldak visited Canada once 

again from November, 1902, until December, 1904» 

An interesting letter of the times is that of one of 

the Ukrainian immigrants who in 1$99 wrote to the Basilian 

Fathers’ monastery at Zolkwa, Western Ukraine, describing the 

plight of the Ukrainian children who were without schools and 

educational opportunities in the sparsely settled West. 

Worst of all the small children will fall into 
delinquency for they will not attain any learning in their 
catechism. There are even those who having been born in 
Canada will not know anything about the church or education, 
and they will not wish to obey their fathers or mothers 
if they will not have any church teaching. (Translated 
from the Ukrainian).^ 


6 

Dr. Bohdan Kazymyra, op. cit. » p. 16 . 

7 

Letter of L Pyskor of Winnipeg, to the Basilian 
Fathers 1 Monastery in Zolkwa, Western Ukraine, as quoted in 
Neil Savaryn, 0. S. B. M., op. cit .. pp. 12-13. 








c 


















r 





c 







t 





32 


The Arrival of the Basilian Fathers and 
The Sisters Servants 

Largely through the intercession of Archbishop 
Adelard Langevin the first Basilian missionaries to arrive in 
Canada were the Rev. Platonid Filas, O.S.B.M., Rev. Sozont 
Dydyk, O.S.B.M., and Rev. Anthony Strotsky, O.S.B.M., who 
arrived in Edmonton on November 1, 1902. They were accompanied 
by a lay brother. With these four Basilian missionaries came 
four teaching Sisters of the Congregation of Sisters Servants 
of Mary Immaculate. These were Sisters Ambrosia Lenkewich, 
Isidora Shypowska, Emilia Klapoyshuk, and Taida Wroblewska.^ 
After their arrival at Strathcona (South Edmonton) this small 
pioneering group was welcomed by the Oblate Fathers of St. 
Joachim’s Parish in Edmonton. Until permanent accommodation 
could be arranged, they were made welcome to the temporary 
hospitality of the Oblate Fathers and the Sisters, Faithful 
Companions of Jesus, at 9906 - 110th Street, Edmonton, Alberta. 

The Ukrainian Girls’ Night School 

When the Basilian Fathers and the Sisters arrived, 
they found a Ukrainian Girls’ Night School already organized by 
the Oblate Fathers and conducted by the Sisters, Faithful Compa- 

g 

Neil Savaryn, O.S.B.M., op. cit ., pp. 17-13. 

9 Ibid .. p. 33. 









o 


c * ‘ * * < 






s 




■ ' 










33 


nions of Jesus* These girls of the Night School prepared a little 
program and reception to welcome the new Ukrainian priests and 
Sisters. The reception is briefly described in the Journals of 
Father Dydyk dated November 5, 1902 and in the Journal of 
Bishop Legal who also made an entry regarding this event on the 
same date. 

There were at that time forty Ukrainian working girls 
attending this Night School at the old St. Mary’s High School 
(now demolished) on 103rd Street in Edmonton. It was organized 
by Rev. Father Alphonse Jan, O.M.I., who went from home to 
home asking the guardians of these girls to permit them to 
attend the night classes conducted by the Faithful Companions 
of Jesus. The beginnings of this school are carefully recorded 
in the Journal of Bishop Legal, January 30, 1901."^ 

After Mass on that day Bishop Legal asked the Sister 
Superior of the Faithful Companions of Jesus whether she would 
agree to conduct a night school for the Galician girls. The 
Sisters agreed immediately and suggested that they were willing 
to begin that very week if a suitable number of girls could be 
found. Father Jan then began his campaign to find as many girls 
as possible who could be aided by this schooling. 

Mrs. Carl Chichloski of Edmonton best describes what 

10 

Extract from the Journal of Monsignor Legal, January 
30, 1901. Archives of the Rev. Father Provincial of the Oblate 
Fathers in Edmonton, Alberta. 






* 

; ■ i d ■ 1 1 






. 

. . , 


. 


: ' ■ ' . 

«■ 

- 






o 





. 


■ 

5 ■ 





34 


this school- was like.^ Classes were held twice a week on the 
third floor of the old St. Mary’s High School, with sessions 
lasting from eight p.m. to nine-thirty p.m. The girls were 
taught English, Reading, and Writing. When they sang for the 
little reception given to the pioneer Fathers and Sisters they 
sang in Ukrainian. The girls, at first ten in number, ranged 
in ages from thirteen to eighteen. This number soon grew to 
twenty, and on occasion thirty and even forty girls attended this 
night school. 

Bishop Legal’s Journal reads: 

Wednesday, I am going to Edmonton where I find 
the Basilians and the Servants of Mary whom I intend 
to visit. They are well quartered in the little 
sacristy (of St. Joachim’s Church) and they seem to 
be satisfied. In the evening we are all going to the 
school for the Galicians. There are going to be songs, 
speeches, and a small reception....All these virtuous 
people seem to be happy for they see the priests and 
Sisters of their rite and nationality. Father Filas 

is moved by the song of a young Galician girl. 

(Translated from the French) 


An interesting memento of this school is found in the 
Church of St. Joachim in Edmonton. As one enters the church 
proper the second window is of stained glass depicting St. 

Basil in mitre and vestments of the Eastern rite. From their 
meagre resources these young and grateful Ukrainian girls showed 
their gratitude for their first opportunity for schooling in 

"^Interview between the writer and Mrs. Carl Chichloski 
of Edmonton, Alberta, who attended the Ukrainian Girls’ Night 
School, 1901, at Edmonton, December 3, 1957» 

12 

Extract from the Journal of Monsignor Legal, 

November 3, 1902. 








i 




c 





35 


their new homeland by raising enough money to purchase this 
stained glass window. Beneath the colored picture is the 
inscription: "Presented by Galician Night School Girls”. 

The Ukrainian Sisters’ School at 
Beaver Lake (Mundare)-^ 

The four Sisters of the Sisters Servants of Mary 
Immaculate who arrived in Edmonton on November 1, 1902 lodged 
over the sacristy of St. Joachim’s Church for eight months. 

They spent most of this time in acquiring the English language 
under the supervision of the Faithful Companions of Jesus. At 
the same time they began to teach the Ukrainian youth of the 
city - Ukrainian, church music, folk songs, religion, and 
handicrafts. On May 23, 1903, Sister Taida, a teacher of 
music, died. 

On July 12, 1903, the Basilian Fathers and the 
Ukrainian Sisters moved to Beaver Lake (three miles east of 
Mundare, Alberta) where Father Filas had already built a small 
home. By 1904 a chapel was built which served, in 1905, as a 
school room for the Ukrainian school children. 

This was a daily school attended by the children of 
the locality and of outlying districts. Since the chapel served 

13 

Sister Elizabeth, S.3.M.I., ’’Forty Tears in God’s 
Service”, Yuvileyna Knyha Sester Sluzebnets 1892-1942 ,( Jubilee 
Book of the Sisters Servants 1892-1942 ), pp. 77-^2« Edmonton, 
Alberta: Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 1942® 






























« 


•/ o 








c : ? 






















c 






36 


as a classroom there was a movable screen which served to cover 
the altar during class time. Soon there were sixty children 
attending this school, thirty of whom lived and boarded at the 
Sisters 1 home. Only cramped quarters forbade them taking in 
more children from the more distant Ukrainian colonies. Condi¬ 
tions remained such until 1911# 

By 1910 Father N. Kryzanowsky, who had arrived from 
Western Ukraine October 28, 1903, was appointed to the monastery 
at Beaver Lake. Seeing the difficulties under which the school 
was conducted he gave up his own living quarters to provide for 
more classroom space. One of Father Kryzanowsky’s first dreams 
was to build a larger and more suitable school for the 
Ukrainian children at Beaver Lake. The new school was a two 
story building built at a cost of $12,000.00 and completed in 
1913* The building of this school began on July 15, 1913 
On August 3, 1913, the cornerstone for this new school building 
was officially laid and blessed. Father Kryzanowsky described 
this event in his Journal in an entry on that date.“^ 

On that day a jubilee procession was announced (in 
the Mundane church). Because the Bishop (N. Budka) 
arrived unexpectedly the ceremony of the laying of the 
cornerstone followed. There was a great deal of trouble 
over this cornerstone because it had not arrived in time 
from Edmonton. After the service the procession began 
from the church (to Beaver Lake - three miles east of 
Mundare). The procession was a wonderful sight, not only 


14 

Chronicles of the Basilian Fathers, Vol. 2, p. 11, 
Mundare, Alberta: July 15, 1913* 

15 Ibid., Vol. 2, pp. 11-12, August 3, 1913. 




■ ' ; • • . . • c ' ' 

« r 

. 

t 4 

. 

• • t 

. 

« 






. 

* 

. 




t 


» , 


• 5 'S. : ■ ' .. i. , ' . ....... ’ o . .... 




• - . ' 


* < 








37 


because of the great number of standards and religious 
pennants (carried), but especially because of the great 
mass of people which caused the procession to stretch out 
for at least a mile and a half. It was truly a wonderful 
sight ... On arriving at the site the Bishop placed the 
cornerstone and blessed it. (Translated from the Ukrainian). 

As an afterthought the chronicler writes, ft It should 
be mentioned that His Excellency (N. Budka) helped with the 
work of the building’s foundations”. 

The formal blessing of this school took place on 
August 19, 1914o 16 

At half-past four there was a prayer service 
and benediction in the chapel followed by the ’vodo- 
swiatia’ (blessing of the water) and the blessing of 
the school. After the blessing the children gave a 
beautiful concert and play which was creditably done. 

All this lasted until nine o’clock that night. 

(Translated from the Ukrainian). 

A letter from Sister Liubow, one of the first sisters 
teaching at the new school throws light upon the difficult 
circumstances under which they worked. 

When we began that school, there were seven sisters, 
two of whom were sick. The five of us worked like black 
oxen. Two taught the children, slept, and ate with them. 
After four we went with them to wash clothes and to carry 
water (one quarter of a mile) from near the tracks because 
there was only enough water near the home for kitchen use 
and washing. There were 111 children, in addition to 
those who came in from the farms. But God gave us strength 
and energy and with that, exceeding happiness. For all 
that, these children felt happy amongst us, even though 
there were no luxuries or entertainment. When they tired, 
we would sing with them and returned to our studies, our 
work and our prayers. In this way the time went, day after 
day. (Translated from the Ukrainian). 1 ^ 


l6 Ibid., VoX. 2, pp. 24-25, August 19, 1914. 

17 

Letter of Sister Liubow, S.S.M.I., of Calgary, Alberta, 
to Sister Superior, St. Joseph’s Convent, Mundare, Alberta, dated 
December 2, 1957® 




. 


. 








T 










r 






T 





? 






C 








A correspondent for the Edmonton Journal makes an 
interesting comment in the columns of the Edmonton Journal in 
regard to this school. 

Situated some miles east of the town of Mundare 
in a spot of more than special beauty lies the quaint 
little Ruthenian monastery founded by Rev. Father 
Filas in 1902. Your correspondent found pleasure 
recently in visiting the institution and learning at 
first hand the nature of the work being done there. 

One could easily see that the good Sisters who look 
after the school garden were adept# in setting forth 
pleasing effects in the arrangement of flowers. 

On approaching the convent everywhere the eye was 
charmed and delighted on beholding the rows of beautiful 
flowers of varied hues so blended as to bring out the 
best possible effects. The work of the Sisterhood is to 
impart to the 70 or more Ruthenian youths who attend a 
sound moral education. The teaching staff is made up 
of fully qualified Sisters under the school laws 
of Alberta, and during the past scholastic year work 
up to Grade 8 has been done by Sister Eugenia, a 
teacher of more than average excellence and a charming 
conversationalist, even in the English tongue, who is, 
under the Superioress, in charge of the teaching arrange¬ 
ments. Your correspondent was greatly struck with the 
neat and orderly arrangements of the classrooms and 
the homelike atmosphere found there. Special attention 
is given to physical education, after the maxim f, A sound 
mind in a sound body”. 

In a separate building apart from the convent we 
met the spiritual adviser and had an hour’s pleasant 
interview with him. The monastery, Including the convent 
is really under Father Kryzanowsky’s charge. In addition 
he and his assistants have to minister to the large 
Ruthenian Greek Catholic Mission extending even to 
Vermilion and Bruderheim, and embracing S,000 c souls. 

In all they have charge in their missionaryAo¥ r 20 churche 

By 1926 when the Sisters built the new St. Joseph’s 
School and Orphanage in Mundare, Alberta, this early 1913 


News Item, ’’Ruthenian Monastery - Good Work Done 
Near Mundare”, Edmonton Journal , August 20, 1921. 










39 

building was torn down and its materials were used in the 
construction of the later building. The chronicles of the 
Sisters Servants say that, "Soon the Sisters were teaching 

]Q 

in three schools locally, six of them qualified teachers". 7 
A high school for girls was begun in this later building at 
Mundare, but by 193$ it became a novitiate for the training of 
new Sisters in the religious, educational, social, and health 
fields. 


The Basilian Fathers and the 
Teacher Training School 

The great numbers of Ukrainian children who went 
to the Sisters 1 School at Beaver Lake, and the great numbers 
who were turned away because of the limited facilities became 
the serious concern of the Basilian Fathers. In many instances 
Ukrainian parents sent their children there although there was 
a neighboring public school in their own localities, and this 
fact proved a source of friction in some of the local and 
neighboring school boards. The parents preferred to have their 
children taught when possible by Ukrainian teachers, and in the 
Ukrainian pioneering times there may have been reason enough 
for encouraging this. Much was written in the Ukrainian press 
of the time and more spoken on public platforms where Ukrainian 
youth were urged to continue their studies and eventually take 
up careers in the teaching field to supplement the need for 

■^Sister Elizabeth, S.S.M.I., op. cit .. p. $1. 





* " : 














i 


C 


c c 








. 


























t ' ' i 

♦ 

. 

1 ■ ■ ■ n 

0 •' ’ •' " 





40 


more qualified Ukrainian teachers in the Ukrainian districts* 

Because of the language handicap the Basilian 
Fathers visualized a teacher training school where potential 
teachers could be trained in special schools. The students 
would receive not only the necessary pedagogical training but 
an intensive and specialized course in English which would 
enable them to do the most good for the Ukrainian children* 

In this way the Ukrainian children would be kept in a teacher 
atmosphere which did not harshly contradict the cultural back¬ 
ground to which they were accustomed at home. In this regard 
the Fathers contacted the highest government officials who 
were very favorable to the project. Father Kryzanowsky recorded 
their efforts in the monastery 1 s daily Journal. 

Cn May 12, 1910, Father Kryzanowsky writes: 

I went to Edmonton. With Father Hura and Father 
Dydyk. I saw Minister Lessard and Premier Rutherford 
who promised to open a Ukrainian seminary (teacher 
training school).... 20 

July 20, 1910. With Father Hura I saw Premier 
Sifton on the matter of a school organizer for the 
Ukrainian school for Ukrainian teachers. The Premier 
was very sympathetic, and promised to do all,that was 
possible at the next session of Parliament. 1 

August 24, 1911. I saw Premier Sifton of Alberta 
who promised to open a school where children could train 
for teachers as soon as he could find a^Ukrainian qualified 
teacher who could direct such a school. ^ 


20 

Chronicles of the Basilian Fathers, Vol. 1, p. 118. 
Mundare, Alberta: May 12, 1910. 

2 1 Ibid .. Vol. 1, p. 127. July 20, 1910. 

22 Ibid ., Vol. 1, p. 164. August 24, 1911. 







. 

.. 

. 

« 7 

: * t 


: 










* 

















* 









♦ 



■ 





. 













• 















* 












. 


■' ; ci LI 

t ; 


c ' 











41 


In spite of the good intentions of the Alberta 

Government, very little came of these hopes. But from 1913 

to 1916, a School for Foreigners was established at Vegreville 

which attempted to prepare Ukrainian students at least for the 

23 

world outside them if not specifically for teaching careers. J 

The Sisters* School in Edmonton 24 

In 1905 two Sisters from Mundare took up residence 

near the first St. Josaphat’s Church on 97th Street and 103th 

Avenue in Edmonton. This early church had been completed in 

1904* The Sisters lived in a small home prepared for them 

by the Basilian Fathers. Again under the most trying conditions, 

the Sisters began their work with the school children. 

The same table was used for an altar in the morning, 

a dinner table at meal time, and as a classroom table for the 

students. It was not until 1906 that a Toronto priest donated 

$120.00 towards the buying of a number of suitable school desks 

for the children. By this time a small one-room building had 

been purchased which was used exclusively as a classroom. This 

small school was placed on one of thirty-eight newly acquired 

2 ^ 

lots selected by Bishop Legal and Father Filas. The cost of 
23 

W. A. Stickle, "School for Foreigners", Eighth 
Annual Report of the Department of Education of the Province of 

Alberta . 1913, PP* 49-51* Edmonton; J. W. Jeffery, Government 
Printer, 1914. 

^Sister Elizabeth, S.S.M.I., op. cit .. pp. 34-36. 

^Rev. j. Jean, O.S.B.M., The Ukrainian School Question . 
Archives of Father Jean, Mundare, Alberta: p. 41* 









c 








7 


■ 


r 

































■ ' 









42 


these lots was $2200.00. Bishop Legal paid for nineteen of 
them, and they became the site of the present Immaculate Con¬ 
ception Church and the present Sacred Heart School building. 

The other nineteen were bought by the Basilian Fathers and became 
the site of the present St. Josaphat’s Convent and School, 
rectory, and church grounds. 

The school work of the Sisters was aided by the 
charitable services of the people who did all that was 
possible to aid the Sisters in establishing themselves. By 
1910 the school had become so overcrowded that it was found 
necessary to expand. Bishop Legal received $15,000.00 from a 
Catholic Organization in Toronto, and this was used to build a 
brick school and home for the Sisters. It was blessed by 
Metropolitan Andrew Sheptycky. In 1920 additional classrooms 
were added at a value of $18,000.00. Four classrooms in this 
building are included as a part of the present Sacred Heart 
School which has an average annual enrolment of about 130 
Ukrainian children. 

The Schools in Sifton and Yorkton 2 ^ 

The Sisters first arrived in Sifton, Manitoba, on 
November 30, 1910, where the Sisters conducted classes in the 
basement of the church until about 1914# In 1912 Rev. Josaphat 
Jean founded a missionary school for young men in Sifton which 

°Sister Elizabeth, S.S.M.I., op. cit .. pp. 89-93* 







- • 

, 









oriw' • - . : ... 


* 

i-Hi . .., . ■- . •' ... . ■ ..... : ..: 

‘ 5 * 

• ■ % i 

- 

, 

- * <J 

, ■' . ; ' . 1 J i.;/;j 

* 










43 


was later under the direction of Father Sabourin. The 
Sisters used the facilities of this building to some extent. 

In 1921, a home and school was built for the Sisters at a 
cost of $30,000.00 and this building was also blessed by Metro¬ 
politan Sheptjrcky. After adverse circumstances in 1924, the 
Sisters left Sifton but returned in 1933 to begin their work 
anew. 

In Yorkton, Saskatchewan, land was bought in 1915 
by Bishop N. Budka for a new school. On a loan of $25,000.00, 
the Sacred Heart Academy was erected and completed in 1916 
and placed under the administration of Father Delaere. During 
the first years only eight gradeswere taught, and it accommo¬ 
dated eighty girls. Since 1932, it has been a high school for 
girls, and in 1957, the Sisters began to build a new and 
modern high school for girls which is now nearing completion. 

St. Nicholas School in Winnipeg^ 

On June 16, 1905, Sisters Athanasia and Alexia 
27 

The material for this section has been found in: 

a) Sister Elizabeth, S.S.M.I., op. cit ., pp. $6~89* 

b) Sister Athanasia,^S.S.M.I., "Shkola Sw. o. Nykolaya” 

(St. Nicholas School), Yuvlleyny Almanakh Shkoly Sw. o. Nykolaya . 
1911-1936 ( Jubilee Almanac of St. Nicholas School in Winnipeg , 
1911-1935 ). pp. 11-18. Winnipeg, Manitoba: Sisters Servants of 
Mary Immaculate, 1937o 

Article, "Yuviley 25-litnoi Pratsi Shkoly Sw. o. Nykolaya” 
(Jubilee of the 25th Year of the Work of St. Nicholas School), 
Ibid ., pp. 37-41* 










1 


c 


c 


c 




c 
















< ‘ * c 



■, ■. I j: > \ 



c 





' 




r ' J 


<; * 


44 


arrived in Winnipeg where a small Ukrainian school had already- 
been established by Father M. Hura, O.S.B.M., and taught by a 
secular teacher. The Sisters immediately began teaching 
catechism, church music, reading, writing during the vacation. 

On August 2S, 1905, the Sisters began a daily school 
in a small building on Selkirk and MacGregor which had a stage 
and a gallery and served as a community hall locally. This was 
a rather dilapidated building with doors which could not be 
locked and which was frequently broken into at night by vandals. 
During the first year fifty children attended this school, and 
the children gave plays and concerts on its stage. 

In the winter of 1905, the Sisters moved their school 
into the basement of St, Nicholas Church where they were bothered 
by the hazards of mud, water, and gloom. At this time they 
taught in three languages: Ukrainian, Polish, and English. In 
order to become more familiar with the Canadian System of 
teaching, they often paid visits to the classrooms of other 
Sisters teaching in Winnipeg, and did all they could to improve 

c) Article, "Shkola Sw. o. Nykolaya” (St. Nicholas School), 
Illustrovany Kalendar-Almanakh Ukrayinskykh Vistey , ( Illustrated 
C alendar-Almanac of the Ukrainian News ), pp. 66-70. Edmonton, 
Alberta: 1935* 

d) Rev. Stephen Semchuk, "Zhromadzenia Sester Sluzebnets" 
(Congregation of the Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate), 
Propamyatna Knyha . t The Commemorative Book of the Settlement of 
the Ukrainian People in Canada, 1^91^1941 ), PP« 73-76. Winnipeg. 
Manitoba: Episcopal Ordinariate (Ukrainian Catholic Church), 1941• 














c 






45 


their knowledge of English. By 1906, there were 160 children 
attending this basement school. They were often visited here 
by Archbishop Langevin who greatly enjoyed their Ukrainian songs 
and often attended their little concerts and plays. One of 
thes e concerts was given in honor of Metropolitan Andrew Sheptycky 
on September 27, 1910. 

When the difficulties of teaching in this basement 
school became acute the Sisters presented their problem to 
Archbishop Langevin and to Father Cherrier. The year 1911 was 
a particularly rainy year and often enough the classroom floor 
was covered with water. By July IS, 1911, Father S. Dydyk, 
O.S.B.M., after a visit to Archbishop Langevin, came home with 
plans for a new school. In the summer of 1911, construction 
began on the new St. Nicholas School which was built at a cost 
of $25,000*00 from the personal funds of Archbishop Langevin. 

This was a brick building two stories high and measuring fifty 
feet by sixty feet. Father Cherrier gave a personal gift of 
$2,000.00 for school furnishings. When this building was opened 
to the children on October 24, 1911, there were five classrooms, 
a chapel, a recreation room, and living quarters for the Sisters. 
It was formally blessed on October 22, 1911 by Father Fillipiw, 
O.S.B.M. 


e) Interviews with Sister Athanasia, S.S.M.I., the first 
teacher of St. Nicholas School, Winnipeg, and associated with 
the writer in parish work at St. Josaphat’s Cathedral, Edmonton, 
Alberta, from 1947 to 195&* 











46 


At the end of June, 1912, the children gave their 
first concert in the school auditorium in the presence of Arch¬ 
bishop Langevin and Bishop Budka. At this concert, Archbishop 
Langevin gave the school to the Sisters. On this occasion, 
Archbishop Langevin said, 

I, Sisters, have visited you for a long time, 
taken care of you, and now I shall cease, for you now 
have your own Father, your own Bishop, who shall care 
for you better than I. At my leaving I wish to leave 
you with a little present, and this present for you is 
this school. It is yours. You owe me nothing. As a 
reward, however, I desire that each Christmas, for as 
long as I live, you bring me a Ukrainian Ghristmas- 
cake. 28 

In 1912, there were about 200 children attending 
this school. In 1914, there were 250 children and soon this 
grew to 400 children and only six teaching Sisters. In 1920, 
when the number of children went over 400, the Inspector of 
Health decreed that some of these children must be sent away. 

The cost of running this school became a severe 
burden to the Sisters. Their taxes for each school year 
averaged from between $500.00 to $900.00. Each child was 
assessed a fee of 10 cents a month, but for example, in 1933, 
when there were 160 children at the school and five teaching 
Sisters, all that was collected from the children for one given 
month amounted to $13.00. The Basilian Fathers heated the school 
at their expense, and the Sisters tried to make ends meet by 
sewing church vestments, presenting concerts, and organizing 

2 ^ 


Sister Athanasia, S.S.M.I., a 


cit ., pp. 17-13 











c 


c 


t 




c • 




47 


bazaars. By.1936, eight of the fourteen Sisters at this school 
were qualified teachers. In addition to the regular course of 
studies required by the Manitoba Department of Education, the 
Sisters taught the Ukrainian language, Ukrainian History, 
religion, prepared concerts, drills, exposition, and handicrafts 
The school is still part of the Winnipeg school system today. 

Conclusion 

An effort has been made to indicate the role of the 
Ukrainian missionaries and Sisters In the formal educational 
development of the Ukrainian children In Western Canada in the 
time which was still a pioneering period for the Ukrainians. 

In particular, reference was made to the early beginnings in 
Edmonton, Mundare (Beaver Lake), and Winnipeg. 

The Sisters continued to expand and build their 
schools in nearly every province of Canada. They now have large 
and beautiful modern schools accommodating hundreds of students 
and covering a complete and diversified program of High School 
studies for young women at Yorkton, Saskatchewan; Ancaster, 
Ontario; and Sloatsburg, N.Y., U.S.A. In 1954, In Canada alone, 
they had forty-five teaching Sisters teaching a total 2,369 chil 
dren. 

Their Jubilee Memoir, a souvenir book, indicating 
fifty years of progress, shows that in 1952 they numbered 255 



. ■ 

c : 

< ' t 

< « ' ' < ■ 




' 




1 " < >j d 












.t: i :d ■ ” 


, ■ 


< c • 

V 1 : -J d.Q :.r i A ;;;: -di . ' './■ , : :.j. ' ?; V: 


. . ' ■ • : ; 

' 


d. d. • ■ d ; : • : d ■ d - \ hr. ' 

C ' ' c 

? . - . , . . 

. C . • - . • • •• - V ' - 

. 

d :d.; . : .. , • . • . 



4 # 


Sisters. They taught 24 day schools, 30 evening schools, 5 

kindergartens, and conducted 4 hostels for girls. This was in 

addition to their hospitals, orphanages, homes for the aged, 

and missions which they had under their supervision. For the 

fifty years following 1902, the statistical figures for the 

numbers of children who were instructed by the Sisters Servants 

29 

of Mary Immaculate are as follows: 


In day schools .... 85,623 

In evening schools . 63,304 

In vacation schools..... 287,068 

In Sunday catechism classes .. 115,#40 

In First Holy Communion classes . 197,743 


The first four Sisters who arrived in Edmonton, 
November 1, 1902, and began their humble work amongst the 
Ukrainian children in Western Canada have truly left a praise¬ 
worthy record in educational achievement. 


29 

Summary, ,f In Fifty Years", Jubilee Memoir 1902-1952 , 
Commemorating the Fiftieth Anniversary of Christ the King Pro¬ 
vince of the Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, p. 150. 

Toronto: Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 1952. 




















c 

c 


t ■ 

c ■ 









c ? 




c 



c 




i , .... . 








CHAPTER IV 


THE FRENCH CANADIAN MISSIONARIES AND THEIR 

CONTRIBUTION TO UKRAINIAN EDUCATION 

Introduction 

Archbishop Adelard Langevin was deeply disturbed 
by the spiritual neglect of the Ukrainian settlers, predomi¬ 
nantly Catholics. A monk from Mount Athos, Seraphim, made 
himself spiritual leader of the Ukrainians and by 1903 he 
began "ordaining" scores of "priests” to provide for the 
"spiritual” needs of the people* 1 With few exceptions these 
men, unskilled laborers, many of them illiterate, took up their 
sham duties, and confusion reigned supreme. Heresy and schism 
claimed their toll* Some of these priests who had some 
schooling eventually broke away from Seraphim to form indepen¬ 
dent churches; other joined forces with either the Presbyterian 
or Anglican missions* 

Latin Rite Priests Enter Upon 
the Ukrainian Mission 

In 1$9$ Archbishop Langevin visited the Redemptorist 
Fathers in Belgium and asked these Belgian priests of the Latin 
rite to undertake the mission for the Ukrainians in Manitoba and 

^P* Bozyk, Tserkov Ukrayinsiv v Kanadi ( The Church 
of the Ukrainians in Canada ), pp* 25-55* Winnipeg: Canadian 
Ukrainian, 192?. 














I i ■ • ' i • 



n:i ; . . ' . 1 .. >'£ ■ - ■ ■ ■ ‘ : ■ 

i . . ., .' .1/ '■ - ' ‘ ■ ■ ■■■' V : 

t .; t . < • ' 

: ./■ : J • ■ ■ ; - 

: .. * 
t . : . . . • ?'•' " '■ ■ • .« 


, 




. 

noc-j: a.: j jaI , :/ ; ji.LLoua&a-j 

‘X ■ i . 10 J. . : - \ ; ' 

* . i 


... ’ : ’ 1 J > ■ 


.... '• . ' < i. iA • n 












5 

. - . , 










50 


2 

Saskatchewan. Father Achille Delaere, C.S.S.R., was the first 
to respond, arriving in Canada on October 2, 1899, to begin his 
work in Yorkton, Saskatchewan. By 1907, three other Belgian 
priests followed him: Fathers Henrich Boels, Noel Mary Descamps, 
and Charles Tescher. These Latin rite priests mastered the 
Ukrainian language and the Ukrainian liturgical rite. They then 
threw themselves heart and soul into the work for the Ukrainian 
people. 

In the meantime Archbishop Langevin continued his 
fight to obtain Ukrainian priests for the Ukrainians. When his 
efforts failed in Europe he encouraged young French Canadian 
students-in-training as well as ordained priests in Quebec to 
give up their priestly lives in service for the Ukrainians. 

The example of Father Delaere and his co-workers, as well as 
his memorial written on the advance of heresy and schism amongst 
the Ukrainians stirred many young French Canadian youths to 
undertake the Ukrainian mission.^ Young priests like Fathers 
Joseph Jean, who later entered the Basilian Order, Joseph Gagnon, 
Arthur Desmarais, Adonais Sabourin and Desire Claveloux left 
Canada for the Ukraine where they acquired a knowledge of the 
Ukrainian language and rite, and on their return took up work 
amongst the Ukrainians, especially in Manitoba. One of their 
first undertakings was to establish a school for the Ukrainians 

2 Ibid., pp. 13-14, 

^Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M. , Moye Sluzinia Ukraini ( For 
the Ukrainian Cause ), p. 4* Library of Catholic Action, No. 15. 
Edmonton, Alberta, 1953. 













< * V < 

? : :■ x. 

« 




. 


* 

' 

. 

i ' ' ' ■■ 


. 

< ' ■ c 

f 


x 

x 




< V .. 








. . 


f: ' .1 











51 


at Sifton.• 

When Archbishop Langevin approached Metropolitan 
Sheptycky on his visit to Canada in 1910 for Ukrainian priests 
the Metropolitan replied negatively, but encouraged Archbishop 
Langevin to send his own young priests for this work if such 
volunteers could be found. The Metropolitan replied, 

The number of priests whom I can send to Canada 
is minimal. Your Excellency would do a great deed for 
the Ukrainian Canadians so greatly beset by schism and 
heresy if you found priests for them who would understand 
them and accept their rite. I would like to say before¬ 
hand that these will meet with great difficulties, and 
our people will be even suspicious of them for in the 
beginnings they shall not understand this manner of 
sacrifice.^ 

The striving for the improvement of the position of 
the Ukrainian settlers in Canada, both spiritually and educationally, 
was indeed heroic. Archbishop Langevin wrote, travelled, pleaded, 
and gave all possible monetary help in the building of Ukrainian 
schools and seminaries. He encouraged young men to give their 
lives for the Ukrainian cause - one among them was Father 
Josaphat Jean, Q.S.B.M., who today at 7$ has spent a continuous 
fifty years in service for the Ukrainians. 


Efforts Towards the Establishing of Schools 


In Manitoba, the conditions for establishing a school 
for the Ukrainians were particularly favorable because bilin- 


^Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M.. Dr. B. Kazymyra, Vylyky 
Metropolit ( The Great Metropolitan ), p. 4* Library of Catholic 
Action, No. 17, Edmonton, Alberta, 1954* 







52 


gualism was permitted in the school system until as late as 
March &, 1916, when legislation finally abolished it.^ The 
French clergy realized that in the first years the Ukrainian 
settlers and their children would have great difficulty in 
adapting themselves to the conditions of their new homeland. 

They knew little or no English at all, knew nothing of the 
customs, the history, or the traditions of the country, and any 
attempts to anglicize them were treated with resentment, 
suspicion, and as a threat to their racial identity which they 
had struggled to preserve under the greatest of difficulties in 
the Old Country. They felt that particularly in the beginnings, 
any such schools should be staffed by Ukrainian teachers who 
were bilingual because this would make the initial shock of 
adjustment a much milder one. 

While there was a limited number of qualified Uni¬ 
versity men from the Ukraine, these were clergymen or laymen 
who held editorial or administrative positions in various Ukrainian 
organizations. The early problem of finding Ukrainian teachers 
who were qualified to give English instruction to the Ukrainian 
children was a formidable one. The Ukrainians themselves were 
very anxious to have their children learn English. Father 

5 

Julian Stechishin, Yuvileyna Knyha, 25-Litia Instituty 
im. Petra Mohyly v Saskatuni (Jubilee Book, Twenty Five Years of 

the Pr~Mohyla Institute in Saskatoon % 1916-1941^p.^42. 

Winnipeg: P. Mohyla Ukrainian Institute, 1945• 






. 

? t ■ c 

C ■ ' -"‘J • \. ■ ; ■ ; 

■ 

. 

- : ■ - • ' ' ‘ ' . Vi 

. 

“ 

. 

. 

* 

: ..4;...: 

• * - * - .5 

* - 




53 


Lacorabe, the great Canadian missionary, as a delegate of Arch¬ 
bishop Langevin in Europe, brought up the matter in a memorandum 
to Cardinal Ledochowski. He hoped to obtain the services of the 
Franciscan Sisters of Mary in establishing schools amongst the 
Ukrainians* In 1900, he wrote: 

Permettez-moi de Vous soumettre un plan que 
nous avons en vue ... pour dtablir une grande 6cole 
de cette nationality h Winnipeg Mbre Gdnerale 
me parle de l*accompagner en ce pays, .pour y plaider 
notre cause auprbs du Gouvernment et des Eve que s de 
Galicie* Tout en recrutant des sujets pour nos 
ecoles galiciennes, nous avons l*esp6rance d* obtenir 
quelques secours pecuniaires »•••• Si quelques 
laiques, de bonne volonte, voulaient nous accompagner 
en Arnerique, nous les rdpandrions, comme Maitres et 
Maitresses d'Ecoles dans nos colonies. 


The Memorandum and Memoir of Archbishop Langevin 


Since the Ukrainians were formerly subjects of Austria, 

Archbishop Langevin wrote a letter and memorandum to the Austrian 

Minister of External Affairs, Goluchowski, whereby he hoped to 

7 

obtain help for the Ukrainians from the Austrian government * 1 
Attached to this letter was’a memorandum in which he expresses 
the Ukrainian situation. Entitled, ft Les Galiciens au Manitoba 
dans les Territoires du Nord-Ouest Canadien ,f , it consisted of 
five articles dealing with the following subject matter: 


Extract from the Memorandum of Father Albert Lacombe, 
Delegate in Europe of Archbishop Langevin, to Cardinal Ledochowski 
in Rome* Rome: June 1, 1900* St* Boniface Archives* 

^Memorandum of Archbishop A. Langevin of St* Boniface 
to Count Goluchowski, Austrian Minister of External Affairs. 

May 2, 1S99, St. Boniface Archives* 




j. •: • 


v jj.: < 


■ 


; ;• i.oo <■'£ 






i 

■ ■ * ; 




« - ■ 













t ■ ' t 

4 ; 

...... ■ • ■ ... • •- •. •' - - ■■’lit •' cJ ... 




; 

* 


' : 







.■ o.v\‘: f :»:o i ; 'iomsb -. 1 

. /.T' . '. . 

* . ■ •_ .: t 









54 


•1* The Number of Ukrainians, 

2. The Rites, 

3* The Priests, 

4. Financial Assistance, and 

5. The Schools* 

Under this last heading he wrote that it was necessary to 

establish a school immediately for nearly a hundred Ukrainian 

pupils at Winnipeg* In addition to the school, he hoped to 

found several scholarships for deserving students attending St* 

Boniface College under the direction of the Jesuit Fathers* 

He admitted that he foresaw the difficulty of finding competent 

teachers who knew the Ukrainian language as well as possessing 

a satisfactory knowledge of English* In expressing these plans, 

he hoped for assistance from the Austrian government in providing 

for these necessary schools. 

A much more memorable and historic document Is the 

Memoir of Archbishop Langevin to the Austrian Emperor Franz- 

& 

Joseph in 1904» Here Archbishop Langevin gives a complete 
analysis of the Ukrainian problem under four separate headings: 

1* The Population, 

2* Dangers to the Faith and Social Order, 

3* What has been done to meet these Dangers, 

4* What should be done. 

& Memoire sur la situation des sujets ruthbnes de Sa 
Majesty apostolique, I’Empereur d*Autriche, dans 1*Quest Canadien. 
(Amdrique Britannique) by Archbishop A. Langevin, July 2, 1904. 

St. Boniface Archives* 






.. . 


5 

• K . ■; : 

* 

. . 

(, . ■ * 

. 

. 




* 


' ! . 




. 

; . ■ l .I: ' . . . . i'. 

— 1 

* 

r i • ’ •... 


. 












, 




" . . . ... - 

T . ' ' l 

. o ..... 


55 


He reminds -His Majesty that in 1904 some £0,000 of his subjects 
were living in Western Canada and of these, 60,000 were Ukrainian. 
He stated that 30,000 of them were to be found in Manitoba, 20,000 
in Alberta, and 10,000 in Saskatchewan. Here he again assures 
the Emperor of the necessity of schools for the Ukrainian children 
as there are 4,000 of these children without schools, and presses 
the point that to a definite degree the Emperor was responsible 
for the future of these children. In this regard he requested 
any possible assistance for the needs of the Ukrainians. 

Le second moyen de sauver la situation serait 
de construire une ecole centrale, b Winnipeg, pour 
les enfant s Ruthbnes. D<§jb les Catholiques Anglais, 
allemands, polonais ont leurs 6coles speciales qu’ils 
entretiennent b leurs frais. Les Ruthbnes plus 
pauvres auralent peine b faire cette nouvelle ddpense; 
mais il leur faudrait une 6cole sdparee. Un pbre 
Basilien a ddjb ouvert, ce printemps de 1904, b 
Winnipeg, une <§cole libre dins une petite maison 
que les Soeurs Servantes de Marie de Galicie, d<§jb 
6 tab-lies dans le diocbse de St. Albert vont venir, 
habiter b l’automne si elles n*y sont pas dejb 
installdes. 

Si l’on pouvait aussi nous envoyer des maitres 
catholiques brevetes, on nous rendrait un grand 
service. Je le repbte, II y a plus de 4000 enfants 
Ruthbnes sans 6cole. 

Pour conclure qu*il me soit permis de faire deux 
remarques: D*abord les Ruthbnes, au Canada, sont 
appelds b jouer un role important dans les affaires 
religieuses et politiques, tant parcequ'ils auront 
bientdt droit de vote comme tous les autres citoyens 
que parcequ f Ils sont ddja trbs nombreux et tous ou 
presque tous en voie d'acquerir une honnete aisance, 
sinon la fortune.... 

This intense appeal to the Austrian government brought 
no response. This great friend of the Ukrainian people then 


Ibid., Extract from the Memoire. 







t 


* 


c 




t 







t 




c 


: 





56 


turned to his good friend, Premier Roblin of Manitoba, and 
asked him to establish a Ukrainian seminary. Such an institu¬ 
tion (The Ruthenian Training School) with the aid of Mr. Roblin 
was actually opened on Minto Street in Winnipeg in 1904* It was 
soon transferred to Brandon where it was in full operation till 
1910. A letter from Premier Roblin to the Archbishop indicated 
his readiness to cooperate in this matter.*^ 

..regarding the necessit}^ of the Education 

of the .... Galician children of this Province.I 

may say that it has already been considered by the 
Government, and while we have not reached any conclusion 
.....it is felt that some provision must be made in order 
that the children of these people have at least temporary 
school education. I shall be glad to further consider 
the matter with you along with other members of the 
Government as to a method of solution of what appears 
to be a very difficult problem at present. 

It may be mentioned here that Bishop Vital Grandin 
had established a school in St 0 Albert in 1900. This school, 
which had a program of studies generally classical in content, 
was attended by many Ukrainian students from Alberta. This 
school existed about seventeen years. Father J. Tymochko, O.S.B.M., 
and Dr. N. Strilchuk of Mundare are products of this school® In 
the fall of 1913, Archbishop Langevin established a small 
seminary near his residence in St. Boniface. This school, however, 
was designed for those students who desired to take philosophical 
and theological studies in preparation for the priesthood. 

Ukrainian boys who were inclined towards the clerical life were 


Letter of Premier Roblin of Manitoba to Archbishop 
Langevin, no. 193, St. Boniface Archives, dated January 26, 1901. 














. 




. . \ 



' 




















c 















• . 


i > .. ', *1 

zwoti b " /■ 1 o:L: 








: . 




57 


encouraged•to attend this school which was affiliated with St, 
Boniface College, It was at Archbishop Langevin’s personal 
cost that St. Nicholas School for Ukrainian children was built 
in Winnipeg in 1911* In 1910, St. Josaphat’s School in 
Edmonton was built through the help of Bishop Legal, 


The Missionary School at Sifton*^ 


The report of the First Plenary Council of Canada 
held in Quebec in 1909 recommended the immediate building of a 
junior college for Ukrainian children near the Basilian Fathers 
in Winnipeg. 


Gommeneer au plus vite, prbs de l*6glise 
des R6v6rends Pbres Basiliens, & Winnipeg, un 
Petit Seminaire „ pour les enfant s ruthbnes de 
tout 1* Quest sous la direction d*un P£re Basilien. 

Une construction modeste pouvant Xoger une ving- 
taine d'elbves serait peu couteuse et ii est b 
esparer que l*on trouveras des bienfaiteurs qui 
donneront cent piastres per an, pour un <§lbve 
ruthbne • Vingt diocbses donnant chacun cent 
piastres annuellemeninfonderaient en quelque 
sorte 1 # institution. 

By June, 1912, Rev. Father Joseph Jean had returned 
to Canada from Galicia, in Western Ukraine, where he had gone 
to study the Ukrainian language and rite. On August 14, 1912, 
Archbishop Langevin appointed Father Jean to the Ukrainian mission 


Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The School Question , pp. 
21-26, Archives of J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Basilian Fathers, Mundare, 
Alberta. 

12 ^ 

^ Rapport de la Commission chargee par le Premier 

Concile plenier du Canada d f etudier la question des Ruthenes et 
de soumettre quelques conclusions, p. 7. Quebec, September 2£, 
1909. Archives of J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Basilian Fathers, Mundare, 
Alberta. 






f 






« 


c 




5 & 


in Sifton,.where he was told to found a school for the Ukrainians. 
Two other French Canadian missionaries, Rev. Father Joseph 
Gagnon and Rev. Father D. Claveloux, who had been in the district 
at an earlier date, had been instructed to gather as many chil¬ 
dren as possible in the Ukrainian colonies who were to become 
the pupils of the new school® When Father Jean arrived in 
Sifton on August 15, he found that little had been accomplished. 

Immediately, Fathers Jean and Gagnon began to prepare 
two classrooms in the basement of the Ukrainian Church in Sifton. 

A home newly built for the purpose was used to house the students. 
The third floor of this home was turned into a dormitory which 
was furnished with good iron beds and matresses for twenty 
students. A kitchen and dining room were prepared in the base¬ 
ment. Arrangements were made with the Sisters Servants in 
Winnipeg who agreed to cook for the students at the modest sum 
of $50.00 per month. One of.the first teachers, Professor Basil 
Bulyk, was already in Sifton. Father Claveloux was instructed 
to visit the Ukrainian colonies to obtain as many students as 
possible for the school. This school opened in Sifton on Sep¬ 
tember 6, 1912. 

On the first day there were only three boys. The 
following day, Father Jean travelled forty-five miles with a 
team of horses to bring in a fourth boy. The next day, a Sunday, 
a fifth boy was brought in by his parents. Soon there were 
twelve boys and by January of 1913, there were sixteen students. 


- • c • ' ■•••'• 

t 

< - * • 

u• • (. 

« 

• ■ C • 

' 

. a ■ a a a.-. ■ aa'r 

•.. . * ■ 

« 

a a " . • .‘V. ' a .... : a. aaa; 

* a < 

.• : l . a . 

« 

. t 

i' . 

c 



v*i n. i a,< 

■ ro i . '• . . 


■ • ' > . ' 

i 



59 


Not one of- them was able to read or write in Ukrainian or English* 
Father Jean then began to teach them the English language and the 
material covered in the first two grades of the Manitoba school 
program. Professor Bulyk taught Ukrainian reading and writing, 
and singing. Games were played during recreation and the child¬ 
ren were satisfied and studied well. Each morning they attended 
Mass during which they sang Ukrainian hymns. 

One can obtain a better idea of the course material 
taught at this school by an examination of the report cards 
which were issued each month to the parents of the children. 

Program of Studies 

St. Josaphat f s Missionary School in Sifton 

Month.19. 

Name of Student .... 

Subjects 

I. Ukrainian Grammar 
2 0 Ukrainian Reading 
3. English Grammar 
4* English Translation 

5. Geography 

6. Arithmetic 
7• Catechism 

Conduct 
Character 

Director of the School 
13 

Archives of Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The Sifton School , 
Basilian Fathers, Mundare, Alberta. 


Marks up to 10 Standing in Class 

00 * 90 * 0 * 000***00 




























60 


Of interest, too, is the daily time table for the 
average day. Except for Sundays and Church Holidays, there was 
little variation from this schedule. 


Daily Time Table^ 
Morning 


5:40 

Reveille 

6:00 

Prayer, Mass, and preparation of 
lessons 

8:00 

Breakfast, clean up, and recreation 

8:40 

Preparation of lessons 

9:00 

Classes 

10:00 

Recreation 

10:10 

Classes 

11:15 

Preparation of lessons 

11:50 

Prayer 

12:00 

Dinner 


Afternoon 

1:15 

Writing and Drawing 

1:30 

Preparation of lessons 

2:00 

Classes 

2:50 

Recreation 

3:00 

Classes 

4:00 

Recreation and lunch 

4:30 

Preparation of lessons 


Evening 

6:00 

Conference by the Director 

6:30 

Supper, recreation 

7:30 

Singing 

8:00 

Reading 

8:30 

Prayer and night rest 


On Wednesdays and Saturdays, the children enjoyed 
extra periods of recreation from 12:30 to 400 p.m. Reading 
during mealtime was required on certain days of the week. Other¬ 
wise, recreation (permission to speak to each other) was the 
natural order. 


14 


Ibid. 








X) : 


C 


, ‘.u 


' 


I •• i Jw 




c ' ? 











; io. 








c 





■ ' 




C; 




, 





61 


•When news arrived that the Ukrainian Canadians were to 
have their first Bishop in the person of Bishop N. Budka, Father 
Jean and his students sent a letter of welcome to Liverpool, 
where he was to embark on the Empress of Britain. On receipt of 
the letter, the Bishop 1 s first reaction, in the words of his 
secretary, Rev. J. Bala, was to say, ’’Look, a Frenchman is 
teaching our children in Canada. My first act on arriving there 
will be to close that school”.^ 

On December IS, 1912, Father Jean went to Winnipeg to 
meet Bishop Budka. Here he was advised by the Bishop’s secretary, 
Father Bala, to invite the Bishop to visit the school in Sifton. 
Said Father Bala, ”Invite the Bishop to your school. He has a 
good heart, and once he has seen your school he will change his 
mind.”*^ Accordingly, Bishop Budka received his invitation and 
was to arrive by train at 6:00 p.m. on January 18, 1913• Because 
of the extreme cold (30° below) the train did not arrive until 
5:00 a.m. the following day* 

When Bishop Budka arrived, Father Jean’s parishioners 
were waiting for him at the station. These led him in procession 
to the church in Sifton where the Bishop had a short prayer 
service. At 10:00 a.m., the Bishop celebrated Pontifical Mass, 
followed by the ceremony of the Blessing of the Water, for it 
was January 19, and the Feast of the Epiphany (Jordan) according 

^Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The School Question , p. 23. 
Archives of Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Basilian Fathers, Mundare, 
Alberta. 

16 T , ,, 

Ibid. 














c 






t 


7 




< < < 


c 










T 
















, : . •■'.<■ V.o 


7 














7:o 




c 




c 









62 


to the Julian Calendar. This latter ceremony was carried out in 
the icy cold outside, before a huge cross twelve feet high, con¬ 
structed of ice. 

In the evening, the students of the school gave a con¬ 
cert and sang so beautifully under the direction of Professor 
Bulyk that the Bishop wept. At the end of the concert, the 
Bishop offered Father Jean $500.00, all the money he had on his 
person, as a gift towards the upkeep of the school. To this, 

Father Jean replied, 

”Your Excellency! Your need is greater than mine. 

I cannot accept this gift, but only ask you for one thing, Your 

Excellency 1 s permission to continue my work for the Ukrainian 
17 

children.” On receiving His Excellency’s permission and 

blessing, Father Jean writes, "That blessing of my good Bishop 

has continued with me through all the many years of my service 

for the Ukrainians, so much so that I have never had a truly 

black day. It is sincerely true that I have never been piqued 

1$ 

in my fifty years of service amongst the Ukrainians.” 

The income received from the students of the school 
was exceedingly small. By the middle of December 1912, that is, 
three months after the opening of the school, he had obtained 
only a total of $45*00 from the students. To offset the financial 
difficulty Fathers Jean, Sabourin, Gagnon, Glaveloux, and Desmarais 


17 

16 


Ibid ., p. 


Ibid. 


24. 














< ' 






: > 




% 












< 








< 




T 


r 


i 













■. . ; x i' 










63 


gave all of their personal incomes towards the support of the 
school, so much so that by June, 1913, there was no debt on the 
school# In 1913, Father Jean left Sifton to enter the Basilian 
Order and was required to make his novitiate in Western Ukraine. 
With the outbreak of the war, his homecoming was delayed until 
1925. 


Father Jean was replaced by Father A. Sabourin, who 
was appointed to the Sifton school on November 11, 1913, by 
Bishop Budka. He continued to direct this school until June, 
1916. The Sisters Servants then took over the administration of 
this school when it became an educational institution for 
Ukrainian girls. 

An advertisement which appeared twice in the Ukrainian 
press directed the attention of the Ukrainian public to the 
services offered by this school and encouraged young boys to 
enrol in it* 

For the purpose of preparing boys for college 
and the minor seminary, the regular missionary school 
will open on January 12, 1914* Classes will be held in 
the English and the Ukrainian languages. The main pur¬ 
pose of the school is to prepare boys for higher studies 
as quickly as possible. Those boys who have already 
been at the school and those who wish to study for the 
priesthood will receive priority. Since preparatory 
studies in a college are very expensive and the Ukrai¬ 
nian language is not used, studies at the missionary 
school in Sifton will be less costly, and special 
attention will be given to the study of the English 
and Ukrainian languages, and rite. There is accommodation 
for twenty-five students. Costs for board, room, and 
education amount to $10.00 monthly. Laundry services 
per individual are .75 monthly. (Translated from the 
Ukrainian) 


^Advertisements i n the Kanadiysky Rusyn ( Canadian 

Euthenian, 3 (December 6, 1913), 1 and 3 (December 13, 1913), 1* 
Inserted by the Episcopal Ordinariate, Winnipeg, Manitoba. 











< 

4 


{ . 





« 


4 


4 r , 
t ' % 

C ' • * 

* 

, 


, 

. 

« 

. ■ 

-' ’ m: 

t 

' 4 

c . “ 


. 

. '■ • : « ■ ' ' ' 

' . * . ■ f : ! 

* 




/ ' 1 ! : vv 








) 










64 


'The teachers at the Sifton school over the period 

1912 to 1916, in addition to Fathers Jo Jean, A* Sabourin, and 

Professor Bulyk, were: Fathers Peter Oleksiw, J. Kolcun, and 

P. Pasichnik, theological students Mo Pelech and Jo Tymochko, 

as well as Mr. George Skwarok, Mr. Demchuk, and Mr. A. 

?n 

Zaharichuk. 


Conclusion 

The interest and energetic efforts of the French 

Canadian clergy on behalf of the Ukrainians is of historical 

value in the story of the Ukrainian settlers and their schools. 

These first schools, established through the zeal of Archbishop 

Langevin and his suffragan Bishops Pascal and Legal, were among 

the first for Ukrainians in Canada, if not on the continent. 

These schools were the first steps in the education of many a 

future leader amongst the Ukrainian people in Canada. Father 

Anthony Luhovy, a former student of the Sifton school, describes 

the value of this school in a published memoir where he says that 

hundreds of students eventually took advantage of its educational 

21 

opportunities during the five years of its existence. From 


Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The School Question , pp. 21- 
26. Archives of Rev. J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Basilian Fathers, Mundare, 
Alberta. 

21 

Anthony Luhovy. ff Vylyka Shkola w (A Great School), 
Kalendar Holos Spasytelia (Calendar-Almanac of the Voice of the 

Redeemer), p. 109. Yorkton: Redemptorist Fathers, 1952. 







. 




< 






.J 




c 




c 


' 




AH 

i '■ ' ■ ' '£<) 


c 








c- 






c 
























c. 








65 


these schools emerged many priests, doctors, lawyers, teachers, 
and politicianso George Skwarok, a product of these schools, 
received his M.A. in 1919* 

The sacrifices of the young French Canadian priests 
who adopted a language that was foreign to them and a rite strange 
to those accustomed to the Latin ceremonials were heroic# 

Adapting themselves to the customs, traditions, and mode of 
thinking of the Ukrainians, they became a part of the Ukrainian 
way of life# As Metropolitan Sheptycky prophesied, the Ukrainian 
people did not at first understand this manner of sacrifice, and 
they were suspicious of the strangers who claimed to be working 
for their good# On this score, the young French Canadian priests 
suffered frequently from the people who feared that they were to 
be Latinized and that any lengthy contact with priests who were 
formerly of the Latin rite would endanger their own Ukrainian 
rite# 

Time has shown the truth and sincerity of their 
sacrifice and to them the Ukrainians can only remain grateful. 






c 


J 














* 






















: 
























C 




' 






' ' - 


( 






V 




T S ’ \UIG : . . i i,rU,I 













CHAPTER V 


THE UKRAINIAN TRAINING SCHOOLS IN WESTERN CANADA 

Introduction 

Earlier chapters have shown that by 1900 there 
were about 60,000 Ukrainians in Western Canada and that during 
the period between 1896 and 1914, over 200,000 Ukrainians had 
immigrated to Canada* By 1912, 90 Ukrainian school districts 
had been organized in Alberta, and by 1915, there were 130.* 

In Manitoba, by 1915, there were 111 such districts operating bi¬ 
lingual schools and employing 114 teachers, with an enrolment of 
6,513 pupilsThe Kalendar of the Canadian Rusyn for 1916 
indicates that Manitoba, with a Ukrainian population of 60,000, 
had 130 Ukrainian school districts, and that in Saskatchewan, 
with a Ukrainian population of 70,000, there were over 200 
Ukrainian schools and 80 Ukrainian teachers* It may be safe to 
assume that by the end of 1915, there were about 400 Ukrainian 
schools in operation in Western Canada* 


*The expression ff Ukrainian school district” as used in 
this work, is defined to mean a school district inhabited entirely 
or largely by Ukrainian settlers. 

1 

Special Report on Bi-Lingual Schools in Manitoba * 
February 1, 1916* p* ll As quoted in C* H* Young, The Ukrainian 
Canadians * pp* 180-181. Toronto: Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd., 1931* 

p 

"Ukrayinski Ucheteli i Shkoly V Kanada” (Ukrainian 
Teachers and Schools in Canada), Illustrovany Kalendar Kanadiyskoho 
Rusyna (Illustrated Calendar-Almanac of the Canadian Ruthenian )~ 
pp. 37-3^* Winnipeg: 1916. 













e 











t 


c 







; ; . ; ■ • ' ’ ; n'i' 

c 1 


$ 





t 








67 


The Characteristic Plight of 
the Ukrainian Schools 


It must be remembered that only those Ukrainians 
affected by economic conditions immigrated to Canada. Almost 
without exception, they were peasants who had very little oppor¬ 
tunity for education in the Ukraine. Of these, 50 per cent were 
illiterate, and as late as 1921, the Ukrainians were the most 
illiterate people in Canada. 

The foreign born Ukrainians, showing nearly 
40 per cent (10 years of age and over) illiterate, 
stand at the top of the table, while the Norwegians, 
with only 1.40 per cent illiterate, are at the 
bottom.^' 

A further hindrance to the progress of education 
amongst the Ukrainian settlers in Canada was a natural and 
instinctive resistance to anything which proposed or suggested 
assimilation. Their whole historical background was a struggle 
for the preservation of their national identity, and the public 
school, the greatest instrument of assimilation, was looked upon 
with distrust and suspicion. 

The public school is distinct even from those 
educational institutions of Ukrainian-Canadian society 
proper, for the latter are sponsored by the Ukrainians 
themselves and are promoted by reasons quite the reverse, 
though not exclusive of those for which the public school 
actually exists among them. Chief of these is the 
teaching of Ukrainian to the juveniles in order to main¬ 
tain their identity as a distinct racial group, and the 
teaching of English to adults in order to improve the 
capacity of the individual members and thereby raise 
the status and prestige of their group. 


^ Origin, Birthplace, etc.. Study of 1921 Census , p. 170. 
As found in C. H. Young, op. cit ., p. 179, 







: 




t 


t 





















■ \ ' ' 


* 

/i 1 r v ^ ' .C ■ ' i y> j .t\> f.. ■■ 1 [j 


0 ., 0 \ 


■ 








■ 


t 




. 

. 




C 

■ 

.... ■ . • 


.... • 


ij; >C :IJ oJ. e/ 








63 


The public school among these people aims to do the 
opposite. It is regarded by us, and rightly so, as the 
most important means of assimilating the foreign-born 
or the children of the foreign-born* The Ukrainians 
have known this and in the past they have done what 
other immigrant groups have done under similar circum¬ 
stances - refused, failing other means of defence, to 
be a party to the proposition.^ 

Again, the economic factor kept many children out of 
the schools because every pair of hands was needed in the very 
fight for existence. It was no wonder then that children were 
often kept from school because the need for them at home was 
great• 


Second only to the watchful inactivity and open 
antagonism of the Ukrainians as a factor in determining 
the progress of education in their settlements, was that 
of economic conditions. This refers not only to the 
Ukrainians but also to the provinces in which they 
settled. It must be remembered that Saskatchewan and 
Alberta did not become provinces until 1905, nearly a 
decade after the first Ukrainians had arrived in Canada. 

And as for the Ukrainians, it was at least a decade before 
many of them were on their feet even in the best districts, 
for the reason that they had little or no means with 
which to start farming, and in most cases had relatively 
hard land to clear. Even today in certain parts of the 
West, it is asking too much to levy school tax on these 
people.^ 


In retrospect, one of the greatest calamities 
affecting the Ukrainian immigration was that they were not 
accompanied by a proportionate number of the Ukrainian intelli¬ 
gentsia. Although Western Ukraine had its own universities, 
teachers’ colleges, and technical institutes supplying professors, 
teachers, lawyers, physicians, editors, etc., these for the most 

4 C. H. Young, op* cit ., pp. 173-179® 

5 Ibid ., p. 179. 






c 




< 






c 




















£ 





















< 






<5 


c 







* c * 


69 


part found .conditions satisfactory enough at home and felt 
neither the need nor the desire to emigrate. Except for the 
Basilian Fathers who came to make a permanent stay in Canada in 
1902, Ukrainian intellectuals dribbled into the country only 
sporadically. It was only after the Second World War that 
hundreds of Ukrainian university graduates flowed into this 
country with the strongest of religious and political convictions. 
It is unfortunate that their timing was late by half a century, 
for had they arrived in the l$90 f s and made their adjustments to 
their new homeland fifty years ago, there is no doubt but that 
their contribution to the economic, social, cultural, and edu¬ 
cational growth of the Ukrainians in Canada would have been much 
more significant than it has been. 

In the early pioneer days there were few roads, and 
the way to school often led through miles of brush. Qualified 
teachers were hard to acquire and few of them wished to take 
advantage of the primitive facilities offered in the T bush f 
country. Often the prospective teachers were required to board 
and live with the entire farming family in a single room. Salaries 
in the poorer districts were as low as $ 30.00 to $45<>00 a month. 

The majority of the teachers were of the permit category, and the 
English-speaking teachers who ventured into the Ukrainian districts 
were often veterans or young university students who sought work 
during the summer months. Often as many as three different 
teachers taught in the one school during the interval of a school 






: 

. 

: ' CJ'X 

;;:. . r ■ ■/ ' 7 ■' / ''' . ■ ', , V .■ 

•. ' , 

. 

. 

:■ 

7 7 ' • • 

- 

* 

' . • * •' ' ' 

' \ ' :X\- .S'. ...-o ^ •//' j ;' r ’: y . ; o v 



70 


year. Some would teach a year or two and then move on to greener 
pastures. 

As a consequence of suchfrequent changes of teachers, 
there was great wastage, and as usual it was the children who 
suffered the most. The pupils disliked attending school where 
they understood nothing or very little because of their language 
handicap. The days of fine school libraries, large and pleasing 
illustrations, flash cards, and all the little props and mecha¬ 
nisms which make today’s classrooms so attractive were only coming 
into beingo Those children were indeed fortunate who had the 
imaginative and inventive teacher who was able to color and trans¬ 
form the plain pioneer schoolroom because of his teaching skill 
and ingenuity. Lessons were limited to reading, writing, and 
ciphering. Many of the teachers living under the most trying 
of circumstances, and teaching foreign-born children who knew 
little or no English at all, were not conscientious in their 
efforts, or felt that the task demanded a specialized pedagogical 
training beyond their own capacities. There is no doubt that in 
such schools the children were neglected, and often the Ukrai¬ 
nian settlers felt that the cost of keeping them in operation 
was a waste. The English-speaking teacher did not understand the 
Ukrainian child, nor did the Ukrainian child understand the 
teacher. ’The boy’, ’the dog’, ’the cat’, etc. remained meaning¬ 
less symbols unless there was someone who could make them 
meaningful to the child. An English missionary-teacher writing 





c 








it 






? 
















* 











' .... 



























71 


in a religious journal of the time states, ”...The Central 

European children are so dense that it is perhaps too much to 

expect that they should ever make good and desirable citizens in 

6 

Canada.” The Free Press of Winnipeg reacted to the above state¬ 
ment by proposing that the flow of immigration to Canada from 
Central Europe be stopped. Yet these same children, once they 
were given an opportunity to prove themselves, inspired Robert 
Fletcher, Supervisor of Schools among Foreigners in Alberta, to 
say, tf Ruthenian children are as a rule bright and intelligent, 
and even with the handicap of acquiring a new language, they keep 
abreast with the children of English-speaking parents.” 

In Manitoba, the Laurier-Greenway agreement of 1&97> 
known as Section 258 of the Public Schools Act, had a specific 
clause which read that "where ten of the pupils speak the French 
language, or any other language other than English, as their 
native language, the teaching for such pupils shall be conducted 
in French, or such other language, and English upon the bilingual 
system.” Whenever possible, the Ukrainians hired Ukrainian-speaking 
teachers for their schools, but the demand was greater than the 
supply. 

When the English-speaking teacher did not readily wish 
to go into the ’backward 1 Ukrainian district, the Ukrainian- 

^Wm. A. Chumer, Spomyny pro Perezhyvannya Pershykh 
Ukrayinskykh Pereselentsiv v Kana^T~T§9T-1941 t ( Memoirs of the 
Experiences of the First Ukrainian Settlers in Canada, 1&9 1- 

1941), p. 73* Edmonton: the author, 1942. 







' i u 


. 

, 


; V-,’ ) • . . ■ ‘ . • ”. ' 1 ? 

/; ■ : , 

r 





<- * 

■. , - ’ M v ". ■ < 

- 

■ . t f ■ : T 








j ; u . . 


. 



» * < , 









72 


speaking teacher was usually ready to enter upon an atmosphere 
with which he was thoroughly familiar. Without going into the 
merits and demerits of the bilingual system, the arrangement of 
a Ukrainian teacher in a Ukrainian school was the source of 
mutual satisfaction to the parents, to the teacher, and to the 
children. As it happened, there were more Ukrainian school 
districts than Ukrainian school teachers; in fact, many of the 
classrooms were empty for the want of an English-speaking teacher 
to fill them. In 1915, with the war on in Europe, twenty-five 
per cent of the schools were empty because of a lack of teachers.^ 
It became evident that some instrument of instruction was 
necessary whereby Ukrainian teachers could be trained at least 
to a degree which would permit them to go out into the Ukrainian 
districts and teach the children under what at the time were 
pioneering conditions® 


The Ukrainian Training School in Winnipeg 


The Conservative government of Rodmond Palen Roblin, 
which was in power in Manitoba from 1900 to 1915, was 
faced with the gigantic problem of providing schools and 
teachers for the ever increasing Ukrainian settlements 
and the settlements of other ethnic groups. In 1903, 
the Department of Education engaged Theodore Stefanik, 
who had a knowledge of English, to organize schools 
among the Ukrainians, and in 1910 Paul Gigeychuk. 

However, after schools had been established, it was 
found that qualified Anglo-Saxon teachers refused to 
teach in the "foreign” districts, which were considered 
"backward.” 8 


?W. Mihaychuk, "Ukrayinsko-Angliske Uchetelstvo v 
Kanadi" (Ukrainian-English Teachers in Canada), Kalendar Ukrayin - 
skoho Holosu ( Calendar-Almanac of the Ukrainian Voice) , p. 170* 
Winnipeg: 1915. 

g 

P. Yuzyk, The Ukrainians in Manitoba , pp. 144-145, 
Toronto: University of 'Toronto Press, 1953. 















;5! r: v• XJ 3 Go V 

. : . • 

■' r : '■ 

■ ' 




; f f 

: 

.0 ' • 




\.o . ■; o > : 

g * ' ' 












: ><; ; ‘ ' a : - G 



G 


' 




: ' : a ‘ ; ' 




it 







73 


In 1904, the Conservative Government under R. P, 

Roblin, opened a Ruthenian Training School for Ukrainian teachers 

9 

on Minto Street in Winnipeg opposite the Army Barracks. Active 
members of the Conservative Government responsible for the 
founding of this school were Premier R. P. Roblin, Colin Campbell, 
Stanley Me Innis, G. R. Coldwell, and R. Fletcher. ^ About forty 
students registered for the first session. The principal of tMs 
school was J. T. Cressy of Yorkshire, England, and he was assisted 
by A. Chisholm, teacher of high school subjects, and Jacob Makohin, 
a qualified teacher from Ukraine who taught Ukrainian subjects. 
Later, another Ukrainian teacher was Dionysius Perch. This 
school on Minto Street, Winnipeg, is considered to be the first 
Ukrainian high school in Canada. 

Archbishop Adelard Langevin, referring to this school, 
wrote, "...the new school for young Galicians is in fact an 
immense advantage to these people who are in such urgent need of 
school teachers. 

At the end of the first year’s sessions, it appeared 
that the school on Minto Street would be closed down, but the 

9 

P. Bozyk, Tserkov Ukrayintsiv v Kanadi ( The Church 
of the Ukra i nians in Canada), p. 87. Winnipeg: Canadian Ukrainian, 
1927. 

^M. Stechishin, "Nashe Shkilnytstvo” (Our Schools), 
Narodny Kalendar Ukrayinska Rodyna ( The People’s Calendar-Almanac 
for the Ukrainian Family )."pp. 152-154. Winnipeg, Manitoba: 1915. 

■^Letter of Archbishop A. Langevin to the Hon. M. 

Rogers, Minister of Public Works, Manitoba, dated February 6, 

1903# Letter no. 203, p. 593, St. Boniface Archives. 










. 










c 











t 










I 


* 



c 







74 


Ukrainian teachers f convention held in Winnipeg in 1906 brought 

12 

pressure upon the government for the continuation of the schoolo 
In an interview with W. Chumer, one of the first students of the 
Winnipeg and Brandon training schools, it was stated that the 
government agreed to provide for a training school in Winnipeg 

ueo-r 

in theM904* The Minto Street school was formally opened in 

Winnipeg on February 3, 1905, and closed on June 30, 1907* A 

convention of Ukrainian teachers and citizens at Winnipeg in 

190$ impressed the government with the necessity of continuing 

the work of the school* With the cooperation of the Minister of 

Education, Stanley Mclnnis, the school was continued at its new 

13 

site in Brandon opening in the fall of 190$* 

The Ukrainian Training School in Brandon 

The Ukrainian Training School at Brandon proved to be 
a successful venture, and today many Ukrainians consider it to be 
one of the bright marks in the educational progress of the Ukrai¬ 
nian people in Canada. This school existed from 190$ until shortly 
before the abolition of the bilingual system in Manitoba in 1916. 

On March 9, 1915, Minister G. R. Caldwell announced that with the 
termination of that year’s courses, the Brandon school would be 
closed.^ 

12 

M. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 154. 

13 

Interview between the writer and W. Chumer, Edmonton, 
Alberta, at Edmonton, June 21, 195$* 

14 / 

Tf Ukrayinski Ucheteli i Shkoly v Kanadi” (Ukrainian 

Teachers and Schools in Canada), op. cit ., p. 37, 













j . ;V; K r;o 


f .. 










% 








’■’■r.\-.v 




% 




t 















SJx -LI 


l • c 


c 










e 




c 


' • ^ 1 < 


c 







75 


Ukrainian youth were encouraged to enter this 
seminary, and the pages of the Ukrainian press in Canada were 
used to make it known among the Ukrainians throughout the 
country, the following information was published for interested 
applicants. 

Priority will be given to those sons of farmers 
between the ages of 18 and 22. Applicants are required 
to have guarantors and some knowledge of the English 
language. Preferably they should have their public 
school completed and should apply and address their 
inquiries for complete information to the organizer 
of schools^ P. Gigeychuk, Department of Education, 

Winnipeg. ^ (Translated from the Ukrainian). 

A fairly complete account of this school is given by 
Orest Zerebko in a published article, f, The Ukrainian Teachers 1 

*j ^ 

Seminaries in Canada. ffA The government gave financial assis¬ 
tance to those students who signed written guarantees stating 
that they would repay the government after they found teaching 
positions. The contract also required the student teacher to 
spend three years in training at the school, where he received his 
room, board, and education at a cost of $25.00 per month. Here 
they were taught the English language, Canadian and British His¬ 
tory, Mathematics, English Literature, Geography, Botany, Book¬ 
keeping, Science, Art, and Music. In addition, they were taught 
those pedagogical subjects required by a candidate for the 
teaching profession. This pedagogical training was obtained by 


News Item in Kanada ( Canada ), Winnipeg, 1 (September 

2, 1913), 4. 

16 

Orest Zerebko, "Ukrayinski Uchetelski Seminariyi v 
Kanada” (The Ukrainian Teachers’ Seminaries in Canada), Illustro - 
vany Narodny Kalendar Tovaristva Prosvity ( The Illustrated People’s 
Calendar-Almanac of the Enlightenment Society ), pp. 158-162. Lwiw: 
Prosvita Society, 1914* 
























' 


■ 






< 


■ 






' ’ ' 


t . 




. . ' 


" .) ; .4 






76 


attending the Provincial Normal School for six months after they 
had completed their courses at the Training School. They were 
required to write examinations each year of the three years spent 
at the Brandon Training School, and after successfully completing 
the Normal training, they were issued Third Class teaching certi¬ 
ficates which permitted them to teach in the Manitoba schools. 

In 1910, there were seventeen graduates from the 

17 

school. In 1915 there were thirty-nine in the graduating class. ' 

In 1911, about twenty trained teachers graduated with Third Class 

1 $ 

qualifications; ten in 1912 and fifteen in 1913* Mr. J. T. 
Cressy continued as the principal of the school in Brandon and 
was assisted there by Mr. J. T. Norquay. After the departure of 
Jacob Makohin and D. Perch as the Ukrainian teachers of the 
institute, Taras D. Ferley held the position for about three 
years. For some time the Ukrainian post was vacant until 1913-14? 
when Petro Karmansky, who had arrived from the Ukraine, taught the 
Ukrainian language and related subjects. 1 ^ Much credit should be 
given to Karmansky for his contribution to the Brandon school. 
Through his efforts the school gained in prestige and won the 
esteem of the Ukrainian teachers and public. Mr. John E. Basarab 


Interview between the writer and J. E. Basarab Q.C., 
of Edmonton, Alberta, former teacher at the Ruthenian Training 
School, Brandon, Manitoba, at Edmonton, December 4? 1957. 

18 

M. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 156, 

Swystun, ft Nashe Shkilnytstvo v Kanadi n (Our 
Schools in Canada), Kalendar Ukrayinskoho Holosu ( Calendar-Almanac 
of the Ukrainian Voice), p. 123. Winnipeg: 1915® 








. 





< 


: 












C 






c 


‘ 1 . 



?r;) 








c.' 
















v { 









5 


$ 



< 

ii ■ .5 J ■. ’ 








: {.iXouii 

•m.,.: 












77 


succeeded h.im on February 2, 1915* 

John E. Basarab Q.C., of Edmonton, who was a student 

at the Brandon school prior to his appointment as the Ukrainian 

21 

teacher of the institution, praises it very highly. The 
school was administrated efficiently; the students received a 
sound and intensive training in the required high school subjects 
from sympathetic and understanding teachers. The facilities of 
the building permitted the accommodation of sixty to sixty-five 
students at a time. This school became the root of Ukrainian 
culture in Canada, for many of its students continued with their 
studies in Canadian universities, emerged as graduates in their 
chosen fields, and became leaders among their people in the new 
homeland. 


The Ukrainian-English Seminary in Regina 


A similar school for the training of Ukrainian teachers 

was established by the Saskatchewan Government at Regina in 1909, 

22 

and was officially called The English School for Foreigners. 

The Ukrainian people and Ukrainian press referred to it as the 


20 

J. Stechishin, Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayinskoho Instytut u 
im. P. Mohyly v Saskatoon!, 1916-1941 ( Jubilee Book of the P. Mohyla 
Ukrainian Institute in Saskatoon, 1916-1941 )* P» 36. Saskatoon: 

P. Mohyla Ukrainian Institute, 1945 • 

21 

Interview between the writer and J. E. Basarab Q.C., 
of Edmonton, Alberta, at Edmonton, December 4, 1957* 

22 

J. Stechishin, o p, cit ., pp. 30, 31, 341* 














lor, 















r : i • 




. 


* 

■ ■■ ■ : ’ • 
































t 


« 








7S 


Ukrainian-English Seminary in Regina. Along with director Greer 
the first Ukrainian teacher was W. Pliatsko who remained on the 
teaching staff for only a few months. 23 The only other Ukrainian 
teacher on the staff of this school was N. Romaniuk, who received 
his appointment in the fall of 1914* There were nearly fifty 
students registered at this school. 2 ^ - 

The Regina school operated in much the same manner 
and with much the same purpose as the Brandon School, although 
its influence and popularity with the Ukrainian people was much 
less. Joseph Megas, a Saskatchewan school organizer, offers 
the following information in the pages of Novy Kray, 1910: 

The Saskatchewan Provincial Government opened a 
new school last year to prepare qualified teachers for 
Ukrainian school districts of the province. This year 
the building will be enlarged to accommodate a greater 
number of students. There will be two teachers, and 
the students will be divided into lower and higher 
divisions. The course begins at the beginning of 
October and will last^for eight months. (Translated 
from the Ukrainian). ^ 

One of the reasons the Regina school did not win the 
immediate approval of the Ukrainian public was that there was no 
Ukrainian teacher on the teaching staff as there was in the 
Brandon school. The Ukrainians felt that it was extremely 
important for the future teachers to be fully instructed in the 
Ukrainian language, Ukrainian literature, and history before going 


23 

W. Swystun, op. cit ., p. 128, 

24 

0. Zerebko, op. cit ., p. 160. 

25 

News Item in the Novy Kray ( The New Country) , 
Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 1 (September 30, 1910), 1. 







* 

c . v. - 

* . 

. • 

f!„ ;> t 

. 

t - - «. 

:■ l- ' . < . 














« 




. 






. 

- 




















» 

.. 


C • ■ - c » 

• c 

' : . _ _ ' ! y) .■ ^ k1 . . ' . j: 

i . ? t ^ 






79 


out to teaoh Ukrainian children. In 1912, Novy Kray wrote: 

For the first time since the Ukrainian teachers’ 
seminary was founded in Regina, a concert was given in 
the Ukrainian language in honor of the Ukrainian poet, 
Taras Shevchenko. This is a very important moment, 
because since the founding of,the seminary, the Ukrainian 
language had no place in it. ° 

The Regina school was open to other nationalities 

as well, although most of its student body was Ukrainian. In 

1912, of forty-seven students there were two Poles and three 

27 

Germans; the rest were Ukrainian. 1 


The English School for Foreigners 
in Vegreville 


This school was opened in Vegreville by the Alberta 
Government on February 3, 1913• For the greater part of the 
three years that it existed, the principal was W. A. Stickle. 

E. S. Farr succeeded him in the fall of 1915• The school was 
closed in 1916. 

During the first term there was an enrolment of 
twenty-three pupils ranging in age from sixteen to twenty-eight. 
Since these students entered with varying degrees of knowledge, 


News Item in the Novy Kray ( The New Country ), 
Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 3 (March 1, 1912), 6. 

27 

N#ws Item in the Novy Kray ( The New Country ), 
Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 3 (February 10, 1912), 1. 

2 $ 

W. A. Stickle, "School for Foreigners”, Eighth 

Annual Report of the Department of Education of the Province of 

Alberta, 1913. pp. 49-51# Edmonton: J. ¥. Jeffery, Government 

Printer, 1914# 
















* 




I 




' 



c 


















c 








.. 0 









c •. 







K 


. 


t 











they were put on the public school program or high school 

program as the achievement of each individual indicated. Since 

these were senior students, it was possible for some of them to 

cover the work of five grades by the end of June. A great deal 

of time was given to the study of English, and phonetic drills 

were conducted constantly. The language handicap made progress 

in such subjects as history slower because this required a reading 

understanding. The purpose of the school was to prepare the 

students for departmental examinations. In addition, short term 

courses were offered in English for those who wished to accept 

business positions in banks, stores, or general clerical work. 

Within three years, about 120 students took advantage of the 

29 

facilities offered by the school. 

For the year 1914, an analysis of grading reported by 
the principal, W. A. Stickle, showed the following distribution 
of students in the various grades and their educational standing 


on entering 

: the 

: SCh.001. 









~r 

1 

II 

III IV 

V 

VI 

VII 

VIII 

IX 

X 

XI 

First 

Term 

4 

1 

5 2 

2 

0 

4 

0 

6 

5 

0 

Second 

Term 

1 

1 

4 1 

2 

0 

2 

2 

5 

1 

3 


29 

E. S. Farr, "English School for Foreigners", Tenth 
Annual Report of the Department of Education of the Province of 

Alberta. 1915. pp. 145. Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, Government 

Printer, 1916. 

30 

W. A. Stickle, Ninth Annual Report of the Department 
of Education of the Province of Alberta, 1914 * P« 71® Edmonton: 
J. W. Jeffery, Government Printer, 1915. 












»>.. .1.'io ; >e.x -.i/x*-, iv;Oi\U'£ o.i.L'n; ? 3d$- •lie- c>iiv 

, 

^ ■'■ ’ t • ; 

» . : " ' V.: 

. < 









: : : , £i.". 




. 


: ■ : . : \ • < ? 


< *- 

t . 

c • * t 

i 

. 


f i . c ' - • o ' s; 1 j. ' A . \ JmMs !Wx»T 1 


. ; 

< < 

v 










. Standing of Students on Entering 


Total enrolment . 37 

Born in foreign countries . 36 

Born in Canada . 1 

In Canada for 10 years . 8 

In Canada for 5 years but less than 10 years .... 8 

In Canada less than 3 years .. 21 

No previous education .♦. . 1 

Not able to speak or understand English . 9 

Some Public School education in Canada . 9 

Some Public School education in native land . 27 

Both Public and High School education in 

native land ..... 9 


The English School for Foreigners in Vegreville never 
became as successful an enterprise as the Brandon School nor was 
it ever as popular with the Ukrainians* When former students 
speak and write of the Brandon School with praise and consider 
it the "salvation of the Ukrainian people" during the time of 
their early educational problems, the references found in the 
Ukrainian press in regard to the Vegreville school were usually 
unfavorable* 

The reasons for this were several* Students entered 
the Vegreville school hoping they would be given three or four 
years training which would enable them to receive teaching per¬ 
mits upon graduating, as did the Brandon school. The Vegreville 
school was designed to prepare students for entrance into the 
Normal School and provided instruction for those entering upon 
the business world* Consequently, would-be teachers were dis¬ 
appointed to find that they were required to pass the depart¬ 
mental examinations and then complete the standard course of 















$2 


31 

training at the Provincial Normal School. About five 

32 

students from this school eventually became qualified teachers. 

Again, many of the students considered the principal, ¥. A. 

Stickle, to be unsympathetic and unnecessarily strict, and after 

one stern disciplinary action which resulted in an investigation 

by the Department of Education, many of the students left the 

33 

school altogether.Later, ¥. A. Stickle was appointed principal 
of the Camrose Normal School. 

The school continued to exist for about four years. 

There is no doubt that it played an important role in the 
education of ma.ny students of Ukrainian extraction. Shortly 
before its closing, E. S. Farr, who succeeded ¥. A. Stickle as 
principal, assessed the value of the school in these words. 

The English School for Foreigners has made 
possible the more ready adaption of the young foreigner 
in Alberta to our Canadian citizenship; it has a great 
moral effect, directly and indirectly, on foreign 
communities, and thereby has proved its usefulness. 

However, such an institution must remain experimental 
and temporary; soon it will be unnecessary. When 
that arrives the young man of foreign birth will be 
equipped to take his stand without handicap by the 
side of the young Canadian, and will be able to 
make his contribution, which is by no means a small 
one, to our national life.^ 


31 

J. T. Ross, Eighth Annual Report of the Department of 
Education of the Province of Alberta, 1913 . P. 26. Edmonton: J. ¥. 
Jeffery, Government Printer, 1914* 

32 

Interview between the writer and Peter Svarich, early 
organizer of Ukrainian Schools, Yegreville, Alberta, at Vegreville, 
March 25, 1957. 

33 

News Item in the Novyny (The Newshl (December 27. 

1913), 2. 

34 

E. S. Farr, op. cit ., p. 145. 











. 


< 






c ' 


















r 




■ < ; 



c 












r " 



















c 


• f 


b 


c 









< 







Conclusion 


The Ukrainian Training Schools in Winnipeg, Brandon, 
Regina, and Vegreville, which began to come into existence in 
1904 and which finally disappeared in 1916, are of interest in 
the educational history of the Ukrainian Canadians. 11 Approxi¬ 
mately 150 teachers (many of the permit category) were trained 

35 

by the Brandon School”. J. Stechishin estimates that appro¬ 
ximately two hundred teachers in all were trained by these 
Ukrainian seminaries. J 

There is no doubt that these teachers had a tremendous 
influence for good amongst the Ukrainian settlers and their 
children in Western Canada. In Manitoba and Saskatchewan, these 
Ukrainian teachers held annual Teachers 1 Conventions where they 
considered their problems and from which they petitioned their 
respective governments for the wants and needs they deemed 
necessary to their teaching careers. 

When the Ukrainian-speaking teachers were not desired 
by the English-speaking school districts, they were generally 
made most welcome in the Ukrainian school districts. The general 
shortage of teachers was felt more acutely in the Ukrainian 
districts for there were relatively few Ukrainian teachers, and 
more often than not, the English-speaking teacher was not anxious 
to work in an area where he might have had to live in a ! dug- 

35 

P. Yuzyk, op. cit ., p. 145* 

J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 31* 








■ ; • ; 0.. ' .. V.... 

. ■ ■ . : - .. . < 


c ' • . . 


* 


•, . ..s. t J.'. - ) r . 

. 

, 

• T ■ -. ■/ .'V . • 




■: r z 

,, -i\ : . ■' " 


: 

c • • . • . . . .. .. ■ . ’: V \. ... : - - - 

- ' < ■ > ‘ ' 

? 




< *: . 


. 


. ° . \ 



84 


37 

out 1 .-*' It is worth mentioning that some of the Ukrainian 
teachers were high school graduates from the Ukraine and except 
for the language handicap, were excellently qualified and indeed 
very successful in their teaching* 

Possibly the greatest contribution of the Ukrainian 
Training Schools was that they served as the touchstone or 
impetus for further study. The early teaching careers of the 
Ukrainian students were often the first steps which led them to 
further intensive studies at the universities. These first 
Ukrainian Canadian teachers became the nucleus of the future 
Ukrainian intelligentsia and leaders among the Ukrainian people 
in Canada. From their number emerged members representing all 
the professions and vocations: judges, lawyers, doctors, agri¬ 
culturists, priests, editors, members of Parliament, and 
businessmen. The first Ukrainian university graduate in Canada 
was Orest Zerebko who received his B.A. degree in 1913 * Judge 
Arsenych, the first Ukrainian lawyer, graduated in 1916. 

From the humble beginning of the early Ukrainian 
teacher slowly came the opportunities which the second and third 
generation Ukrainian Canadian was much more ready to appreciate. 



Interview between the writer and J. E. Basarab Q.C 


9 





J 

4 

< 

■ >.-L : ‘ 

* 

■ • . e o 








. 

? ■ ? 

■ 


















K 


. 


. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE UKRAINIAN PRIVATE SCHOOLS* 

Introduction 

Up to the time of the First World War, the Ukrainian 
settlers were primarily concerned with establishing themselves 
and making a living on the homesteads and farms which they occu¬ 
pied. There was very little organizational life, and that little 
was limited to the social and community efforts centered around 
the individual parishes. 

By the end of the war, the situation was somewhat changed. 
The Ukrainian settlers had chiseled out a foothold in the Canadian 
way of life. Some were slowly becoming prosperous. The Ukrainians 
became more interested in education and the schooling of their 
children. Definitely interested in preserving the Ukrainian lan¬ 
guage and in fighting off assimilation, the Ukrainians met their 
first obstacle when bilingualism which allowed the use of the 
Ukrainian language in the schools was forbidden by law in Mani¬ 
toba in 1916. Saskatchewan and Alberta started out without offi¬ 
cial recognition of the bilingual system. The Ukrainian-English 
teachers of Alberta and Saskatchewan therefore found themselves 
in a more difficult position than the Ukrainian-English teachers 
of Manitoba prior to 1916. 

♦There were several private schools established for 
Ukrainian children by the Presbyterian, Methodist, and Baptist 
missions. The reader is referred to works on the religious life 
of the Ukrainians for more information. In 1907, Dr. A. J. Hunter 
of the Presbyterian mission at Teulon, Manitoba, said, ”The k 
experiment was rather too complex for a great democratic body lie 
the Presbyterian church to handle.” See P. Yuzyk, ”The Religious 
Life”, The Ukrainians in Manitoba , pp. 73-77. Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1953* 







(. ' 




- 


; 







' . 

« 

- 

* 


t ■ < 

- 

. . . t 

. c. : : 

< 

. t . < 

, c 







36 


. The Ukrainian ’Bursas’ or Hostels 

In self-defence the Ukrainians began to buy buildings 

and establish hostels or 1 bursas’ for the use of students in 

Edmonton, Saskatoon, Winnipeg, and St. Boniface. These were 

large organized boarding-homes catering to university, college, 

and high school students. It was hoped that the directors, 

and teachers, in control of these institutions, would help the 

students retain a knowledge of the Ukrainian language, literature, 

and history, as well as persevere in their Catholic faith while 

attending the schools and universities. The discipline which 

usually prevailed in these hostels permitted and provided for 

such extra-curricular activities 0 Among these early Ukrainian 

’bursas’ was the Taras Shevchenko Institute, founded in Edmonton 

in 1917 3 and which occupied the premises of the former Grand 

Hotel on 93th Street and 107th Avenue.^ This building was 

purchased by the Ukrainians for $60,000.00. At a Ukrainian 

convention held in Mundare, Alberta, in December, 1919, attended 

by the Honorable Frank Oliver, H. A. Mackie, M.P., Mr. Joseph 

McCallum, M.P.P., Dr. J. Boulanger of Edmonton, and Bishop N. 

Budka, $6,000.00 in funds were raised to help pay off the debt 

2 

on the institution. In 1922, the project failed because of 
financial and administrative difficulties. The site of this 


P. Bozyk, Tserkov Ukrayintsiw v Kanada ( The Church of 
the Ukrainians in Canada), p. 108. Winnipeg: Canadian Ukrainian, 
1927. 

2 

Chronicles of the Basilian Fathers, Volume I, p. 143 3 
Mundare, Alberta. 









t f ’ j 










c 




t 










? 


c 




t c 








C. * ' * c 



c 


: t 5 









c 



c 


.. ■ 1 








S7 


institution was later transferred to 92nd Street and 106th A 
Avenue, in Edmonton, where a large red brick building was rented 
to house Ukrainian students from 1925 until about 1932. In its 
last years, it was successfully directed by Brother Methodius, 
F.S.C., and other Brothers of the Brothers of the Christian 
Schools. 

Other early ’bursas’ were the P. Mohyla Institute 
founded in 1916 in Saskatoon, the A. Kotska Institute founded 
in Winnipeg in September, 1915> and the Rusko-Ukrainian Bursa 
founded in Edmonton on August 22, 1912 Later, the M. Hrushewsky 
Institute appeared in Edmonton and the Markian Shashkewich 
Institute was founded in Saskatoon. Most of these early ’bursas’ 
or hostels have disappeared. Today, they have been replaced by 
newer and more modern institutions. Among these are St. Josaphat’s 
Residence for university girls, St. Basil’s Residence for uni¬ 
versity boys, founded by the Basilian Fathers in 1945 and 1946 
in Edmonton, and the new St. John’s Institute also in Edmonton. 

In Saskatoon, the P. Mohyla Institute and the large and modern 
Metropolitan Sheptytsky Institute opened in 1953 are successfully 
operating. 

The early ’bursas’ were only as successful as there 
were leaders to lead them. They were continually beset by finan¬ 
cial and administrative difficulties. The greatest difficulty 

3 

J. Stechishin, Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayinskoho Instytutu 
im. P. Mohyly v Saskatooni, 1915-1941 (Jubilee Book of the P. "" 

Mohyla Ukrainian Institute in Saskatoon, 1916-1941 . PP* 55» 39. 

2$. Saskatoon: P. Mohyla Ukrainian Institute, 1945* 







j/.i.d' M - . 


'.id' 








i ■: . id . i.‘ 


. , 




t c 


. 








, 

■ f .■ , 

' ' • < 

f t 



: . . ‘ . . - ‘ ■ 7 '• ' 1 \ ‘ 


X . ; ... /■“. , . . .< ' . . ; . . •. ' ..... 

. •: _ _ ■ .... . . 

. ... ■: : . '£.I- . '■ . • •• « l 





was to obtain men who had university and teaching experience 
and who were able to understand and influence the students 
under their control. The lack of proper leadership and guidance 
often spelled their ruin and downfall. 

The early ’bursas’ were beset by religious difficul¬ 
ties also. The P. Mohyla Institute was founded in 1916 with the 
sympathy and help of the Ukrainian Catholic public and press. 

In its opening year the majority of the students which it housed 

were Ukrainian Catholic. ^ In 1917, it became an independent 

5 

Ukrainian institution free of any religious influences. It 

eventually became and is today, an educational instrument of the 

Ukrainian Orthodox Church. 

One of the successful early ’bursas 1 or hostels was 

the Metropolitan Sheptytsky Institute in St. Boniface, Manitoba, 

which was founded by the Ukrainian Catholic Bishop N. Budka.^ The 

Bishop was able to obtain the services of George Skwarok, M.A., 

a qualified teacher and graduate of the University of Manitoba, 

who held the post of director of this institution from its 

7 

founding in 1917 until 1920 o As many as sixty-three Ukrainian 
university and college students were housed there in its first 

^Ibid ., p. 56. 

^ Ibid o, ppo 76-79 * 

6 

News Item on the Metropolitan Bursa in the Kanadiyski 
Rusyn ( The Canadian Ruthenian ), July 11, 1917* 

7 

George Skwarok, Unpublished autobiography, Life of 
George Skwarok , first director of the Metropolitan Bursa in St. 
Boniface, Manitoba. 




















! 


















? 







- $ 












f 








;... ■-o 









29 


years. In addition to the regular courses taken at the university, 
the students were instructed privately in the Ukrainian language 
and literature, Ukrainian history, and religion. The students of 
this institution enjoyed extra-curricular activities which pro¬ 
vided for music lessons, a school orchestra, drama, a glee club, 
and sports. 

The Ukrainian f bursas 1 or hostels were a phenomenon 
which grew with the time of the Ukrainian settlers and have 
remained with us until this day. Although the early Ukrainian 
1 bursas 1 were definitely a contribution to the education of the 
first Ukrainian students, these institutions were plagued by 
internal and external difficulties. Summed up, these difficulties 
were financial, admin'strative, and directorial. It was because 
of this that they probably did not fulfill entirely the early 
hopes and ideals which were held out for them. 

St. Joseph’s College, Yorkton, Saskatchewan 

In 1919, Most Reverend N. Budka, Ukrainian Catholic 
Bishop of Canada, persuaded the Catholic Extension Society of 
Canada to construct St. Joseph’s College at Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 
This new institution of learning was to provide the sons of 
Ukrainian settlers with an adequate education and to foster 

$ 

George Skwarok, Pershy Richny Zvit, 1917-1912, Bursy 
Metropolita A. Sheptytskoho~v St. Boniface (The First Annual 

Report of the Metropolitan A. Sheptycky Bursa in St. Boniface , 

1917-1912), Winnipeg: Metropolitan Bursa, 1912. 








• '■ 

, 

, 

i t 

, 

< < ' 

# 

< t f 

■ t - C 

C 7 ° 






,.s 





















90 


9 

vocations to the Ukrainian Catholic priesthood. 

The Catholic Extension Society, under the presidency 
of Right Reverend T. O’Donnell, granted $100,000.00 towards the 
erection of the building. 10 The cornerstone of the college was 
laid by Bishop Budka on September 7, 1919* The Bishop, lacking 
religious teachers to direct this school, petitioned the Provin¬ 
cial, Brother Bernard, of the Brothers of the Christian Schools 
to place his English-speaking Brothers in charge of the new 
establishment. The Redemptorist Fathers in charge of the 
Ukrainian mission at Yorkton visited Brother Bernard and pressed 
the Bishop’s plea. These were Fathers A. Delaere, Louis Van 
den Bossche, and N. M. Descamps. Brother Bernard, the Provincial, 
responded by sending three Christian Brothers to the school: 
Brother M. Ansbert as director, Brother Stanislaus Joseph, and 
Brother T. James® School began on October 11, 1920. 

There were only six pupils in the first class, but 

the enrolment increased rapidly and soon grades one to eleven 

12 

were being taught. In 192$, the first grade twelve class was 
established. As early as 1920, the college was visited by two 

9 

Brother Stanislaus James F.S.C., The History of St . 
Joseph’s College (1919-1955) . p. 1. Yorkton, Saskatchewan: St. 
Joseph’s College, 1955# 

10 

Rev. Brother Stanislaus Joseph, Early History of St . 
Joseph’s College , p. 1. As found in Brother Stanislaus James, op . 

cit ., p. 1. 

11 TV, 

Xipid • | p • 1# 

12 

Ibid., p. 5. 









, 

' 

■ . / ' ;■ s . ' . ■ • . . . ' ■■ ■ 

, .. ■ 

. % C 

. 

* 

. ■ ' 

, • . ' 

, • < 

• t 

, , • 

,• 

c 





91 


distinguished personages: The Honorable Mr. Martin, Premier 

of Saskatchewan, and the Honorable W. L. Mackenzie King, Leader 

of the Opposition in the Federal House. "Both spoke of the need 

of such an education institution for the Ukrainian youth of 

Western Canada from the point of view of better Canadian 
13 

citizenship." " 

Brother Stanislaus Joseph, one of the first Brothers 
assigned to the school, dedicated himself heroically to the 
task of Christian education of Ukrainian youth. He devoted 
himself to the study of the Ukrainian language, the Ukrainian 
rite, and familiarized himself with the history, customs, and 
traditions of the people.*^ 

If today, St. Joseph*s College in Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan, is held in deep veneration by the 
Ukrainians of Canada; if hundreds of its graduates 
scattered throughout the country in every field of 
business and professional life testify to a sound 
Catholic education; if the ranks of the Canadian 
Ukrainian Clergy are steadily increasing in numbers - 
it is to Brother Stanislaus Joseph that most of the 
credit must be given. x 

Sports and physical education became an important part 
of the regular curriculum. * House Leagues* were formed and the 
boys participated in such sports as basketball, hockey, bad¬ 
minton, volleyball, baseball, softball, soccer, and other minor 


Brother Stanislaus James, op. cit ., p. 2, 

14 

Rev. Brother S. Methodius, Reverend Brother Stanislaus 
Joseph, F.S.C. , 1953, P* 9. As found in Brother Stanislaud James, 
op. cito , p. 3, 

15 


Ibid ., p. 14 . 












92 


sports* ^ . In 1923, the College Troop won the shield for 

Rifle Competition. In 1923-26, the College Juvenile team won 

17 

the city title in hockey. The College has been consistently 
successful in sports and has held athletic championships through 
the years in hockey, basketball, track and field. 

Extra-curricular activities and a highly varied program 
did much to enrich the interests and lives of all the boys in the 
institution. A tumbling group was formed in 1935• In 193$, an 
extension department modelled on that of St. Francis Xavier 
University, Nova Scotia, was formed to better social and economic 
conditions in Northeastern Saskatchewan. In 1939, St. Joseph’s 
College Alumni Association was revived. In 1943, nine students 
were enrolled with the Air Cadet Corps, and all students were 
given a Defense Training Course during 1943-44* The College 
Cadet Corps was organized in 1944-45 and this group won the 
Grand Challenge Trophy for the Saskatchewan area several times. 
The boys’ college life was also rounded out with the organization 
of Glee Clubs, school orchestras, oratorical contests, Road-E-0 
contests, and many other social, cultural, and religious activi- 
ties. 18 

In June, 1947, for the first time, the students of 
the College had the opportunity to write the official university 


Brother Stanislaus James, F.S.C., The History of St . 
Joseph’s College, (1919-1955 )* P* 3* lorkton, Saskatchewan: St. 
Joseph’s College, 1955* 

17 

Ibid ., p. 3. 

1 $ 


Ibid ., pp. 7 to 19 




















t 








C 
























e 














c • c 








T 

r 







93 


examinations in the Ukrainian language and obtain credit towards 
a degree® Through the leadership and efforts of Brother 
Methodius, on September 4> 1932, Honorable W. S. Lloyd, Minister 
of Education recognized the Ukrainian language as an optional 
subject in all high school grades in St. Joseph 1 s College and 
Sacred Heart Academy. In 1934, the privilege was extended to 
all the high schools in the province. ^ 

St. Joseph’s College, which was founded to fulfill the 
educational needs of the Ukrainian settlers, has stayed with 
the Ukrainian people to this day. From the time of its estab¬ 
lishment, there have been six directors in charge of the institu¬ 
tion: Brother Ansbert, 1919-1922; Brother Stanislaus Joseph, 1922- 
1929; Brother Anthony, 1929-1939; Brother Aloysius, 1939-1943; 
Brother Justin, 1943-1931; Brother Methodius, 1931-1933* The 
present director is Brother Justin. The Gollege now limits 
itself to grades nine to twelve. Approximately 150 boys attend 
the school and they represent most of the provinces of Canada 
and some States in the United States. 

In 1931, Brother Methodius wrote that in the thirty- 

two years of the College’s existence, 2,563 students had entered 
21 

its portals. 

19 Ibid .. p. 18. 

20 

Brother S. Methodius, Pochatky i Pratsia Kolegiyi Sw . 
Yosafa v Yorktoni. Saskatchewani ( The Beginnings and Work of St . 
Joseph’s College in Yorkton, Saskatchewan ), pp. 4-7* Yorkton, 
Saskatchewan: St. Joseph’s College, 1951* 

2 1 Ibid ., p. 8. 









I 

* 

* ■ < •: 5 ' "i. t 

1 : , . ■' 






«■: '■ : i 

; 

, t s : ' ' ' ' ' ‘. r 

■ 4 . ■' • i 

i 

: < : , 1 

* 




. 




94 


By 1951, 201 students of the College had continued 
their studies and graduated from the university; 326 
became teachers; 24 became priests; from the institution 
emerged 6 medical doctors; 4 dentists; 12 engineers; 6 
university professors; 5 lawyers; 1 school superintendent; 
1 provincial legislative member; 7 political candidates; 

47 who became influential Ukrainian leaders; 2$ well 
known business men; and 31 officers with the Canadian 
services. (Translated from the Ukrainian). 2 


Sacred Heart Academy, Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 


The Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate first estab¬ 
lished a home in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, in 1915, with the help 
of Bishop N. Budka.^ The Sisters were able to obtain a loan 
of $25,000.00 from the Sulpician Fathers of Montreal, and 
immediately work began on a new school which was completed in 
1916, under the guidance of Father A. Delaere, C.Ss.R.^ 

The Ukrainian Sisters began their work with the Ukrai¬ 
nian children by opening an orphanage and establishing an elemen¬ 
tary school in the new building where grades one to eight were 
taught. The first teaching Sisters there were Sister Athanasia 
and Sister Alexandra. This school, first known as the Sacred 
Heart Institute, formally opened classes on January 11, 1917. 


22 Ibid ., p. 8. 

2 ^Sister Elizabeth, S.S.M.I., "Forty Years in God’s 
Service", Yuvileyna Knyha Sester Sluzebnets, 1&92-1942 ( Jubilee 
Book of the Sisters Servants, 1892-1942) , p. 93* Edmonton, Alberta: 
Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 1942. 

24 Ibid., p. 93. 

25 

Pioneer Days of Our Community , unpublished material 
prepared for the Saskatchewan Provincial Archives by the high 
school girls of Sacred Heart Academy on the occasion of Saskatche¬ 
wan 1 s Golden Jubilee, 1905-1955. Yorkton, Saskatchewan. 

















c 

















c 




t 




* 






t 






















« 



c •. 



i 




95 


At first there were twenty-five students, seventeen resident 
and eight non-resident students. Other early teachers were 
Sisters Nicholas, Macrina, Euleteria, Eugenia, Daria, and 
Margaret.^ 

In 1932, the Sisters began teaching high school. The 

first high school teachers were Sisters Elizabeth and Cornelia. 

The school became known as Sacred Heart Academy when it became 

27 

exclusively a high school for girls in 1945* At that time, 

the elementary grades were transferred to another building. In 

1955 , twenty-three years after the opening of the high school, 

1,303 young women had attended classes at this Academy, coming 

from various parts of Canada, as well as North Dakota in the 
7 A 

United States. In 1955, a total of 1,997 pupils had completed 

the elementary grades under the direction of these Sisters, and 

a total of 59,777 children had received training from the Sisters 

29 

since their arrival in 1915• 

At the end of the 195$ school term, there were one 
hundred and thirty-four girls attending the Academy, where a wide 
and complete program of high school studies are offered from 
grades nine to twelve. The school possesses one of the finest 


26 


Ibid. 


27 

"Sestry Sluzebnetsi v Saskatchewani ff (Sisters Servants 
in Saskatchewan), Yuvileyna Knyha Ukraintsiw Katolykiw Saskatche ¬ 
wan y. 1905-1955 ), ( Jubilee Book of the Ukrainian Catholics of 
Saskatchewan. 1905-1955) » P. 182. Saskatoon, Saskatchewan: 
Ukrainian Catholic Council of Saskatchewan, 1955. 

2g 

Pioneer Days of Our Community, vide supra . 


29 


Ibid. 














- v , if -/ V: - 

. 

. . < t < 

. 

. . . ? 


. 

C 

c ' < 

V- . c . . ' 

A ■ 

. 

< ' 

. 

c . 

t . ....... .c . 

c * ■ - t . < 

• 

•. t f : _ j ■■■ j ■ • 







96 


high school libraries in the province. The girls have been pro¬ 
vided with a variety of social and cultural activities, in¬ 
cluding the publication of f Cor Regis 1 , and academically have 
established an outstanding record. 

From this school have emerged hundreds of teachers, 
and nurses, while others have entered upon business careers. Many 
have completed their university studies and are represented in 
almost all the professions. From Sacred Heart Academy alone, 
about 100 girls have chosen the religious vocation and entered 
the ranks of the Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate to continue 
the Sisters 1 work for the Ukrainian people. ^0 

On May 25, 195$, the Sisters formally opened a new 

$600,000.00 extension to the old Academy which will be able to 

accommodate the increasing number of Ukrainian girls who wish 
31 

to study there . J The new Sacred Heart Academy is equipped 
with the most modern of classrooms, dormitories, dining hall, 
auditorium-gymnasium, library, laboratories, students’ lounge, 
and beautiful chapel. ' The new Sacred Heart Academy in 
lorkton is another milestone in the educational history of the 
Ukrainian Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate. 


’’Sisters Servants in Saskatchewan”, op. cit ., 

p. 182. 

31 

News Item in the Ukrayinski Visty (Ukrainian News) , 
Edmonton, Alberta, 31 (May 19, 1956), pp. 2 and 5® 

32 

News Item in the Yorkton Enterprise , 63 (May 15, 
1954), PP* 9 and 10. 







? 1 

. 


* 

< 




• 


, ' f (.;•'/ 

L < ■; . 

5 ? ' - 



1 * ■ V ' 




• 




Li io. r 7 ;1 

: ; , t ’ c , ' - ' 


* 


* 

c * .... J 

.-. I 

< 

. 


" 

• , c c < 

c 

■ , 

. 


97 


Conclusion 

With the disappearance of official bi-lingualism in the 
public schools of the prairie provinces, the Ukrainian settlers 
attempted to circumvent the dangers of assimilation and the loss 
of the Ukrainian language, customs, and religious traditions 
by opening hostels or 1 bursas 1 . These institutions fulfilled 
in part the ideals which they fostered but were hampered in 
their operation by the lack of qualified teachers and directors 
to lead them. In addition, they were beset by financial and 
administrative difficulties. The Ukrainian ’ bursas 1 or hostels 
continue to exist to this day alongside the various university 
campuses. Efforts are made to enrich the university students 1 
program by teaching them the Ukrainian language, literature, 
and history, as well as allowing them to live in an atmosphere 
where they are made to appreciate their religious and cultural 
traditions as an integral part of good Canadian citizenship. 

As the Ukrainian settlers became more and more inte¬ 
rested in the education of their children, they became more and 
more concerned with the problem of building schools for them. 

It was thus that St. Joseph’s College directed by the Christian 
Brothers and Sacred Heart Academy directed by the Ukrainian 
Sisters, both in Yorkton, Saskatchewan, came into being and 
made a substantial contribution to the education of Ukrainian 
Catholic youth in Western Canada. In 195$, the new Sacred Heart 


, 

• ? T 

<• 

' 

» 

, 

* 

- . . 

t : ' > • 

, 

' 

; • ' 

, 


9 # 


Academy was opened with the most modern of equipment and 
facilities and an excellently trained staff of teaching Sisters 
to accommodate hundreds of Ukrainian high school girls. 

The Christian Brothers are now in the planning stage 
for a large and modern addition to St. Joseph 1 s College for 
Ukrainian high school boys. In this school, as in all their 
schools, the Brothers are dedicated to the Christian education 
of youth. This is aptly expressed by Brother Stanislaus James, 
F.S.C.: 


By means of religious instruction, reflections, 
religious services, prayers, sacraments, sound discip¬ 
line, and a Catholic atmosphere, students are developed 
spiritually and morally; by means of an enriched high 
school program, including wide options in languages, 
sciences, Glee Club, orchestra, literary society, 
public speaking, campus cavalcade, yearbook, cadets, 
and vocational guidance, the students are developed 
intellectually and socially and by means of organized 
sports, and cadets, they are developed physically .^ 

In 1946, when St. Joseph T s College was visited by 
the Honorable ¥. L. Mackenzie King, Prime Minister of Canada, 
the Prime Minister said: 

St. Josephs College has performed a particularly 
valuable function over the past quarter century in the 
training of youth of Ukrainian ancestry into loyal and 
useful Canadian citizens, many of whom have become leaders 
of the communities in which they live.^4 

St. Joseph 1 s College, Sacred Heart Academy, and St. 
Nicholas School in Winnipeg are three educational institutions 


33 


Brother Stanislaus James, 


F.S.C., 


op. cit ., p. 21. 


34 


The lorkton Enterprise , 


(Flay 30, 1946), 13. 









„ ' 

■j C 

. 


c 






c 


« ' 






. 


... . ' 





















99 


which were .founded to meet the needs of the Ukrainian settlers 

3 5 

and have continued to exist to this day. They began their 
pioneering task in the most difficult of circumstances, but 
the heroic dedication on the part of the early found ers and 
loyal teachers made them grow and flourish successfully. They 
have turned out hundreds of highly cultured young men and women 
who today are prominent and respected citizens of Canada and 
the United States. 


35 


See Chapter III, St. Nicholas School, Winnipeg, 


Manitoba, p # 43 # 



• o 

t 

■ ■; .0 ' V..; '; 

-'■/ '• - 

. 









< < . t 

. t 



CHAPTER VII 


THE UKRAINIAN LANGUAGE AND THE SCHOOLS 

Introduction 

The Ukrainian Canadians have been keenly interested 

in the preservation of the Ukrainian language from pioneer 

times until this day* The Ukrainian language was a means of 

fostering the national identity of the Ukrainians* It was a 

bridge for continuing the culture they had brought with them 

from Europe, and it was intimately linked with a church rite 

which for centuries was an external expression of the Ukrainian 

Catholic and Ukrainian Orthodox faiths. 

In April of 1953, two briefs were presented to the 

Cameron Royal Commission on Education by the Ukrainian Catholics 

of Alberta* One dealt with the matter of opening Ukrainian 

Catholic Separate Schools for the purpose of preserving the 

Ukrainian Catholic rite. ^ The other dealt with the need of 

introducing the Ukrainian language as an optional language in 

2 

the elementary and secondary schools. 

In addition to pointing out that the Ukrainian Canadians 

^Neil N. Savaryn, O.S.B.M., Ukrainian Bishop of Edmonton, 
Brief to be Presented to the Royal Commission on Education , 

Edmonton, Alberta: April, 1953. 

2 

Ukrainian Catholic Council of Alberta, Brief to be 
Presented to the Royal Commission on Education , Edmonton, Alberta: 
April, 1958. 
























' 


:. J ? '■•"Mi-.O ■.1 v.:; : v ' «r O ' • :' , ■ - ; u. •.( • 




. . 










• ■ • 


■ : . • : ■ 

. 





c 






101 


are a large minority in Alberta and that other Slavic groups 
living in Alberta use the Ukrainian language to a great extent, 
this latter brief notes the following interesting facts: 

3. Several Canadian and American universities have 
recognized the importance of the Ukrainian language and 
have introduced it into their courses of study. Those 
familiar with scientific research must be able to consult 
scientific literature in the original language. There 
is a growing demand for graduates with a special knowledge 
of East European languages and history, coming from 
various Governmental Departments for services abroad as 
well as in our armed forces. In the United States, special 
classes in Ukrainian have been introduced for the army 
personnel and courses have been established in a number 
of universities. The study of a language is primarily a 
course in elementary and secondary schools. One of the 
functions of our elementary and secondary schools is 
undoubtedly to prepare students for the university. 

With respect to the Ukrainian language, already recog¬ 
nized by many universities, our elementary and secondary 
schools are doing very little, if anything. The university 
work would be greatly aided if our elementary and secondary 
schools provided these elementary instructions. The 
universities could then devote their time to more advanced 
studies in the training of their students. 

4* As it has already been mentioned, recent articles 
in the Canadian press spoke about the lag in languages and 
about unused talents being wasted. Apart from the United 
States, no other country in the world has such a wealth 
of people with different national and ethnic backgrounds 
as Canada has. Proportionally with Canada, the Province 
of Alberta shares this advantage. Few nations, if any, 
have in so short a time aca x uired so many people with so 
large a store of knowledge. No other people has such a 
wonderful opportunity to learn foreign languages straight 
from those who live and breathe these languages, who 
would be able to teach them not just academically but 
with all of their life and beauty. Nevertheless, there 
are hundreds of frustrated and bitter people in our country 
who have so much to offer, be it technical, political or 
other fields of knowledge, but who by the limited and 
narrow minded outlook chosen by their host country, are 
condemned to live fruitless and hopeless lives while 
their wealth of knowledge goes irrevocably to waste. 

Canada should welcome the potential contributions which 














c 




c 


















' 




■; . i. 


■ 


. : - 

:■ . 










c t 


- 






c 


■ i : : 


. • 

' 




„ : 




. • . ;i.X 




ino.L.j is*Iriisxi&j o ; . sul.:.*. Mioo£&\f i 










102 


can accrue to our own evolving culture by encouraging these 
persons and groups to preserve what is best in their cul¬ 
tural pattern, so that they may be better prepared to 
make their significant endowment to the evolving Canadian 
pattern*. Introduction of the Ukrainian language would 
in some respect improve this attitude .' 

The brief presented by the Alberta Catholic Trustees 
Association to the same Royal Commission indicates that the 
Ukrainian rite is a distinctive rite in the Catholic Church 
and also recommends the introduction of the Ukrainian language 
into the curriculum.^ 


Developments in Manitoba 


Although bi-li*gualism in the schools was not abolished 
in Manitoba until March &, 1916, opposition to such a system 
began as early as 1911*^ According to W. Chumer, a Ukrainian 
teacher of the times, opposition was felt as early as 1905.^ 

In its issue of January 29, 1913, the Ukrainian Voice reported 
that up to that time, at least thirty articles had been published, 
chiefly in the Winnipeg Free Press, unfavourable to the teaching 

7 

of Ukrainian in the public schools .’ 


^ Ibid ., pp 0 9, 10. 

^The Alberta Catholic School Trustees 1 Association, A 
Brief Prepared for Submission to the Royal Commission on Educa¬ 

tion . Resolutions 10 and 19, PP* 12, 13* Edmonton, Alberta: 
April, 1953* 

^J. Stechishin, Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayinskho Instytutu 
im. P. Mohyly v SaskatooniT 1916-1941 ( Jubilee Book of the P. 
Mohyla Ukrainian Institute in Saskatoon, 1916-1941 )i P« 32. 
Saskatoon: P. Mohyla Ukrainian Institute, 1945* 

6 

interview between the writer and W. Chumer, of 
Edmonton, Alberta, at Edmonton, June 20, 195#• 

^J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 32. 















































t ■ * ^ . t * 





. c : ' 


. < 

. f 




: 










103 


The Ukrainians became more alarmed as the opposition 
grew. Not only in Manitoba, but also in Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
the Ukrainians realized that they would be affected by legis¬ 
lative restrictions imposed upon the Manitoba schools. Conse¬ 
quently, the Ukrainian press was continually filled with 
editorials in defense of bi-lingualism and the necessity of the 
Ukrainian language in the schools as a means of education for 
children of the early settlers. Organizations, delegations, 
and committees were formed; Ukrainian Teachers 1 Conventions 
were held, and the Ukrainian representative in the Manitoba 
Legislature, T. D. Ferley, defended the need for the Ukrainian 

language in the debates on the readings of the bill abolishing 

$ 

bi-lingualism in public schools in Manitoba in 1916 0 

How seriously the Ukrainians felt about their language 
in the schools can be seen from the writings of Reverend Father 
M. Kinash, who wrote a reply to one of the editorials of the 
Free Press in the Canadian Ruthenian in 1913* 

...A state which attempts to transform all races 
subject to it into one nation with one language performs 
an unpatriotic act harmful to the whole state for it 
calls forth a "battle of tongues". 

...A variety of languages is not the invention of 
human self-will, no more than the color of face which 
distinguishes the races...No one has created a native 
tongue for himself, but it is something which becomes a 
precious treasure and a people’s sacred heritage. One’s 
native language is the language of heart and soul, and 
in it is reflected the whole spiritual life of the 
nation with all its inherent faith, song, tradition, and 
history. 


Ibid., pp. 40-42. 






■ •. .. • 1 •, ‘ ■' . . • • ... • * j- ■- • ; 

. 

... 

i ."j .. ..... ' ; ... ■ • ' . . .' 

■> ■ '. " : • ■ . . ’ . i ’ ' • ' ■ ^ ’ ■■ 

' 

. 














« 


' :' ■ ill 


c 


» ° t 



' I: j’o- i • 













i’ 


d i: ' ■ 

c 

. 

, 

c 

■ • . . ...» ; 

t 

f 

A . : • • ’ ' . v ' j, ■:> ' J. 0:3 1 : )A :1 O' i 

- 


■ «• 




• .; .. ' v I .• ‘ . *. ... u 

■ 

. 








104 


To cut off a native language from a people is the 
same as cutting off a part of its soul. A state should 
never forcefully impose its language upon another people 
...but instruct these people to see that in addition to 
their own language they should see the value of acquiring 
a knowledge of the prevailing language. 

Every nation, no matter how primitive, has an unas¬ 
sailable right to its own language. This is a natural 
law. An attack on the mother tongue of a man is a wrong 
which calls upon heaven for veng^hce. Legislative force 
in this matter will not end successfully, but on the 
contrary will call forth the opposite effects. What can 
a government legislate to destroy the language of a 
weaker people? School force? This is foolishness. 

A state should be concerned whether all nationalities 
are ready to serve her wholeheartedly, willingly, and 
freely, but will not achieve her aims through force. 

The state should govern her peoples in such a way that 
the spark of patriotism will not die out but continue to 
glow. In this way all nationalities will consider the 
state a loving mother for all, making no distinction 
among its people whatever their faith or origin. 

The Ukrainian people....as well as other nationali¬ 
ties desire to be good Canadian citizens and faithful to 
the ruling dynasty; they love their chosen land, but do 
not love their origin or language less. The Ukrainian 
Canadians....will always consider those who attack their 
nationality or language as their greatest enemies. 
(Translated from the Ukrainian).^ 

A tremendous amount of material has been written in 
the columns of the Ukrainian press from the times of the early 
settlers until this day in support of the Ukrainian language 
in the schools. The Ukrainians soon realized that it was not 
enough to write for the Ukrainians alone but that articles should 
be submitted to the English newspapers, thus enabling the general 
Canadian public to become acquainted with the Ukrainian problems. 


Q 

M. Kinash, "Free-Pressi pid Rozwahu" (The Free Press 
Take Note), in the Kanadiyski Rusyn ( The Canadian Ruthenian ), 
Winnipeg, Manitoba. 3 (July 5, 1913), 6. (Translated from the 
Ukrainian)• 










■ : 

- . '. : 

: 


• c 1 ■ 



, 


; .. ' ■. • • \ . ■' . <> '■ ' ‘ | 

v . - •: ln:’> 11 $ mi ?/j: . $8 

« 

. 










105 


Often enough, this door was closed to them and after two 
articles by George Skwarok on the Ukrainian school problem had 
been refused for publication in the Winnipeg Telegram in 1913, 
he indignantly wrote to the Ukrainian press suggesting that 
some of the Ukrainian newspapers publish occasional editorials 
in the English language which would, help communicate Ukrainian 
views to the English speaking public. 10 Very little came of 
this appeal, but the Novyny (The News), published in Edmonton, 
began to publish the occasional editorial in English in its 
pages from March 26, 1914. 

Developments in Alberta 


After the elections of April 21, 1913, the Honorable 

J. R. Boyle continued as Minister of Education in Alberta. * 11 

He had held the ministerial post since the resignation of C. R. 

Mitchell about a year previously. Within a month after the new 

elections, Minister Boyle began to cancel the teaching permits 

12 

of the Ukrainian teachers in Alberta. The cancellation of 

these permits was based on certificates of qualification required 
for teaching in Alberta schools. The new rulings were applicable 


10 

George Skwarok, Letter to the Editor of the Kanadiyski 
Rusyn ( The Canadian Ruthenian ), (November 3, 1913), 6. 

11 

W. A. Chumer, Spomyny pro Perezhyvannya Pershykh 
Ukrayinskykh Pereselentsiv v Kanadi, 1891-1941 ( Memoirs of the 
First Ukrainian Settlers^in Canada, 1891-1941 ). p. 125. Edmonton: 
the author, 1942. 


12 


Ibid. 















■ 

' 

; • ■ . ' M;il> ■ 

’ ■ ■ u:-i 

. 

- 






- < '• V. . ‘-.v- 


. ■' j 

. 


: • ' 1 '• c ; 




. 


.o u- - ... ^ - V. 


. 




' 

• < • 


• « 

c . . / 




. 






; . ... 


t ■ . 


V 

. 


: j \. 











106 


to all Alberta teachers. The Ukrainian teachers were at a dis¬ 
advantage because they were in possession of certificates granted 
them by the Province of Manitoba. There were about thirteen 
Ukrainian teachers at the time, all of the permit category, for 

it was not until 1916 that the first Ukrainian teacher, William 

13 

Kuriets, graduated from the Normal School in Alberta. 

Peter Svarich, writing in the Canadian Farmer in 1912, 
claimed that the Ukrainians had presented the previous Minister 
of Education, C. R. Mitchell, with several demands. They asked 
for a Ukrainian seminary, a Ukrainian school organizer, the use 
of Ukrainian text books in the schools, and other similar 
petitions.According to Peter Svarich, the Minister of 
Education, faced with the demands of the English-speaking public 
resigned rather than compromise himself.^ Since J. R. Boyle, 
who eventually succeeded him, was a legislative member from 
the Sturgeon or North Vermilion district, well populated by 
Ukrainians, it was felt that he was well acquainted with their 
problems, and would be sympathetic in his dealings with them. 

For this reason, the Ukrainians were urged to vote for J. R. 

Boyle during the elections of 1913*^ 


!4 

News Item in the Kanadiyski Farmer (The Canadian 
Farmer), (May 3, 1912). 

15 

Ibid . 

16 

Ibid. 































107 


The sudden action of Minister Boyle after the election 
in regard to permit teachers came as a surprise to most of the 
Ukrainians, and succeeding incidents led to many misunderstandings 
between the Ukrainians and the Minister of Education* At the 
session of the Legislature of October, 1913, Section 149 of the 
School Ordinance was altered by adding thereto the following 
subsections: 

(2) Any person not so qualified (namely, having 
a valid certificate of qualifications issued under the 
regulations of the Department) shall not be entitled to 
recover in any court of law, any remuneration for his 
services as such teacher. 

(3) Any person other than the holder of such certi¬ 
ficate of qualification who undertakes to conduct a school 
as teacher shall be guilty of an offence and, on summary 
conviction, liable to a penalty not exceeding fifty 
dollars, and in default to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one month. 

Provided, however, that no prosecution shall be 
instituted 7 under this section except on the order of the 
Minister. ' 

The immediate effect of the new ordinances was to 
place the Ukrainian teachers at a disadvantage. The qualifications 
and teaching certificates which they had obtained in Manitoba 
after graduating from the Brandon and Winnipeg training schools 
were now invalid in the Province of Alberta. In the same way, 
Ukrainian university students who were teaching in Alberta under 
permit classification found themselves conducting classes 
illegally in Alberta schools. The sudden turn of events required 


17 

Robert Fletcher, "Education in Foreign Settlements”, 
Eighth Annual Report of the Department of Education of the 

Province of Alberta, 1912 , pp. 44, 45* Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, 

Government Printer, 1914* 









... ? 

, <• 


• ' ^ •. . ' . '... ■' ■ , i 

■ it : i ' .• . <" 

. 

c 

« ' 

1 . 



' 


^ , 

< / • , ‘ ' : ; : :"Y Y ' v..;- fJ'O' . I . ' X'l.i: • I 1 


( . t 

. 







103 


many adjustments. For the Ukrainian teachers, it was a question 
of qualifying for the standards set up by the Alberta Department 
of Education or leaving the schools where they had obtained 
teaching positions. In some school districts the people and 
teacher of the school district found the adjustments too diffi¬ 
cult to accept. These districts then became trouble spots for 
the Department of Education. 

Robert Fletcher, Supervisor of Foreign Schools, wrote 
an unusually long report for the year 1913 to the Minister of 
Education. It is filled with the hectic trials of Robert Fletcher 
and the Minister with the Ukrainian teachers, Ukrainian trustees, 
and their schools. Early in the report, the source of the 
problem was summarized as follows: 

Early in the year, the Ruthenian schools were 
raided by would-be teachers from Manitoba and Saskatche¬ 
wan. The majority of these young men had a very indiffe¬ 
rent education. Their written English was faulty in 
idiomatic expression, while their speech was characterized 
by indistinct articulation. Some of them could scarcely 
make themselves understood in either written or spoken 
English. For instance, one of them who happened to be 
a witness on a case in court asked for an interpreter, 
but when the presiding magistrate learned that he was a 
teacher, teaching English in one of our rural schools, 
he refused his request with the result that his conduct 
as a witness was deplorable. 

It soon came apparent that an organization was formed 
to place these young men in Ruthenian schools. It encouraged 
them to come from Manitoba and Saskatchewan to this pro¬ 
vince and distributed them among the various schools when 
they arrived here. The organization was oomposed of certain 
well-known agitators, who had ulterior motives to serve, 
but who, to conceal their personal desires, took advantage 
of the natural and praiseworthy love the Ruthenian people 
have for their mother tongue and agitated that Ruthenians 


. 

. .'. ; ■ > : 

. 








. 



















c 





« 




. 


. 













' 

* 


■ 

. 

' • . 








109 


be taught in our Ruthenian schools and that unqualified 
Ruthenians be allowed to teach, just as, they said, Ruthe- 
nians with low grade certificates are allowed to teach 
their own language part of the time in Ruthenian schools 
of Manitoba. Your department, anticipating the conduct 
of this organization, immediately ruled that only qualified 
teachers, regardless of nationality, be allowed to take 
charge of schools under my supervision, so long as any 
were available, and instructed me to make this ruling 
effective. 

Following his appraisal of the problem, Robert Fletcher 
reported his difficulties in each of the individual schools. In 
each and every case, the pattern of action was almost identical. 
The school was visited by R. Fletcher. After suitable warnings 
which were ignored by the Ukrainians, the Department of Education 
appointed R. Fletcher official trustee of the school. Immediately 
a qualified teacher was placed in the school in spite of the 
protests of the people.^ The following extract from the report 
of R. Fletcher is an example: 

The next school I visited was Kolomea which is also 
close to Mundare. I made the same request and gave the 
same warning to this board but they refused to make a 
change of teachers. I reported their refusal to the 
department and was promptly appointed official trustee 
of the district. I placed a qualified teacher in charge 
of the school immediately. The board of trustees visited 
the department to protest against my conduct, but my 
action was sustained. 20 

The teacher replaced at the Kolomea school was John 
Genyk, a second year arts student from the University of Manitoba. 


1 $ 

Ibid., pp. 39-41. 

1 9 Ibid .. pp. 39-49. 

20 

Ibid., p. Ijf 2 * 











, 


■ 

. ! ...V. v '■ 3 ; v ■ V' . . 

L ■. t t.«o vi 

. 






■ t - 








. ■' ; C XX. O ’ 1 ()»'■’ X'i 














o'.'xl .r~ loo: 




0 ., 


: 

' 1 < ' 

. 










XT" ' a , 

„ 

• • 

, 

■ 


S'ou.vio^; ' xxj 















110 


Although John Genyk did not possess the necessary qualifications 
for teaching in Alberta, the Ukrainians felt that he was excel¬ 
lently qualified for their needs. It was difficult for the 
Ukrainians to see why the same teachers were recognized as 
qualified in Manitoba but lacking in qualification in Alberta, 

The Ukrainian press felt that the Ukrainian teachers in Alberta 
were the objects of discrimination, while on the other hand, the 
Department of Education maintained that all teachers must conform 
to the standards required in the Province of Alberta, Empowered 
by the new school ordinances, the Department of Education conti¬ 
nued with the dismissal of non-qualified Ukrainian teachers 
throughout the province. As a consequence, there was a feeling 
of resentment amongst the people settled in the Ukrainian colonies 
of Alberta.^ 

When an English-speaking teacher was placed upon the 
Bukowina School which had been taught by W. Chumer, a teacher 
from Manitoba, the Ukrainians quietly built another school across 
the road and continued to place their children under the tutelage 
of W. Chumer. Mr. Armstrong, the qualified teacher, continued 
to sit in an empty school from month to month on salary while 
the people continued to finance and support W. Chumer, the 
Ukrainian teacher across the way<»^ 

The unexpected obstinacy and persistence of the 

21 

W. Chumer, op, cit . t p. 125. 

22 

R. Fletcher, op, cit ., p. 43. 

23 


Ibid., PP. 43, 44 








; .vl: = 



•" • r.. : . : . 






:: ;;.?. ' 



' L> t> ; ; , 0 { i ( 




’ . • ' 





— 

C 

. 





‘ ■” 

o 

- .• . : i 




• • 


. i J 1 1 





. 



* 




. . . . 


o 

(, . 




Ill 


people of the Bukowina school district compromised the position 
of Minister Boyle to such an extent that he felt called upon to 
take stronger measures. The Ukrainian and English press was 
filled with editorials and articles on the problem. The Edmonton 
Bulletin wrote: 

In Manitoba the Galicians were allowed to get 
control of their schools with the result that children 
are growing up in the province unable to speak a word 
of English. Mr. Boyle emphatically declared that no 
such state of affairs would be permitted in Alberta. 

’This is an English speaking province,’ said Mr. 

Boyle, ’and every Alberta boy and girl should receive 
a sound English education in the public schools of the 
province.’ 

Mr. Boyle added that there appeared to be an active 
organization among the Galicians to acquire control of 
the schools and have them conducted by Galician teachers 
in their own language. It was evident that strong 
measures on the part of the Department of Education would 
be required to keep control of the situation in the 
foreign settled districts.^4- 

The stronger measures that followed brought on unusual 
complications. When qualified teachers were placed in schools 
formerly occupied by unqualified Ukrainian teachers, the Ukrai¬ 
nian people in the district often refused to send their children 
to school. One such teacher was beaten by a group of masked 
women and driven from the school. In some districts the 
Ukrainians who were not pleased with a newly appointed teacher 
refused to pay the school taxes levied upon them. The Supervisor 
of Foreign Schools was then obliged to recover the taxes by 
distraint of chattels. In one case where the husband was away, 


News Item ’’Control of Ruthenian Schools in Alberta 
Must be Firmly Maintained”, in the Edmonton Bulletin , (August 
20, 1913). 




' ;...y ■: ■. . ■ '• :■ •.■. a.oc v. o . V.'.a . r . 1 ! 


. 




i 








' ! o':; r/ 












c : ' 




















. 


a 

. 

t • 

. 






*: 






■ 

- 








‘ 










• • . . ■ ’: ■ - •• ’ :■ : , V"'; ; \ ' : " A.. A ’ ■. 

. r 



112 


the Supervisor, R. Fletcher, while seizing a horse, was resisted 

forcibly by the wife left at home. Suits, court orders, judgments, 

fines, and imprisonments followed one upon another. The wide 

series of incidents as described by W. Chumer in his Memoirs 

brought the Liberal newspapers, such as the Edmonton Bulletin, 

the Capital, and the Vegreville Observer, into the campaign in 

defense of Minister Boyle 1 s policies. 2 ^ 

The policies of the Minister of Education were bitterly 

criticized by articles in the Ukrainian press. The Conservative 

opposition accused the Minister of being dictatorial and poli- 

26 

tically intolerant. One group of Ukrainians revealed their 

resentment in a painting of the Last Judgment which showed the 

27 

Minister suffering in hell. 

Roman Kremar, editor of the Nowyny, published weekly 
in Edmonton, was one of Minister Boyle’s public adversaries. His 
attacks on the Minister of Education were irritating to the 
English press as well as the Department of Education. To avoid 
misunderstandings he began to publish editorials in the English 
language in his Ukrainian newspaper, the Nowyny, to show what he 
considered to be the Ukrainian point of view to English readers. 

In an editorial of April 2, 1914, he complained that the Ukrainians 

25 

¥. Chumer, op. cit ., pp. 125-143* 

26 

Ibid., p. 126. 

27 

Archives of Father J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The School 
Question , p. 36 . 
















c 











rfcft b8Wt 'ii br 1 j;'u-: ';>fi bJJ0 cl 








T 




,'b- . . / 


O 






C 






. 


. ) 




113 


were interested in qualified teachers for their schools, and 
that the cause of poor educational opportunities for Ukrainian 
children and teachers in Alberta was the responsibility of 
Minister Boyle, 

Ruthenians do not want unqualified teachers, 

Ruthenians demand qualified teachers. 

What the trustees have stated to Mr. Boyle is 
that in Manitoba there are qualified Ruthenian teachers 
because the Manitoba government really cares for the 
education of Ruthenian children, while in Alberta there 
is not one Ruthenian teacher educated in this province. 

And this statement was made after Mr. Boyle made a pro¬ 
mise that his department will turn out its first batch 
of Ruthenian teachers in six years hence... 

The fact that in Alberta there is not one Ruthenian 
boy or girl in any college, and as far as we know only 
one boy in a high school, is certainly a very eloquent 
proof of "superiority” of f, educational policy” of Mr. 

Boyle, over that of Manitoba where there are hundreds ^ 
of university and college students of Ruthenian parentage. 

E. B. Thompson of Ottawa, a writer well acquainted with 
the Ukrainian problems in the West, wrote a syndicated column 
for thirty daily newspapers in Canada and the United States and 
rose in defense of the Ukrainians. His criticism of Minister 
Boyle and his policies was published in the pages of the Boston 
Transcript of September 20, 1913, and was later reprinted in the 
pages of the Canadian Ruthenian. 

The latter times have allowed Boyle to show the 
whole length of his unbelievably long ears. Up to now, 
the majority of the Ukrainians of Alberta voted Liberal 
in the provincial and federal elections. If properly 
guided, there is a sufficient number of them to return 
the province to the Conservatives. Boyle has attacked 
their schools which were wisely conducted by the Ukrainian 


2 $ 

Editorial, ”Mr. Boyle and Ruthenian Trustees”, in 
the Nowyny ( The News ), 2 (April 2, 1914), 1* 








4 

, 

...... 

' 


- 


















t 

■ . i : ' 


n n [ • " oJ: ■ 


, 


. 

c c 

< 










. 






. . ? t ■ , 



114 


bi-lingual teachers* These are teachers who have been 
trained for three years in the English Normal schools; 
teachers who without doubt are better qualified to teach 
the Ukrainian children the English language than the one- 
language teachers. It is common knowledge over the whole 
West that the Ukrainians are most anxious to have their 
children study English; that they quickly accustom them¬ 
selves to the Canadian way of life and that they are 
extremely and sincerely grateful to Canada for the gift 
of freedom and land. There are no immigrants in Canada 
who are more intelligent or harder working than they are. 

They themselves have arranged for and still desire 
to hire well trained bi-lingual Ukrainian teachers. But 
this does not satisfy leather-headed Boyle. He proposes 
to force the well trained Ukrainian bi-lingual teachers 
to make room for the one-language English teachers. His 
game is apparently calculated to please such organizations 
of non-Ukrainian nationalists who dislike the Ukrainians 
because of their industry, skill, good norms, prosperity, 
or simply because they are foreigners*. 

A foolish conviction continues to exist that such 
people as the Ukrainians must be 1 reformed* by forced 
anglicizing and hurrying up the process by which they 
would finally speak one language - English. Although 
it is true that the circumstances of existence urge them 
to master the English language as soon as possible, it 
is also true that such knowledge comes more quickly through 
their social contacts at work and at play than by any 
other means. 

The longer they continue to know two languages, i.e., 
a knowledge of their mother tongue as well as English, 
the more readily can they be called intelligent and 
better educated. The longer they remain Ukrainian, or 
French, or German, or Scandinavian, whatever the case 
may be, the longer shall they retain that feeling of good 
breeding and charm which we see is disappearing amongst 
them the more they anglicize, canadianize, or americanize 
themselves. In the West, I had the opportunity to talk 
with a large number of Ukrainians from various classes 
and age groups. There is no nationality on those 
unmeasurable expanses who are more pleasing, nor any 
nationality whose children are educated under such fine 
norms. (Translated from the Ukrainian). 2 ^ 


'e. B. Thompson, "Ukrayintsi v Alberti** (The Ukrainians 
in Alberta), News Item in the Canadian Ruthenian , 3 (November 3, 
1913), 4. 






: , .J :) n9/' .1: Jn.-;: 









od" 








l . ■•Jo 



' 


e " " « « 

< 








t ' 

- 








115 


Lord Tweedsmuir, former Governor General of Canada, 
speaking to the Ukrainians of Fraserwood, Manitoba, on September, 
21, 1936, said: 

You have become good Canadians.... The Ukrainian 
element amongst others is a very valuable contribution 

to our new Canada.I would wish that you remember 

your old Ukrainian traditions, handicrafts, your folk 
songs, dances, as well as your national legends. I do 
not believe that any nationality can become strong if it 
does not remember and preserve contact with its past. 

Your traditions are all valuable contributions to Cana¬ 
dian culture.You will all be better Canadians by also n 

being good Ukrainians. (Translated from the Ukrainian .)^ 


Conclusion 


Except for a relatively small and insignificant group 
of Ukrainian Russophiles, the Ukrainians were convinced that the 
only solution to the proper education of Ukrainian children 
during pioneering times was through the use or partial use of 
the Ukrainian language in the schools. Therefore the majority 
of the Ukrainians did all in their power to preserve it. In 
the resolutions of the Ukrainian Teachers’ Convention held in 
Winnipeg in 1909, the teachers condemned any attempt to deprive 
them or the Ukrainian children in the schools of the right to 
their own language as an instrument of education. 

We believe that to defend our mother tongue, for 
which our forefathers shed their blood centuries ago is 
our divine duty, and that we would use all our political 
influence to retain the present bi-lingual system. We 


N. Savaryn, "Piadesiat Lit v Kanadi !T (Fifty Years in 
Canada), Yuvileyny Kalendar Ukrayintskoi Rodyny, 1941 ( Jubilee 

Calendar-Almanac of the Ukrainian Family, 1941 ). p. 67 . Mundare, 
Alberta: Basilian Fathers, 1941* 












■ c • 

< < ' ' ■ 

; '• < 

c t S-r \ 

. 

, 

. 

, 


. 3; ' d 


■ . . . : . 

n o *'1 - .■ .1 i ....... * ■ ■ - ■ ■ u .... 

/ .w 1 'do*:■: 'V- j .; 

,. ' ■ 

.■ . < 












i r lo 












• ' d~dd ;d .. d, .\ \ o; cd ‘ 000 ■■■ • — 


■ ol 


ddi ^dddd'd'- 




. < 


: 











116 


value -very highly the British flag, and we are willing 
to defend it at any time or occasion whatever, but we 
would like to see respect to our native tongue. 

Theodore Stefanik, the Ukrainian school inspector of 
Manitoba, who opened the convention of 1909 in Winnipeg, reported 
on the number of schools in his inspectorate and the large 
number of Ukrainian children. 

He reported that there were already 6l organized 
schools, 5$ of them having buildings. He expects to 
organize 40 more schools. Last year 31 teachers were 
engaged, and about 2000 Ukrainian children were in 
attendance. 

He complained that he could not visit all the 
schools, because the grant for the purpose was not 
sufficient. Also it was stated that he was told by 
the English inspectors, who visited the Ukrainian 
schools, that they had great pleasure in hearing the 
children read English as well as their own language, 
and that they admired the progess of the pupils in 
both languages 

The strict application of the school law to Alberta 
teachers by the Minister of Education, J. R. Boyle, affected 
the Ukrainian teachers in the province adversely. The Ukrai¬ 
nian teachers, unable to meet the new standards for qualifications 
set up by the Province of Alberta, were required to leave their 
schools whether they were in session or not. In many of the 
school districts, the Ukrainian teachers left their schools 
unwillingly, and in some cases the Ukrainian rate-payers felt 
that they could hold on to the Ukrainian teacher by organizing 


31 

News Item, "Ukrainians Urge Bi-Lingual Schools", in 
the Winnipeg Free Press , (July 17, 1909). 

32 

Ibid. 





, 

.. . Q ' '■ ' ' ' • ■ ‘ ' 

* 


.. ' . ; 



■ t 

























» 

















, 








• 





. 


■ 







































. 







t 















t 







• 







■ 


















o o 

c 








• 

















• 



■ 



t ' 



tri t 

• 


* 

■ . : • ■ ’ ... ; < • 

.. \: i\l : O ■: ; <'i 

■ . ;; : : ‘: .V;■ ’ ’ 







c 



< - 

■ 

c : 

;j ; : rj ^ * 

\ 

I ■ : ■' ' ' 

' \ ■) 









117 


representations and delegations to the Department of Education, 
or by making an issue of the problem. In each case, however, 
the school law was eventually upheld, and the various school 
districts concerned began to take on the form required of them. 

In the case of Fletcher versus Kutcher, held in 
District Court of the District of Edmonton, March 30, 1914, 

Judge Crawford, in passing oral judgment on the defendant, said: 

....The Supervisor of Foreign Schools, as he is 
called, went out from the Department of Education, and 
objected to the District having for their teacher Mr. 

Chumer, who was then in charge. Mr. Chumer, who is a 
man who impressed me very favorably, seems to be bright, 
intelligent and of honest disposition: but the Depart¬ 
ment, under the powers conferred upon it by the Act, 
interfered..... 

Now it is the duty of the Judge, not to make the law, 
but to interpret it, and, as far as in him lies, to ad¬ 
minister it; and although it is not always administered 
to its strict letter, I understand his duty to be to 
construe it in the majority of cases according to its 
true spirit. The people of this Province have passed the 
Act, and the provisions of it are clear, and no judge can 
overrule those provisions. He must interpret them 
according to their plain ordinary meaning. A judge is 
only one man, and the Legislature is composed of many, 
and no judge has the right to set up his single and indi¬ 
vidual opinion as against all the men composing a Legis¬ 
lature as to.the advisability of the legislation that they 
have passed.33 

In 1913, the Manitoba Minister of Education, G. R. 
Coldwell, while speaking before the Synod of the Anglican Church, 
had this to say about the Ukrainians. 

I take the liberty to appeal to the synod to act 
according to British principle and respect in so far as 
is possible the befitting demands and feelings of these 
people and to treat them with that understanding which 
they themselves would desire if you were in their country. 

You cannot ride over these people no more than you can 


33 


W. Chumer, op. cit ., pp# 137, 13# 









c 






c 








. 








: 




.. , . . . 
































. 










' 




O,;' 


!" i ■ 


' ' ) ' 0 





ride over the British. At first you must win their 
confidence, and then you may do any good you please. 

The method in use here was to kick these people, 
but this should be the last thing to do if you wish 
them to become good Britishers. Approach them properly, 
and they will appreciate British order and customs and 
be convinced that they are for their good. They are 
progressing forward in an unusually noticeable manner, 
and the time will come when we will have to work hard 
to keep up with them. 

I protest against the assimilation of these people 
by force.^ 

The past sixty years have indicated that the Ukrainians 
are good and loyal Canadian citizens who are proud of their 
mother tongue. They have won distinct accomplishments as an 
agricultural people, served community interests well and faith¬ 
fully, and have an excellent war record. Their cultural contri¬ 
bution to the Canadian way of life should continue for many 


more years to come 






- 

„ ■ t . : 

O \ 


•! 

, 




. 







. ‘ ' t 







CHAPTER VIII 


THE UKRAINIAN TEACHERS AND THE SCHOOLS 
Introduction 

It is surprising how quickly the Ukrainians became 
interested in education and in the schooling of their children. 

As soon as they had satisfied the immediate needs for self- 
preservation on their farms their children were attending schools. 
Earlier, it was shown that by 1915, there were about 400 ! Ukrai¬ 
nian schools 1 in operation in Western Canada.^ - In addition, it 
has been shown that prior to 1916, there were about 150 
Ukrainian teachers in Manitoba, about BO in Saskatchewan, and 
13 in Alberta at the beginning of 1913* It may be safe to assume 
that up to 1916 there were from 200 to 250 Ukrainian teachers 
teaching in the western provinces. The Ukrainian teacher situ¬ 
ation stood best in Manitoba because it permitted bi-lingualism 
in the province up to 1916. Then again the same province provided 
training schools for Ukrainian students, as at Brandon, which 
supplied a growing number of Ukrainian teachers. 

The Ukrainian - English Readers 

The first contact Ukrainian children had with the 
English language was in the schools. The Ukrainian teachers 
felt that the only educational approach to these children was 

1 

Chapter V, p. 66, 














. 

' • ■ 

? V 

1 

r 

^ ' t 

■ 

. 






. ~ - 






. 




■■ 




. V .■' 










c ; ' 




120 


partly thrpugh the Ukrainian language. They considered that the 
reading of English phonetic sounds was a waste of time without 
a proper explanation of the meaning of these sounds. To help 
them in their work of teaching English, the Ukrainian teachers 
wanted a reader which offered the English text paralleled by a 
Ukrainian translation of the same text. They also felt that 
they themselves should be thoroughly grounded in a knowledge of 
the Ukrainian language as a part of their education in the 
training schools. 

As early as 1909, the Annual Ukrainian Teachers’ 

Convention, which was held in Winnipeg July 13 and 14, passed 

resolutions calling upon the Department of Education to provide 

Ukrainian texts for the Brandon training school as well as 

Ukrainian elementary books for schools where the majority of 

2 

rate-payers were Ukrainians® 

We, the Ukrainian-English teachers, pray the Depart¬ 
ment of Education to provide the Ukrainian books for the 
training school at Brandon according to the agreement. 

(a) We further request the Department of Education 
to open the Normal School at Winnipeg from July 5, 1910, 
for our higher education. 

(b) To grant the Ukrainian elementary books for the 
schools where the majority of rate-payers are Ukrainians. 

(c) The students attending the training school at 
Brandon should be compelled to pass the examination in 
the Ukrainian language as well as in the English. 


News Item, "Ukrainians Urge Bi-Lingual Schools" in 
the Wihnipeg Free Press , (July 17, 1909). 






Ij u • ' ■ w ■ 

; , -■ c/.- , :: - ; ‘ . .V : *- , ■ 

■ , .. . '■ < ' ■' •* . ■■ 

* • 

J ‘1 J 

. 


. 


*1 


' 


i 














■ 




* 1 




■ 

.: . :• . -■ '■ : '■ ■■■■' 

• ■ . j;.:-.. : . r ■ . ■ '... : ' : ' : ■ ' - ■> 

c ■ ■ < . • ‘ / . ' ■ ■■ ■ - — ■ ■ ' - 

■ '. I ‘ . 

v: ,, v. ' /.. 

j , . ■ . ■ • J l « : , t. ’ i 1- Ct v ' i ■ I ' : V ' i 

■ ■ * 



J: '\i:J. 0 CW.r,' :: X ■■■jr 




: '. ‘ . ' 

e , ■; , <; , , .. , .. '■ / . . 







121 


(d) To accept 5 to 10 Ukrainian students to replace 
those who left the above mentioned school. 3 

In 1913, the Government of Manitoba published the first 

Ukrainian-English reader which contained an English text on one 

page and the equivalent Ukrainian translation by Michael Ste- 

chishin on the other.^ 

A second reader was printed in 1914, but was published 
and never distributed to the schools for use, probably because 
of the strained relations which had developed over the bi-lingual 
problem.^ These readers were called The Manitoba-Ruthenian 
Readers, First Reader (or Second Reader), Approved by the Advisory 
Board for use in the Public Schools of Manitoba, and were pub¬ 
lished by Thomas Nelson and Sons, London, Edinburgh, Dublin and 
New York.^ Another reader which was used by the Ukrainian school 
children of Manitoba was the Ukrainian Primer prepared by the 
school organizer, Paul Gigeychuko 

In Alberta the Ukrainian Trustees 1 Convention held in 

Vegreville on February 15, 1912, passed resolutions which sought 

7 

a translation of the school act in the Ukrainian language. Such 

3 Ibid. 

4 

J. Stechishin, Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayinskoho Instytutu im. 
P. Mohyly v Saskatoon!, 1916-1941 ( Jubilee Book of the P. Mohyla 
Ukrainian Institute in Saskatoon, 1916-1941 )% p. 34. Saskatoon: 

P. Mohyla Ukrainian Institute, 1945. 

5 Ibid. 

6 

Ibid .. p. 39. 

7 

Ibid .. p. 34. 












■ ; Oi* \ A) ) 












? - 

■■ f .u 







. • • ' * ■■■■ t . 












v . 










t : ' . 4 




c ' 




. ■ > : 






< ' 








; ? r . . .. . 


, 


.. 






» t 





122 


a school act was actually published in 1914 by J. W. Jeffery, 
Government Printer in Edmonton. This ninety-five page publi¬ 
cation was a translation of the School Act, School Taxes Act, 

School Grants Act, School Attendance Act, as well as Amendments 
and Additions up to and including the year 1910. Because the 
language used was not pure Ukrainian, but a mixture of Ukrainian 

and Russian, the translation was found unsatisfactory by the 
o 

Ukrainian public. 

In an interview with Peter Svarich of Vegreville, who 

had been originally assigned to the Ukrainian translation, it 

was stated that this had been done with the cooperation of Jacob 

Kret, and others, for the sum of $500.00, but a new translation 

was made by A. Shandro, with the cooperation of Michael Cherniak, 

Michael Ostrowsky, and Hladyk, at a cost of $2,000.00. It was 

this latter work which eventually became published and won the 

10 * 

disapproval of the Ukrainian public. 

Another interesting reader was the work of Peter Svarich 
of Vegreville, who translated Primer A of the Alexandra series of 
readers into Ukrainian for the use of the Ukrainian children in 

a 

A copy of the translated School Act, etc., may be 
found in the Archives of Father J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Mundare, Alberta. 

9 

J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 34. 

10 

Interview between the writer and Peter Svarich of 
Vegreville, Alberta,at Vegreville, Alberta, March 25, 1957* 

Reference is made to the same in the Calendar-Almanac 
of the Canadian Ruthenian, p. 33. Winnipeg: 1916. 







\j t ' . 


























c 


X 


z 











? • 




z 



1 l.j i -■ 




















123 


the schools in the year 1911This little work of sixty-four 
pages was called: An Aid for Young Scholars, for use in beginners’ 
classes in Alberta and Saskatchewan, a literal translation from 
the English of Primer A. 

This Ukrainian reader which faithfully followed each 
page of the original reader in translation became a boon to many 
teachers who were having difficulty in teaching reading to the 
Ukrainian children. It was bought up not only by the Ukrainian 
teachers but also by the one-language English teachers. The 
latter encouraged the children to take the Ukrainian reader home 
along with the reader authorized by the Department of Education. 

As the child read his lesson at home in English the parents 
followed the child with the Ukrainian text explaining whatever 
was not clear to the child in Ukrainian. 1 ^ In this way the 
parents also learned to speak English. 

The Ukrainian Teachers 1 Conventions 

In Manitoba one of the first Ukrainian teachers’ con¬ 
ventions was held in Winnipeg on June 5, 1907, with an attendance 

"^Interview between the writer and Peter Svarich of 
Vegreville, Alberta at Vegreville, March 25, 1957* * 

12 

J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 32. 

*This book may be examined at the Basilian Fathers 
Library, Mundare, Alberta. 

13 

Interview between the writer and Peter Svarich of 
Vegreville, Alberta, at Vegreville, March 25, 1957. 






... . . 

c ■■ : 

C 

. 

■ 

- 

r ' 

t • 

5 t \ 


. t ' t C 


< . . < 






0 c • 

. < t 




< : ‘ : • :■ 





124 


of about thirty-eight teachersThese conventions became annual 
affairs and continued up to the abolition of bi-lingualism in 
Manitoba in 1916. The Winnipeg Free Press gave a complete 
account of the activities and resolutions of the July 13 and 14 
Convention held in Winnipeg in 1909* Amongst other things, the 
teachers reported on their progress in the schools. 

The teachers next gave their reports of the progress 
made among their people. They stated that after much 
work they were successful in making the children progres¬ 
sive in both languages. Great attention was paid to 
reading, spelling, pronunciation, and the other subjects 
were taken step by step. Some of them were complaining 
of uncomfortable dwellings and low salaries, especially 
in Stuartburn municipality, where the salary is $350 to 
$400 per annum. 

The July 11 and 12 Convention of 1913 in Winnipeg 
considered the teaching of the Ukrainian language as well as 
English to Ukrainian children, and showed its appreciation of the 
government’s defense of bi-lingualism and opening of the Brandon 
training school for Ukrainian teachers. In addition, it elected 
a delegation which was to meet the Minister of Education in the 
matter of obtaining a teacher of Ukrainian for the Brandon school.^ 
The July 16 and 17 Convention of 1914 in Winnipeg was attended 
by about fifty-seven teachers .^ 


^M. Stechishin, "Nashe Shkilnytstvo” (Our Schools), 
Narodny Kalendar Ukrayinska Rodyna ( The People’s Calendar-Almanac 
for the Ukrainian Family) , p. 153* Winnipeg, Manitoba: 1915* 


News Item, "Ukrainians Urge Bi-Lingual Schools” in 
the Winnipeg Free Press , (July 17, 1909)# 

16 

J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 33* 

17 

From a photograph in the Illustrovany Kalendar Novyn , 
1915 , ( Illustrated Calendar-Almanac of the News, 1915 )» P* 37* 
Edmonton, Alberta. 












' 


. ■:' . .«*' i ■ 




/ LouuiJ. r ?..■ V:-.;* 







■ 




■ 








. 


■ 
















- • t 


t • ‘ 


' 






o: . 


li .■■■[( e 'i '- 












125 


It is of interest to note the program scheduled for 
the July 16 and 17 Convention of 1914, which was held in the 
Normal School on Williams Avenue in Winnipeg. It reveals a busy 
schedule and cooperation with officials representing the Depart¬ 
ment of Education. 


July 16, 9:30 a.m. 

1) Reports from the executive; 

2) Election of praesidium for the duration 
of the Convention; 

3) Opening of the Convention: 

a) Hon. G. R. Coldwell, Minister of Education, 

b) R. Fletcher, Deputy Minister of Education. 

4) Address of F. H. Belton, Inspector of Schools. 


Second Session 2:00 p.m. 

5) Address of E. E. Best, school inspector; 

6) Education and the Ideal Teacher - an address 
by W. Smuk; 

7) A School Matter by P. Gigeychuk; 

8) Textbooks - by K. Prodan; 

9) The Matter of the Teachers’ Journal. 


July 17, 9:30 a.m. 

10) Address by A. L. Young, school inspector; 

11) The Duties of the Teacher in Regard to 
Politics - M. Stechishin. 


Second Session 2:00 p.m. 

12) Teaching of English to the Foreigners - W. 

Mihaychuk; $ 

13) Election of Executive for 1914-1915* 

In Saskatchewan, the Ukrainian teachers began holding 


N ews) » 


IS 

News Item, "Teachers’ 
2(April 2, 1914), 1® 


Convention" in the Nowyny (The 








c 


hnr> i 


: 





c 



< 








•'V ■ O 




1 




126 


their conventions in the spring of 1912.^ In 1913, a conven- 

20 

tion was held in Rosthern with about fifty teachers in attendance. 

Here they resolved to obtain concessions in regard to the 

Ukrainian language, requested Ukrainian text books, and a profes- 

21 

sor of Ukrainian for the Regina training school for foreigners. 

In Alberta, the Ukrainian teachers were slox^er in 
getting underway with their convention, but the Ukrainian school 
trustees of Alberta held their own convention as early as Feb¬ 
ruary 13, 1912, in Vegreville, where a request for a translation 
of the School Act, a Ukrainian school organizer, and a Ukrainian 

teacher training school with a professor of Ukrainian on the 

22 

staff of such a school was presented to the government. 

In Alberta, the first Ukrainian Teachers’ Convention 

was held in Edmonton in 1915 (sic) attended by about nineteen 

23 * 

teachers and students. Among these were E. Shklanka, well- 
known Ukrainian Canadian writer and author, Harry Kostash, pre¬ 
sent Superintendent of Schools in the Smoky Lake Division, M. 
Luchkovich, later to become the first Ukrainian representative to 
the federal Parliament, and the late Dr. John Orobko, who became 



Stechishin, op. cit .. p* 35. 


20 


Ibid. 


22 

Ibi d., p. 34. 

2 ^w. Chumer, Spomyny pro Perezhyvannya Pershykh Ukrayin- 
skyhk Pereselentsiv v Kanadi, 1891-1941 (Memoirs of the Experiences 

of the First~Ukrainian$Settlers in Canada, 1^91-1941)» P« 75* 

Edmonton: the author, 1942. 

*In an interview with W. Chumer, the date 1915 was stated 
to be incorrect. Mr. Chumer indicated that the correct date is 1917* 













« 






















. 












; c . ±\ 










' i d ... ! . ' ).A 




<, - 5 








* 










' 




c 


* 








‘ ■ ■ 

■ V «• ' 

. 











127 


recognized as one of Alberta 1 s great physicians and surgeons. 2 ^ 

In 1913-1914, a committee of Ukrainian citizens and teachers was 
formed for the promotion of the Ukrainian language, and this 
group presented its findings and requests to J. R. Boyle, the 
Minister of Education and to the Liberal Government. 2 ^ 

At their conventions, the Ukrainian teachers dealt 
with school problems, educational policies, status of teachers, 
and the use of the Ukrainian language as a means of instruction 
amongst Ukrainian children. In the early twenties, a Ukrainian 
Teachers’ Association was formed in Edmonton, which included 
teachers of nearly seventy Ukrainian school districts in Alberta. 
Conventions were held annually in Edmonton. The secretary of 
this group for many years was Elias Kiriak. Since these early 
times the Ukrainian teachers have continued to hold their conven¬ 
tions in the Western provinces. The proceedings of the Ukrainian 
Teachers’ Convention held at Mundare on November 16, 1940, have 
been preserved in a thirty-six page booklet published by the 

p a 

Basilian Fathers at Mundare, Alberta. In latter years one of 

the more successful conventions was held in Edmonton on April &, 

1953, under the auspices of the Ukrainian Catholic Teachers of 
27 

Alberta. Ukrainian teachers representing North Eastern Alberta 
attended this convention and prepared a varied exhibition of school 


24 


Ibid. 


25 Ibid., p. 128. 

26 

Report of the Proceedings and Addresses of the Ukrai ¬ 
nian Teachers’ Convention at Mundare, Alberta, November 16, 1940 * 
Mundare: Basilian Fathers, 1940. 

27 

Organized by the writer in 1953* 







' ; '■ . • ' ' • ? 

: .ii V-'- - c ' '■ ’ " 

- :X , 1 ■ " ' x * ' 


# 





; 


< 




, 











» 






1 '.i. 


■ : 





■ 

. . 
















* 

• .. 1 . s''' 


: <" ■ « - 



. 1 



■ 

t 

’ 

. - 


. t • 

' 

V ' . , c. ■.< :.. .■ 








128 


children’s handicrafts: leather, copper and iron, woodwork, 
carving, sewing, and other school works, including a press dis¬ 
play. At an evening concert presented by the teachers and their 
pupils from various points in Alberta, such as Vegreville, Mundare, 
Radway, Lamont, Andrew, Chipman, Smoky Lake, Vilna, Holden, and 
Edmonton, tumbling displays, folk dancing, choirs, choral work, 
rhythm bands, etc., were featured. Dr. J. W. Gillies, of the 
Faculty of Education of the University of Alberta, Harry Kostash, 
Superintendent of Schools of the Smoky Lake Division, and Dr. N. 
Strilchuk of Mundare, Alberta, were introduced as guest speakers. 

The Work of the Ukrainian Teachers 

It has been mentioned that many of the early Ukrainian 
teachers were of the permit category, but this does not exclude 
the fact that some of them had completed higher studies in 
Ukraine. A few of the part time Ukrainian teachers were students 
attending Canadian universities. In Saskatchewan, where such a 
teacher was not fully qualified by the Department of Education, 
he was tolerated and encouraged to continue his studies for 
certification. 0 Some of these teachers, having arrived from 
Eastern Europe, could speak English, Polish, Ukrainian, German or 
other languages and were able to find schools where the district 
was populated with a mixture of European newcomers. 7 

28 

J. Stechishin, op. cit. , p. 35. 

29 

W. Chumer, op. cit ., pp. 76 , 77. 







c 




i 




c 








< 






■ 







Or 




< 


t 








< ° . 


c 






129 


The children of the Ukrainian pioneers showed promise 
in^pite of their language handicap, and when teachers were avail¬ 
able, they made the most of their educational opportunities. In 
his report of 1909, Inspector Ball of Saskatchewan wrote 

There is no type of school which shows so hopeful 
a prospect of ultimate excellence. 

The attendance at the schools in charge of Ruthenian 
teachers shows the largest average percentage of all the 
rural schools in my division.30 

According to John M. MacEachran’s ff History of Education 
in Alberta", Ukrainian children were unusually obedient, and 
teachers found it a pleasure to teach them. If they were not 
too quick at sport or play in the pioneer days it was possibly 
a reflection of the serious side of their lives at home where 
parents were hard at work from day break until late in the evening 
in their attempts to master the unbroken country which was now 
their home. The children performed long arduous chores at home 
before they went to school, and they were expected to do many 
hours of physical work after they got home. A report of an 
Alberta school inspector in 1907 states: 

The work done in the schools in the Ruthenian dis¬ 
tricts is very encouraging and should be a source of con¬ 
siderable gratification to the Department of Education. 

There were nine schools in operation in this inspectorate 
this year where none but Galician, Bukowinan, or Ruthenian 
children attended, and six more that had a large percentage 
of these foreign children. In all of them, the pupils 
were attentive and interested and were making rapid pro¬ 
gress in their studies. This was particularly noticeable 


30 

Walter G. Murray, "History of Education in Saskatchewan" 
Canada and Its Provinces, Vol. 20, 1. 4&0. Edited by Adam Shortt 
and Arthur G. Doughty. Toronto: Glasgow, Brook and Company, 1914* 








e 

1 

• < 












. 


f 




5 






. 


- 




















« 


. 




• ■ t • t . . - . 

t . « • 




130 


in their number work, which they seem to grasp 
more readily than the average Canadian or American 
child* Another feature of the work which makes it very 
pleasant for the teacher is the ease in maintaining the 
discipline of the school. These children apparently 
never think of disobeying anything the teacher tells 
them. They seldom play in school or out, and in fact 
the teachers who are interested in their development 
teach them games and how to play them, during play 
hours.3 1 


Many of the Ukrainian teachers came from humble homes 
in Europe. They understood that most of the Ukrainian settlers 
came to Canada because of adverse economic conditions in the 
Ukraine. It was perhaps easier for them to put up with the 
hardships of living amongst a poor and struggling people. When 
teachers were scarce it was usually the schools of the Ukrainian 
districts which suffered first. 

About twenty-five schools were in operation for the 
entire year. Several districts proposed opening school 
in March but were unable to secure teachers until May 
or June. The majority of schools remaining closed the 
whole year were in the Ruthenian and Galician settlements.-^ 

Where the Ukrainian teachers did not use or teach the 
Ukrainian language during school hours, many of them gave time 
to the teaching of Ukrainian to the children after school hours. 
This was especially true in Alberta and Saskatchewan which had 
no provision for a bi-lingual system. They were fond of presenting 
concerts, and often such enterprises were offered at Christmas, 
on the occasion of a church dignitary 1 s visit, or in honour of 


31 

John M. MacEachran,"History of Education in Alberta”, 
Canada and its Provinces , Vol. 20, pp. 4&S-4&9. Edited by Adam 
Shortt and Arthur G. Doughty. Toronto: Glasgow, Brook and Company, 1914 

3 2 H. R. Parker, Seventh Annual Report of the Department 
of Education of the Province of Alberta, 1912 , p. 31* Edmonton: 

J. W. Jeffery, Government Printer, 1913* 






* 

. 

t 

. . 

« 

- 

* 


- '■ 

: ■ t; ri'/.o • t C 

. ' T '• 







» 




- 

; 


■ 




■ 


•;. 


........ ■••■■■> 

: e 






131 


the poet of. Ukraine, Taras Shevchenko. 

As the Ukrainian children became more familiar with 
the English language progress in the schools became more discer¬ 
nible. 


About half the schools in this inspectorate are 
purely Ruthenian schools and in a number of others the 

Ruthenian element predominates.In some of the 

Ruthenian schools the progress is quite surprising.... 

At the beginning of the year there were in this 
inspectorate 135 rural and village districts.33 

The chore of teaching new Canadian children the English 
language in addition to all the other subjects of the curriculum 
must have been a formidable one. There were many sincere and 
devoted teachers who used all the skill and ingenuity at their 
command and produced good results. A few had less success, 
possibly because of difficulties for which they had not been 
prepared. 


Teachers who have received their professional 
training in the eastern provinces of Canada and have 
at least a few years T experience there, find it diffi¬ 
cult, apparently, to adapt themselves to western con¬ 
ditions. The effort required for a careful reading of 
and for a practical working knowledge of the Alberta 
curriculum appears to be too strenuous for them. There 
is a tendency prevalent among eastern teachers of more 
or less experience to rest upon their laurels won in the 
east, and to reap in the west, where salaries are good 
and vacancies are many, the harvest of their previous 
hard and laborious efforts where conditions were not 
so pleasant....34 


33 

J. C. Butchart, Sixth Annual Report of the Depart ¬ 
ment of Education of the Province of Alberta, 1911 . p. 57. 
Edmonton: J. A. Richards, Government Printer, 1912. 

34 

F. L. Aylesworthy, Ibid ., p. 62. 









t 


. 


. - 











. 




■ 












. 







i 

< - 


? ■ ' 

* * * ' : ■ 

a « » ® ' 


t 





■ 










132 


.If the early Ukrainian teachers were drawn into 
conflict with the politics, policies, and statements of the 
Canadian press of the time, it was a natural and instinctive 
urge to defend what they considered their inalienable rights. 

One cannot readily blame them for resenting such statements as: 

Y/hoever does not like school conducted in the 
English language may pack his bags and return to the 
place he came from35 

or 

Political recalcitrancy will be treated with 
increasing doses of the English language.3° 

These first Ukrainian teachers were the roots of the future 
Ukrainian intelligentsia. The Ukrainian press reminded them 
that they were the representatives of the Ukrainian Canadian 
public, and that theirs was a dedicated task. 37 The humble 
beginnings of educational growth in the Ukrainians could hardly 
foresee that in 195$, less than fifty years later, there would be 
about 2000 Ukrainian students attending Canadian universities.*^ 


News Item in the Winnipeg Free Press , (July 29, 1914) 
as found in J. Stechishin, op. cit ., p. 36 

36 

Archives of Father J. Jean, O.S.B.M., The School 
Question , p. 36. Mundare, Alberta. 

37 

0. Zerebko, ’’Ukrayinski Uchetelski Seminariyi v 
Kanadi” (The Ukrainian Teachers’ Seminaries in Canada) Illustro - 
vany Narodny Kalendar Tovaristva Prosvity (The Illustrated 

People’s Calendar-Almanac of the Enlightenment Society) , "p. 162. 

Lviw: Prosvita Society, 1914. 

od- 

p Dr. W. Kysylewsky, ff U Kanadayskykh Universytetakh ye 
Kolo Dvi Tysiachi Ukrayinskykh Studentiw” (About Two Thousand 
Ukrainian Students in the Canadian Universities), News Item in 
the Ukrayinski Visty (Ukrainian News ), 31 (June 9, 195&), 2, 4. 















c 


c 










: 


! 


. 


■. (i 


c 




• ■ . 

' 

' ' ' '• , ; i ) . . X. j .£ 

■ ,7 ■ ' < 

- 


c 


r rr/j . e 













. * C 



















? ■ 
















133 


Ukrainian School Names 

After the Ukrainian settlers established their homes 

in the West, towns began to spring up on newly developed sites 

which were given Ukrainian names* There are very many of these 

Ukrainian place names dotting the maps of the prairie provinces* 

In the same way, as schools began to be organized throughout the 

Ukrainian districts, the early settlers, when permitted, began 

to name them after places, territories, rivers, or historical 

figures of the Ukraine* Of the four hundred or so Ukrainian 

schools in Western Canada, a large number received Ukrainian 

names. It was natural for the Ukrainians to feel resentful when 

names like Moscow, south of Mundare, Alberta, and Togo in honor 

of the Japanese admiral of the First World War were given to 

39 

schools in their districts. 7 Most Ukrainians have always consi¬ 
dered Russia a traditional enemy, and the name Togo was of no 
significance to them. 

As early as 1910, J. Badersky, school organizer for 
Manitoba, reported that of eighty-two schools in Manitoba, thirty- 
three had Ukrainian names.^ The following samples are some of 
the Ukrainian school names as found in Alberta. Listed too are 

39 

Interview between the writer and Peter Svarich of 
Vegreville, Alberta, at Vegreville, March 25, 1957* 

40 

Dr. B. Kazymyra, Monsignor Adelard Langevin and 
Ukrainian Canadians , p. 30. Library of Catholic Action. No. 7. 
Edmonton, Alberta, 1932. 









V ' • :: ' ■ 




: : 














< 










i; 




C 


< 





134 


some of the Ukrainian school names of Manitoba.^ Many addi¬ 
tional ones can be found in Saskatchewan, Alberta, and Manitoba, 
and some are common to each of the three provinces. 

Schools named after Ukrainian place names : Bachman,* Bendery, 
Borschiw, Brody, Buchach, Bukowina, Chernowci, Halich, Jaroslaw, 
Kalush, Kiev, Kolomea,* Komarno, Koroliwka, Kossiw, Krasne, 
Krasnohora, Layniuk, Lemberg, Leszniw, Lukiwci, Lviw,* Oleskow, 
Melnycia, Peremysl, Radymno, Shypyntsi, Skala, Sniatyn, Stanislaw, 
Stry, Stubno, Tarnopil, Terebovlia, Trembowla, Zaporoze, Zawale. 
Schools named after Ukrainian historical names : Franko, Mazeppa, 
Shevchenko, Sich,* Shyptytsky, Taras, Vladimir.* 

Schools named after Ukrainian territories : Bukowina,* Galicia, 
Podilia,* Ruthenia, Ukraina,* Volynia. 

Schools named after Ukrainian rivers : Dniester,* Pruth, Toporetz, 
Zbrucho 

Others : Ardan, Boriwci, Chernova, Chornik, Dilo, Horod, Hranko, 
Miroslowna, Molodia, Myroslaw, Nizir, Paraskevia, Pobida, Prosvita, 
Rannock, Rosa, Ruryk, Slawa, Swit, Swoboda, Volia, Zamok, Zhoda, 
Zophia, Zora<> 

With the coming of the larger consolidated school, the 
larger school divisions, and the rural bus circuits, the small 
one-room and two-room schools have virtually disappeared. With 
them have disappeared many of the schools bearing Ukrainian 
names. Today, only the fact that such schools did exist is of 


*The name has been given to a school in two or more 

provinces. 









t 
















5 


c 




c 




c 


c 



' c 


< ' ; 


c ’ t 






c 


c t 












< « 


<: 


c 






:om *xo ow j.ci xoo; 


. . -■ ■ .•.: - : - \.sv:> < . 

\ ... , . J'J 

. '; ! 




135 


historical significance. Although the Ukrainian school names 
are disappearing, the fact remains that in the school divisions 
of today, where the population is predominantly Ukrainian most 
of the teachers are of Ukrainian descent. In the Lamont School 
Division of Alberta, eighty per cent and often more of the 
teachers are Ukrainian. In the Smoky Lake Division, the number 
of Ukrainian teachers often exceeds ninety per cent of the total 
number.^ 2 


Conclusion 

After the Ukrainian settlers had established an economic 
foothold on their new lands, schools began to be organized in 
the newly developed areas with surprising rapidity. The in¬ 
creasing number of Ukrainian schools, the shortage of teachers, 
and the fact that the one-language English teacher was not anxious 
to go into the Ukrainian districts prepared the way for a growing 
demand for the Ukrainian teacher. During the year 1912, 453 
teachers from the other provinces of Canada came to Alberta and 
were granted standing*^ In the same year, 147 teachers from 
Scotland, Ireland, England, and Wales were granted standing upon 
their arrival in Alberta.^ This large influx of 600 teachers 

42 

Interview between the writer and H. Kostash, Super¬ 
intendent of Schools, Smoky Lake Division, Alberta, at Smoky Lake, 
December 24, 1957* 

10 

^D. S. Mackenzie, Deputy Minister of Education, Seventh 
Annual Report of the Department of Education of the Province of 

Alberta, 1912, p. 13• Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, Government Printer, 

1913. 











V. V ' 


' < 

* 

• : • ' \ t 

' n^c’r'.':o n 

. .7:; : v . ' \ < ■ v. - 


- 

{ 



■ 


■ > n 




* 


■ 



• '■ : f: J. 7 , ' ■ 1 0: . 


. 


! ; - ■ 1 1 V C/I 

• c 


' 

f ■ ' < ■ '■ : 


. 

< ■ 0 ' 

r < 

7 . 7) - i ' i • ‘ j ' 

. . c > ‘ ' ' 


< • 

. : . C . . 




136 


from outside Alberta in the one year suggests educational 
instability in the province at the time. 

One can imagine the difficulty the new teacher from 
Wales or Scotland would have teaching in a Ukrainian district 
for the first time. He would be required to adjust to a new 
territory and to a new people. 

The wisdom of placing such new teachers amongst the 
Ukrainian settlers, representing as they did two vastly different 
cultures, is a debatable point. There is no doubt but that many 
of these imported teachers were sincere, honest, and competent 
workers. On the other hand, the reports of the Department of 
Education through the years indicate that two or more teachers 
would pass through a given school in the course of a year. In 
some districts where teacher changes were frequent, the Ukrainian 
people regarded such migrating teachers as 1 adventurers’ or 
’lumberjacks’, and felt that the taxes they paid for the education 
of their children were being wasted.^ In the Ukrainian districts 
the demand for Ukrainian teachers exceeded the supply, and their 
schools were the first to be vacant when teaching shortages 
became acute. When it is considered that the Ukrainians were 
interested in, and concerned with education, even in pioneering 
times, it might have been a wiser policy to have made more pro¬ 
vision for the special training of Ukrainian teachers. It is 
possible that the well qualified Ukrainian teacher would have 

Chumer, op. cit ., p. 71. 








* 

' 

. 

I ■ 

« < 

c 

t 

e 

■ «' ' V. : ' 

. 

ri^h: " $ • O ^-V v?. : 

' 

t c 

■: . ; ■ ' ' • < ' ' 

* 

_ 








137 


been more compatible with the needs of school children in the 
Ukrainian settlements. 

Sometimes the impression is left that the early Ukrai¬ 
nian teachers were interested only in the Ukrainian language. 

This is definitely not so. Although they were willing to use the 
Ukrainian language in their explanations to the children and to 
teach the language after school hours, they understood the value 
and importance of a mastery of the English tongue. The Ukrainian 
teachers made efforts to improve themselves in this respect as 
well as the children. They felt that they were Ukrainian 
Canadians and that it was their duty to help the Ukrainian people 
and their children adjust themselves to the Canadian way of life 
by using the quickest possible methods. This point of view, 
which was prevalent amongst many of the Ukrainian teachers is 
reflected in the following inspector’s report of 1910 from 
Saskatchewan. 

Excellent results appeared in one school, Ukraina, 
after two summers’ work; and the Euthenian teacher in 
charge, an exceptionally bright student, positively 
affirmed that he would not return to the school for 
another year on the ground that his pupils were ready for 
a skilful English-speaking teacher. His idea was that 
the Ruthenian pupils should acquire the Canadian outlook 
lander the same sort of stimulus he was himself receiving 
as a student of the university. The spirit and desire 
of the Ruthenian people, as I know them, is indicated in 
this determination. They are anxious for an English 
education, but they feel, not without reason, that the 
first steps towards this should be taken under the gui¬ 
dance of men who understand their children and sympathize 
with their difficulties. That these people, good agri¬ 
culturists undoubtedly, and as far as their intellectual 










\r Ct 






X . . "1 








< 








* 































■ . 

.. 1 . 







: 

c 



c ■ • 















\ 



















z ' 









■v,' 

i 










j \ / 


















' 












» 




- 
















Irior ’0 'VX 





■ 
































: 



Q 





( 

< ■ 


. 


U 












* 








c 






: c 




< 

: 

























• 



.. ' 


W: 7.0 

: £ 





< 






X 











. 




5 


;■ ■ 'i J.i 

O' . X‘L "J x>i 0 





13d 


advancement admits, good citizens, are willing to 
maintain the excellent schools so far organized, is 
a fact full of possibilities of future progress.^ 

The appearance of the Ukrainian teachers in the times 
of the Ukrainian settlers arose from an inherent need on the part 
of the settlers themselves and a spirit of dedication on the part 
of the young Ukrainian students who entered the training schools, 
such as were prepared for them by the various prairie govern¬ 
ments, These Ukrainian teachers, possessing the same cultural 
and religious background as the Ukrainian settler faced with 
the grim reality of existence in the unopened West, were consi¬ 
dered by the Ukrainians to be the solution to their educational 
problems. In the Alberta elections of 1913, it was alleged that 
the Ukrainian teachers were the political leaders behind the 
Ukrainian people who nominated independent Ukrainian candidates 
for the electoral race in several Ukrainian districts. The 
suggestion that the Liberal government which was returned to power 
in 1913 met the Ukrainian teachers with reprisals is open to 
question and further study. In spite of political difficulties 
in Alberta and Manitoba, the Ukrainian teachers played an impor¬ 
tant role in education during the early settling of the West. 


46 

Walter C. Murray, T, History of Education in Saskatche¬ 
wan”, Canada and its Provinces , Vol. 20, pp. 460-461, Edited by 
Adam Shortt and Arthur G. Doughty, Toronto: Glasgow, Brook and 
Company, 1914* 





t . . 

• _ c ■ , ; ; •</. OJ ;j‘.00i :..i oi V., W‘:; ■ 

■ „ • ■ V. V: : - 

: •; ' ' '-■o - 'i 
















t - ■ 




* 









' 


i 

c 









: 









: < 

.1; . ' : • 

■. ■/ - • 

. 

t ■ 

, . ' 


U.A 

■. ; 


. •• * < 0 < . C 

C • o' 


* 











CHAPTER IX 


SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 

The foregoing pages have dealt with the historical 
aspects of the educational problems of the Ukrainian settlers 
in Western Canada• These problems have been introduced by a 
brief survey of the historical factors responsible for the 
Ukrainian immigration to Canada. It has been shown that the 
mass migration which was heralded by the arrival of Wasyl Eleniak 
and Ivan Pillipiw in Canada was effected chiefly through the 
circumstances of economic necessity as experienced by the Ukrai¬ 
nian people in Ukraine. Essentially an agricultural people, 
they were prompted to emigrate from the Ukraine by their desire 
for more land. The tiny holdings they possessed were unable to 
furnish them with the necessities demanded by their expanding 
families. In Canada, they found the land which served to satisfy 
their innate desire to till the soil. 

Their arrival in Canada was wrought with difficulties. 
The vast majority of the Ukrainians were of humble peasant stock. 
They were the children of serfs who had finally won their emanci¬ 
pation as late as 1S4&® Injspite of their humility, poverty, and 
illiteracy, for educational opportunities for this type of 
people in the Ukraine were few, they were intensely conscious of 
their national identity, proud of their country 1 s glorious 
history, and imbued with a deep sense of tradition and religious 




' : ' . ; , 


: ' ' 

" 1 : ’ w ’ 

. 

' 




a 

- 

. 

■ 






■ o J: i'.U 


; : • '• '■ c 

• '■ t 

1 ' ' ‘ < ■ '• ' • 1 ' ' 

: ' : t 


140 


faith. Inured to poverty and hardship at home, an aftermath 
of the centuries of subjugation of the Ukraine by foreign 
powers, they did not foresee the tremendous suffering they were 
to undergo in their chosen homeland. 

They bent their backs to a literally Herculean task 
of hewing out forests and breaking of virgin land. Their 
efforts found success where others had failed and given up 
hope. Their first years were essentially a struggle for exis¬ 
tence and a self-preservation from the ravages of the elements. 

At this time there was no thought of education in the formal 
sense. But gradually, they were able to look about themselves 
and plan for their children’s future. 

A large part of the Canadian people looked upon the 
new strangers with suspicion and a degree of contempt. The 
Canadians could not understand these new people who spoke a 
strange language, lived in poverty, gregariously sought out each 
other for companionship, and observed their religious customs 
and traditions with ritualistic care. These Ukrainians were 
labelled Galicians, Bukowinians, Ruthenians, Rusyns, Russky, 
Russians, Austrians, and Poles indiscriminately by their Canadian 
neighbors. In fact, even at this late date many Canadians are 
still misinformed about the subject. Undoubtedly, the inferior 
social position the Ukrainians were forced to assume during their 
early years in Canada has been reflected in the occasional case 
of the third and fourth-generation Ukrainian Canadian of today 












' . '■ - - .7: ■ ■ ■' j: ■ t '■ 

„ 

. 




■ 






t • ' ' • ' 

* 































t , < '-.f" : ' ■ ■ « • ' 1 

c < 

t ' 

, • ' - 




" 







141 


who may seek to hide his ethnic background by legally accepting 
a new name and ignoring any knowledge whatsoever of the Ukrainian 
language. 

The majority of the early Ukrainian immigrants came 
from the province of Galicia in Western Ukraine, which was almost 
entirely a Catholic province. There was a relatively smaller 
number of Ukrainians who came from the province of Bukowina or 
other districts of Ukraine. The first to attend to the spiritual 
wants of the Ukrainian Catholic settlers were the French Cana¬ 
dian missionaries. They, too, were the first to be concerned 
with their educational needs. In this regard their contribution 
was not only spiritual but material for they gave concrete help 
in the acquiring of land, and in the building and establishing 
of schools for Ukrainian children. Today, the Ukrainians are 
grateful to the French Canadian missionaries for their material 
help and moral encouragement during the pioneer beginnings. 

With the arrival of the Basilian Fathers and Sisters 
Servants of Mary Immaculate in 1902, the Ukrainians experienced 
a spiritual revival and found a solution to their immediate 
educational needs. A school was founded at Beaver Lake (Mundare) 
by the Basilian Fathers where the Ukrainian Sisters taught the 
children their catechism, the Ukrainian, and the English 
language. Similar schools were established in Edmonton, Winnipeg, 
and later at Yorkton. 

As the flow of Ukrainian immigration increased schools 


, - -..o •; ; v.; : 1. v.‘ ;rO. i ax - ■ | 

* 


'i, x.iu ' 

\oj: » 


fi; x;j; oJ:.C;;•. I) 'x o ■ oi : i J:yo*io <> ■ iu lao'I i 


* 

■ 

/ ■ . ■ • 

■ 

t < 

• .. . 


• ? * 

a 

< . 

* 

' 

. < i. ■ ; ; r ■ • : ■■ 

• : . .. . • • ' 

. 



: 


142 


began to be organized in districts which were predominantly 
populated by Ukrainians• By the end of the First World War, 
there were hundreds of these "Ukrainian school districts 11 
scattered throughout the prairie provinces,. The English speaking 
school teachers who were assigned to teach in school districts 
which were almost entirely inhabited by Ukrainian people experi¬ 
enced many difficulties, because of the language barrier and 
because they were unable to understand the mentality and the 
historical background of these new Canadians. As a consequence, 
there was a great loss and wastage of time and effort, and the 
first educational gains were much less than were expected. 

After the Ukrainians had won their first foothold in 
their newly adopted country, they began to appreciate their 
educational needs and problems more fully. They were anxious 
to have their children become proficient in the English language 
as a means for future success in the many fields of venture which 
were open to them. But they were convinced that the best means 
to the solution of their problems was the training of Ukrainian 
bi-lingual teachers who would be best qualified to meet the needs 
and difficulties found in the teaching of Ukrainian school 
children. 

The Conservative Government of the province of Manitoba 
was the first to respond to the Ukrainian appeal for Ukrainian- 
English speaking school teachers. An exemplary training school 
was founded first in Winnipeg in 1904 and transferred to Brandon 


■ 

■ 

* 

; 


« .. : . • 

' 

. 

a 

• : : ■ < ; ■ ■ . '• ' ■ 


■. • • 

« 

•. { . ■. ... ■ 

" 

:: • . Yi.;'. - V.'Y ■ . ' ! ! i ' ■ 1 

■ 

■ ■ i nx • i ■. 



143 


in 190S. .These schools provided scores of well qualified 
teachers to work amongst the Ukrainians. Many of these young 
men were university students who eventually carved out success¬ 
ful careers for themselves and are recognized today as some of 
Canada 1 s leading citizens. Others continued their studies at 
the universities and are represented fully in all the professions. 
Later, similar training schools were established at Regina and 
Vegreville. All of these made definite contributions towards 
the education of Ukrainian youth, but none had the success of 
the Brandon school. 

When bi-lingualism was formally abolished in Manitoba 
in 1916, the last of the prairie provinces to do so, the Ukrai¬ 
nians established f bursas’ or hostels for university students 
in every major centre where the students were enabled to study 
the Ukrainian language, history, and literature, and were taught 
the principles of their faith. 

In Alberta, the early Ukrainian teachers who had re¬ 
ceived teaching qualifications from the province of Manitoba ran 
into difficulty with the Alberta Department of Education. In 
1913 > the Ukrainian teachers did not meet the standards for 
qualification set up in Alberta and were required to leave their 
schoolse In^pite of the difficulties and misunderstandings 
which follwed, the Ukrainian teachers have left a record of 
enterprise and achievement. Since the first Ukrainian student 
graduated from a Normal School in Alberta in 1916, many hundreds 




. .... . : V. - •' • 

, 

;r ' . , . , •/. ' 

* 

; . > •: " • * ’J . . .'j; I 




£ 

. 






: ,• . • •‘ r 


1 . t 

■ 1 T 

. 

, • : • < •- < 

0 








■ 

: | ' . ' . . . . ■ 

a • : 

■ 

•n . ■ ■ ’ : 

i. ■ *•< ' // <t 

. . "i " • ■ 




loojii 


1 




144 


of students of Ukrainian origin have received teaching quali¬ 
fication in Alberta. About eighty or ninety per cent of the 
teachers in at least two school divisions of Alberta, namely, 
the Lamont School Division and the Smoky Lake School Division, 
are of Ukrainian origin. Large numbers of Ukrainian Canadian 
teachers can be found in other Alberta School Divisions today. 

An indication of the educational progess of Ukrainian 
Canadians through the decades in terms of years of education, 
level of grades reached, provision for high school facilities, 
and numbers of Ukrainian Canadian teachers for the various pro¬ 
vinces is a subject for further intensive research. Since the 
early days, the Ukrainian educational scene in the prairie pro¬ 
vinces has changed considerably. Now, hundreds of Ukrainian 
Canadian teachers are graduating annually from the Canadian 
universities, and Ukrainian Canadian students are found in every 
faculty of every university. There is no doubt, but that today 
in Western Canada they are, in proportion to their numbers, 
taking great advantage of the educational opportunities offered 
to them. They have established their colleges, hostels, high 
schools, academies, private schools, and seminaries. They are 
found on the teaching staff of almost every Canadian university. 
Today, many universities have established Departments of Slav 
Studies. Many university libraries are interested in and beginning 
to develop library divisions of Slav studies and associated prob¬ 
lems. Young university graduates are developing an enthusiasm 


.. I U • i '■■■ ' 

■ v. j v.ct i 


- 


■ ih ‘ ' 






' 




: • ; 


■ 


„' ; ' . • 










' ' • t 

.... . r; I < } i'-'/'j J I'd XO iVi.AiUJSi 

* 




• .. ■ : : c ■' 

■ 











* 


t ‘ : sV\; 

< < ■ 



* 

, 

" 1 ' ' ' ' ■ ' ■ ' ‘ ■ ’ ■ 


» 






145 


for study in this relatively unopened field of research. In 
particular, the Ukrainian Canadian aspect is almost virgin 
territory. 

Today, the Ukrainians are struggling for recognition 
of the Ukrainian language as a high school subject and as a course 
of instruction in the universities. Now they have met with suc¬ 
cess in the Saskatchewan high schools where Ukrainian is offered 
as an optional subject and in the universities of Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan where the Ukrainian language is being offered on 
the courses of study. In August, 1953, Education Minister Anders 
Aalborg announced that Ukrainian language instruction will be 
offered in Alberta high schools starting in the fall of 1959. 

Many Ukrainian Canadian 5 of Alberta hope that the Ukrainian 
language will become a credit course of instruction at the 
University of Alberta in the near future. 

The relatively few Anglo-Saxon interpreters of the 
educational problems of Ukrainian Canadians such as J. T. M. 
Anderson, Education of the New Canadians , and C. H. Young, The 
Ukrainian Canadians , seem to suggest that the best means of 
solving the early educational difficulties of the newly arrived 
Ukrainians was a rapid conformity to public school law. In this 
respect, according to C. H. Young: 

Alberta fared better than the other two Western 
provinces because she had a compulsory school attendance 
law, discouraged bi-lingual schools in the province, and 
from the first she arranged for the suspension of the 
powers of the local Ukrainian trustees, thereby taking 
the direction and the supervision of the schools out of 
the hands of the Ukrainians until such time as they be¬ 
came competent to manage the task. 






, 

c' 


< . 

a 

? < . 

■ 

. 






C . c t 

* 


a .■ ': ' • : '• ■ 




< ; 

. 

e : .v c i ' i: ■ 'i '• ? 

? : . w -i " ‘i . : 1 C ■ : 1 

, •, : v.: : ; ; ^ ' ju: ' .. 

, 






146 


The chapters of this work on the Ukrainian language 
and the Ukrainian teachers hint at the possibility that another 
and perhaps wiser course could have been followed by the Alberta 
educational administration in their dealings with a new people, 
proud of their racial origin and yet subservient to the circum¬ 
stances of a new environment and language. The Ukrainians did 
not arrive from a mother-country ruling over an empire of world- 
scattered dominions, but were part of a nation which had been 
subjugated for centuries. In this new world, which was free 
and full of opportunity, they longed for the independence which 
had been denied them at home. Their immediate entry into the 
life of other pioneering communities was delayed by the barriers 
of language, old world traditions strange to their Canadian neigh¬ 
bors, and at first extreme poverty. The problems of the early 
Ukrainian settlers and their schools, particularly in Alberta, 
have only been highlighted in this work and are worthy of further 
research. 

The Ukrainian Teachers’ Conventions which began to 
take active organizational form in Alberta in the early twenties 
is another field for research. The reports, problems, programs, 
conventions of nearly eighty Alberta schools in Ukrainian districts 
are available to the student of research anxious to follow up the 
present work. The Ukrainian English Teachers Organization of 
Canada which was founded at the time of the first training schools 
in Manitoba is another open field for study. 












. 

' 

t 

« 

( 






’ 




■ 






j; 

t 


* 




< 


» 











f 



t ^ 









• 


t A 

* 

; ' :j 

. 


/. 




147 


.The historical report of the Ukrainian settlers and 
their schools as presented in the chapters of this study does 
not pretend to cover all aspects and phases of the school prob¬ 
lems and progress of the Ukrainian settlers. The purpose here 
is to give a unified picture of the many patterns of the early 
Ukrainian Canadian educational development to serve as an impetus 
and guide for further investigation in almost unknown territory. 
In the province of Alberta, where hundreds of teachers and 
students are of Ukrainian origin, continued research in the 
areas suggested should reveal the interreaction of challenging 
principles of equality, liberty, and justice. 

The educational history of the Ukrainians in Canada 
barely covers a span of sixty years. Most of it lies recorded 
in the pages of old Ukrainian newspapers and calendar-almanacs, 
many of which are no longer existent, but even today much of 
this material is still available. The energetic student of 
research will find that these faded pages will reveal a pro¬ 
gressive record of educational enterprise and achievement. 















\ 


. 







< c 

. 

; 

* 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 






149 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

BOOKS 


Balch,Emily Greene, Our Slavic Fellow Citizens * New York: 
Charities Publishing Company, 1910. 

Bozyk, P., Tserkov Ukrayintsiw v Kanadi ( The Church of t he 
Ukrainians in Canada ). Winnipeg: Canadian Ukrainian, 1927* 

Pp. 336. 

Chumer, W. A., Spomyny pro Perezhyvannya Pershykh Ukrayin - 
skykh Pereselentsiv v Kanadi t 1891-1941 ( Memoirs of the Experi - 
ences of the First Ukrainian Settlers in Canada, 1591-1941) * 

Edmonton: the Author, 1942. Pp. 190. 

Frank©, Dr. Ivan, Panschyna ta yiyi Skasovanie 1&4& r. v 
Halychyni ( Serfdom and its Abolition in 1^4^ in Galicia ). Second 
Revised Edition. Lwiw: Ukrainsko-Ruskoi Vydawnychoi Spilky, 

1913. Pp. 24^. 

Halich, W., Ukrainians in the United States . Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1937. 

Kiriak, Elias, Syny Zemli ( Sons of the Soil) , Vol. 1. 
Edmonton: Author, 1939. Pp. 396. 

Navrotsky, William, Pianstvo i Propinatia na Halychyni 
(Drunkenness and Propination in Galicia), Vol. 5. Geneva: Hromada, 


Sichynsky, Volodymyr, Ukraine in Foreign Comments and Des ¬ 
criptions from the Vlth to XXth Century . New York: Published by 
the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, Inc., 1933® Pp. 236. 

Young, C. H., The Ukrainian Canadians . Toronto: Thomas Nelson 
and Sons, Ltd., 1931. Pp xiv and 327. 

Yuzyk, Paul, The U krainians in Manito ba. Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press, 1953. Pp° xv and 232. 























c 


c 



c < 

c 




150 


ENCYCLOPEDIAS 


Polonska - Wasylenko, N., ”Kniaza Doba tf , Encyclopedia of 
Ukraine in two volumes, Vol. I. Edited by Volodymyr Kubijovyc 
and Zenon Kuzela. Munich-New York: Shevchenko Scientific Society, 
Inc., 1949. 

MacEachran, John M. "History of Education in Alberta”, 

Canada and its Provinces , Vol. XX. Edited by Adam Shortt and 
Arthur G. Doughty. Toronto: Glasgow, Brook, and Company, Ltd., 
1914. 


Murray, Walter C., "History of Education in Saskatchewan”, 
Canada and its Provinces , Vol. XX. Edited by Adam Shortt and 
Arthur G. Doughty. Toronto: Glasgow, Brook, and Company, Ltd., 
1914. 


UKRAINIAN CALENDAR - ALMANACS 


Illustrovany Kalendar Kanadiyskoho Rusyna ( Illustrated 
Calendar-Almanac of the Can ad ian Ruthe^aii rrWinnipeg: Canadian 
Ruthenian, 1916. Pp. 2087” 

Illustrovany Kalendar Novyn, 1915 ( Illustrated Calendar - 
Almanac' of the News.) Edmonton: TheNews 1915. Pp. 121. 

Illustrovany Kalendar Ukrayinskykh Vistey ( Illustrated 
Calendar^Almanac of the Ukrainian Ne ws!. Edmonton: Ukrainian 
News, 1935. Pp. iSol 

Illustrovany Narodny Kalendar Tovaristva Prosvity ( The 
Illustrated People y s Calendar-Almanac of the Enlightenment 

Society). Lwiw: Prosvita Society. 1914. Pp. 232. 

Kalendar Kolos Spasytelia ( Calendar-Almanacof the Voice 
of theT Redeemer ). Yorkton: Redemptorist Fathers, 1952. Pp. 160. 

Kalendar Ukrayinskoho Holosu ( Calendar-Almanac of the Ukrai ¬ 
nian Voice ). Winnipeg: Ukrainian Voice, 1915. Pp. 255. 

Narodny Kalendar Ukrayinska Rodyna ( The People 1 s Calendar - 
Almanac for the Ukrainian Family ). Winnipeg: 1915. 

Providnyk, Kalendar Kanadiyskykh Ukrayintsiw ( The Leader, 
an Illustrated Calendar-Almanac for Canadian Ukrainians ). 
Winnipeg: St. Raphael 1 s Ukrainian Immigrants Welfare Association, 
1931. Pp. 64. 


































< * ■ t 


(. * 




c 





1 


A 



151 


SOUVENIR BOOKS 


Jubilee Memoir 1902-1952 , Commemorating the Fiftieth Anni¬ 
versary of Christ the King Province of the Sisters Servants of 
Mary Immaculate* Toronto: Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 
1952. Pp. 15$. 

Propamyatna Knyha Poselennya Ukrayinskho Narodu v Kana di, 
1891-1941 ( Commemorative Book of the Settlement of the Ukrainian 
People in Canada, 1891-1941 ). Winnipeg: Episcopal Ordinariate 
(Ukrainian Catholic Church), 1941. Pp. 33$. 

Propamyatna Knyha Qtsiw Vassilian u Kanadi, 1902-1952 , 
(Commemorative Book of the Basilian Fathers in Canada, 1902-1952 )• 

Toronto: Basilian Fathers, 1953. Pp. 435* 

Sacred Heart Academy Dedication, May 25. 195$ . Yorkton: 
Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 195$• Pp. 4$. 

Yuvileyny Almanakh Shkoly Sw. o. Nykolaya, 1911-1936 , 

( Jubilee Almanac of St. Nicholas School in Winnipeg, 1911-1936 )♦ 

Winnipeg: Sisters Servants of Mary Immaculate, 1937. Pp. 9$. 

Yuvileyny Kalendar Ukrayinskoi Rodyny, 1941 » ( Jubilee 
Calendar-Almanac of the Ukrainian Family, 1941 ). Mundare, 

Alberta: Basilian Fathers, 1941. Pp. 17o. 

Yuvileyna Knyha Sester Sluzebnets, 1892-1942 ( Jubilee Book 
of the Sisters Servants, 1892-1942 ). Edmonton: Sisters Servants 
of Mary Immaculate, 1942. Pp. 208. 

Yuvileyna Knyha Ukrayinskoho Instytutu im. P. Mohyly v 
Saskatooni. 1916-1941 ( Jubilee Book of the P. Mohyla Ukrainian 
I nstitute in Saskatoon. 1916-1941 ). Saskatoon: P. Mohyla 
Ukrainian Institute, 1945. Pp. 446. 

Yuvileyna Knyha Ukraintsiw Katolykiw Saskatchewany. 1905 - 
1955 ."1 Jubilee Book of the Ukrainian Catholics of Saskatchewan . 
1905-1955) . Saskatoon: Ukrainian Catholic Council of Saskatche¬ 
wan, 1955. Pp. 224. 


































c. 


. c. 



c 






c 




.. , .t.. . 


c 







c 








152 


INTERVIEWS 


Interviews with Sister Athanasia, S.S.M.I., the first 
teacher of St. Nicholas School, Winnipeg, and associated with 
the writer in parish work at St. Josaphat’s Cathedral, Edmonton, 
Alberta, from 1947 to 195#* 

Interview between the writer and Mrs. Carl Chichloski of 
Edmonton, Alberta, who attended the Ukrainian Girls 1 Night School, 
1901, at Edmonton, December 3, 1957- 

Interview between the writer and John E. Basarab, Q.C., of 
Edmonton, Alberta, former teacher at the Ruthenian Training 
School, Brandon, Manitoba, at Edmonton, December 4, 1957* 

Interview between the writer and W. Chumer, of Edmonton, 
Alberta, one of the first Ukrainian school teachers in Canada, 
at Edmonton, June 21, 195$ • 

Interviews between the writer and Peter Svarich, early 
organizer of Ukrainian Schools, Vegreville, Alberta, at Vegreville, 
March 25, 1957, and June 19, 1958. 

Interview betv/een the writer and H. Kostash, Superintendent 
of Schools, Smoky Lake Division, Alberta, at Smoky Lake, 

December 24, 1957. 


LETTERS 


Letter of Archbishop A. Langevin to the Hon. M. Rogers, 
Minister of Public Works, Manitoba, dated February 6, 1905. 
Letter no. 203, P* 593, St. Boniface Archives. 

Letter of Sister Liubow, S.S.M.I., of Calgary, Alberta, to 
Sister Superior, St. Joseph’s Convent, Mundare, Alberta, dated 
December 2, 1957. 

Letter of M. Luchkovich of Edmonton, Alberta, to the Editor 
of Svoboda, New Jersey, N.Y., published on March 17, 1956. 

Letter of I. Pyskor of Winnipeg, to the Basilian Fathers’ 
Monastery in Zolkwa, Western Ukraine. 

Letter of Premier Roblin of Manitoba to Archbishop Langevin, 
no. 193, St. Boniface Archives, dated January 26, 1901* 

Letter of George Skwarok to the Editor of the Kanadiyski 
Rusyn (Canadian Ruthenian), p. 6, November 3, 1913® 






c 


? 




5 

* 



C 


< 


1 




c 






c 



c 


c 


c 



c 




c 


c 


















c 
















153 


REPORTS 

Rapport de la Commission chargde par le Premier 
Concile pl6nier du Canada d’dtudier la question des 
Ruthbnes et de soumettre quelques conclusions, Quebec, 
September 28, 1909* Archives of J. Jean, O.S.B.M., 

Basilian Fathers, Mundare, Alberta. 

Report of the Immigration Commission, Vol. I. Washington, 

1911. 


Report of the Proceedings and Addresses of the Ukrainian 

Teachers* Convention at Mundare, Alberta, November 16, 194~Q « 

Mundare, Alberta: Basilian Fathers, 1940. Pp. 36. 

Reports of the Department of Education of the Province of 
Alberta: 


Sixth Annual Report of the Department of Education of 

the Province of Alberta, 1911 . Edmonton: J. A. Richards, 

Government Printer, 1912. 

Seventh Annual Report of the Department of Education 
of the Province of Alberta, 1912 . Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, 
Government Printer, 1913* 

Eighth Annual Report of the Department of Education of 

the Province of Alberta. 1913. Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, 
Government Printer, 1914. 

Ninth Annual Report of the Department of Education of 

the Province of Alberta. 1914 . Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, 
Government Printer, 1915. 

Tenth Annual Report of the Department of Education o f 
the Province of Alberta, 1915 . Edmonton: J. W. Jeffery, 
Government Printer, 19167 

Skwarok, George, Pershy Richny Zvit, 1917-191&. Bursy 
Metropolita A. Shyptytskoho v St. Boniface ( The First Annual 
Report of the Metropolitan A. Shyptytsky Bursa in St. Boniface , 

1917-191#)• Winnipeg: Metropolitan Bursa, 1918. Pp. 71. 

Young, C. H., The Ukrainian Canadians . Toronto: Thomas 
Nelson and Sons Limited, 1931. Pp. 327: 

Report of inspector at Vegreville. 

Special Report on Bi-Lingual Schools in Manitoba, 
February 1, 1916. 

Origin, Birthplace, etc., Study of 1921 Census. 

























f . 






c 








154 


ARCHIVES 


Archives of the Oblate Fathers, Edmonton, Alberta. 

Basilian Fathers Museum and Archives, Mundare, Alberta. 

Pioneer Days of Our Community , unpublished material pre¬ 
pared for the Saskatchewan Provincial Archives by the high 
school girls of Sacred Heart Academy on the occasion of 
Saskatchewan 1 s Golden Jubilee, 1905 t1955* 

Pomichnyk dlia Malikh Shkoliariw ( An Aid for Young 
Scholar s). A Ukrainian translation^)! the Alexandra Primer 
by Peter Svarich. Vegreville: Translator, 1911* Basilian 
Fathers Library, Mundare, Alberta. Pp. 64* 

The Sifton School . Archives of Father J. Jean, O.S.B.M., 
Mundare, Alberta. 

The School Question , Archives of Father J. Jean, O.S.B.M., 
Mundare, Alberta. 

The School Act, The School Taxes Act, The School Grants 
Act, and School Amendments to 1910.Attendance Act . A translation 
from the English for Ukrainian settlers. Edmonton: J. W. 
Jeffery, Government Printer, 1914* Pp* 95* Archives of Father 
J. Jean, O.S.B.M., Mundare, Alberta. 

The St. Boniface Archives; and the Archives of Father J. 
Jean, O.S.B.M., Mundare, Alberta. 


BRIEFS 


The Alberta Catholic School Trustees* Association, A Brief 
Prepared for Submission to the Royal Commission on Education. 

Edmonton, Alberta: April, 195$. Pp. 14* 

Neil Savaryn, O.S.B.M., Ukrainian Bishop of Edmonton, 

Brief to be Presented to the Royal Commission on Education . 

Edmonton, Alberta: April, 1958. 

Ukrainian Catholic Council of Alberta, Brief to be Presented 
to the Royal Commission on Education . Edmonton, Alberta: April, 

1953: 




















<: . 










t 



x 


< 


0 




< « 9 * • 5 



T 




. 


c 


c • • • • < 









155 


MEMORANDUMS 

Memoire sur la situation des sujets ruthknes de Sa 
Majestd apostolique, l'Empereur d'Autriche, dans 1*Quest 
Canadien. (Amdrique Britannique) by Archbishop A. Langevin, 
July 2, 1904. St. Boniface Archives. 

Archbishop Langevin, Memoire to the Emperor Franz Joseph 
of Austria , St. Boniface, July 2, 1904* St. Boniface Archives. 

Archbishop Langevin, Memorandum to Count Goluchowsk i. 
Austrian Minister of External Affairs. May 2, 16599, St. Boni¬ 
face Archives. 

Father Albert Lacombe, Memorandum to Cardinal Ledochowski . 
Rome: June 1, 1900. St. Boniface Archives. 


PAMPHLETS 

Bala, Rev. J., Kyr Nikita Budka ( The Most Reverend Nikita 
Budka). Winnipeg: Centrality of the Ukrainian Catholics of 
Manitoba, 1952. Pp. 56. 

Jean, Rev. J., O.S.B.M., Moye Sluzinia Ukraini ( For the 
Ukrainian Cause ). Library of Catholic Action, No. 15. Edmonton, 
Alberta, 1953. Pp. 20. 

Jean, Rev. J., O.S.B.M., and Kazymyra, B., Piadesiat Rokiw 
v Kanadi ( Fifty Years in Canada ). Library of Catholic Action, 

No. 12. Edmonton, Alberta, 1952, Pp. 16. 

Jean, Rev. J., O.S.B.M., and Kazymyra, B., Vylyky Metro - 
polit ( The Great Metropolitan ). Library of Catholic Action, 

No. 17. Edmonton, Alberta, 1954. Pp. 31. 

Kazymyra, B., Monsignor Adelard Langevin and the Ukrainian 
Canadians . Library of Catholic Action, No. 7. Edmonton, Alberta, 
1952. Pp. 31. 

Methodius, Brother S., Pochatky i Pratsia Kolegiyi Sw. 

Yosefa v Yorktoni. Saskatchewan, ( The Beginnings and Work of St . 
Joseph y s College in Yorkton, Saskatchewan ). Yorkton: St. Joseph T s 
College, 1951. Pp. S. 

Savaryn, Neil, O.S.B.M., Rolia Otsiv Vasilian u Kanadi ( The 
Role of the Basilian Fathers in Canada ). Educational Letters, 

No. 6 0 Mundare, Alberta: Basilian Fathers, 1933. Pp. 60. 

Stanislaus James, Brother, F.S.C., The History of St . 

Joseph 1 s College (1919-1955 ). Yorkton: St. Joseph 1 s College, 
1955. Pp. 25. 





























156 


UKRAINIAN NEWSPAPERS 


Kanada ( Canada ), Winnipeg, (September 2, 1913)* 


Kanadiysky Farmer (Canadian Farmer), Winnipeg* (May 3 

1912 ). 


> 


Kanadiysky Rusyn (Canadian Ruthenian) Winnipeg, 3 (July 
5, 1913), 6. 

Kanadiysky Rusyn (Canadian Ruthenian), Winnipeg, 3 (November 

5, 19I3TT4. ~“ ~ 

Kanadiysky Rusyn ( Canadian Ruthenian ), Winnipeg, 3 (December 

6, 1913), 1, and 3 (December 13, 1913), 1* 

Kanadiysky Rusyn (Canadian Ruthenian), Winnipeg, (July 11, 
3.917)o “ “ -“ 

Kysylewsky, Dr. W., f, U Kanadiyskykh Universytetakh ye 
Kolo Dvi Tysiachi Ukrayinskykh Studentiw" (About Two Thousand 
Ukrainian Students in the Canadian Universities), Ukrayinsky 
Visty ( The Ukrainian News) , 31 (June 9, 195$), 2 and 4« 

Novy Kray ( The New Country ), Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 
(September 30, 1910). 

Novy Kray ( The New Country ), Rosthern, Saskatchewan, 
(February 10, 1912) 

Novy Kray (The New Country), Rosthern, Saskatchewan, (March 
1, 1912U^ 

Novyny ( The News ), Edmonton, 1 (December 27, 1913), 2. 

Novyny ( The News) , Edmonton, 2 (April 2, 1914), lo 

M. Kinash, "Free Pressi pid Rozwahu" (The Free Press Take 
Note), Kanadiysky Rusyn ( The Canadian Ruthenian ), Winnipeg, 3 
(July 5 , 1913), 6. 

Ukravinsky Visty (The Ukrainian News), Edmonton, 31 (May 
19, 195$ )", 2 and y. 














































157 


THESIS AND DISSERTATION 


Byrne, T. C., The Ukrainian Community in North Central 
Alberta * Unpublished Master’s Thesis, University of Alberta, 
1937. Pp. 100. 

Zmurkevych, S. M. A., The Ukrainian Canadian Poetr y, An 
Attempt to Define the General Idea, Unpublished Doctor’s Thesis, 
University of Ottawa, 1951, Pp. vi and 204. 


ENGLISH NEWSPAPERS 


’’Control of Ruthenian Schools in Alberta Must be Firmly 
Maintained”, Edmonton Bulletin , (August 20, 1913). 

Winnipeg Free Press , (July 29, 1914). 

’’Ruthenian Monastery - Good Work Done Near Mundare”, 
Edmonton Journal . (August 20, 1921). 

’’Ukrainians Urge Bi-Lingual Schools”, Winnipeg Free Pre ss, 
(July 17, 1909). 

Yorkton Enterprise , 63 (May 15, 195$), 9 and 10. 

Yorkton Enterprise , (May 30, 1946), 1$. 

CHRONICLES 


Chronicles of the Basilian Fathers, Mundare, Alberta. 

Volo I. May 12, 1910, July 20, 1910, and August 24, 1911. 

Vol. II. July 15, 1913, August 3, 1913, August 19, 1914. 

Volo I. Clipping, p. 143, December 22, 1919. 

Extracts from the Journal of Monsignor Legal. Archives of 
the Oblate Fathers, Edmonton, Alberta. January 30, 1901 and 
November 5, 1902. 


MEMOIRS 


Eleniak, Wasyl, Memoirs , recorded by the Basilian Father^, 
Mundare, Alberta. September 21-22, 1940. 























c 










c ' t « 


a t 


c 


t 




t 


c 


c 


c 





153 


Hnatiw, Peter, "Rozkaz pro Sebe M (A Memoir), Providnyk , 
Kalendar Kanadiyskykh Ukrayintsiw ( The Leader, an Illustrated 
Calendar-Almanac for Canadian Ukrainians f* Winnipeg: St* 
Raphael 1 s Ukrainian Immigrants Association, 1931* 

Skwarok, George, Life of George Skwaro k, unpublished 
autobiography* 












c • , . <• , 

.. iS , .. r, , . ; ■: 

* : 

. t , ... ' ■ 1 , 


c 








: , ■ . ... ■ 











APPENDIX 


A BRIEF HISTORICAL SURVEY OF UKRAINIAN LITERATURE 


IN CANADA 




A BRIEF HISTORICAL SURVEY OF UKRAINIAN LITERATURE 

IN CANADA 


160 


Definition of the Problem 


According to a leading authority on European-Canadian 
literature, Professor Watson Kirkconnell, 

At least ten thousand Ukrainian poems lie mouldering 

in the back files of the Ukrainian Canadian Press . 

Of the hundred or so Canadians publishing poetry today 
in Ukrainian, the majority turn out the simplest kind 
of ballad measure, with thought and expression ranging 
all the way from flabby doggerel up to genuine human 
power* 

To this poetry should be added also thousands of 
anecdotes, short stories, novels, plays, and works of 
scholarship. In comparison with the Canadian average, 
the literary output of the Ukrainian-Canadian must be 
considered as prodigious. 

The above two statements are indicative that there is 
an Ukrainian literature in Canada and the purpose of this report 
is to bear witness to this fact, to show that the problem has 
merits which can be appreciated, and that the Ukrainians in 
Canada have made a definite contribution to Canadian culture in 
the literary field. 

It is important to notice that this report includes 
some contributions of the Ukrainians to Canadian literature and 
stresses the opinions and commentaries of the relatively few- 
expert s in the field. That there are relatively few is indicative 


Watson Kirkconnell, "Ukrainian Canadian Literature”, 
p. 3o Opinion , (September, October, 1947). 














, ; '/ ' t ' 






























c 







t 














< 

. ■- ■ . 

. • ? ■ 

. , ' e 




< / t 0 


. 




161 


that the research problem presented here is new. The Anglo- 
Saxon experts which have been drawn upon in preference to 
Ukrainian-origin sources wherever possible, are men and women 
who are leaders or educators in the literary field. But that 
these men and women who have had the courage to master the 
Ukrainian language because of their convictions of the literary 
merits to be found within Ukrainian literature, or at least men 
and women who have found it of interest to study the Ukrainian 
contribution in the English language is evidence enough that 
this short study is of research value and is worthy of further 
scientific investigation. 

In Florence Randal Livesay’s translation of Hrihory 
Kvitka’s Marusia, His Excellency Lord Tweedsmuir, former Governor- 
General of Canada, writes in his Introduction to the book, 

In Canada, especially in the middle West, we have a 
large Ukrainian population, and it is therefore most 
fitting that we should know something about their 
classics. The newcomers from Central and Eastern Europe 
have much to gain from Canada, but they have also some¬ 
thing to give. They can contribute out of their own folk 
culture - in letters and music - to Canada’s intellectual 
life, and to give as well as to get is the basis of self- 
respect. So I welcome the publication of Marusia in 
English as a happy augury. 

Since Tweedsmuir’s happy augury, the last fifteen years 
have seen great strides in the Ukrainian Canadian literature. 

Young Ukrainian-Canadian s , finding a new pride in their simple 
peasant fathers who first came to Canada to till the soil just 


Florence Randal Livesay, Marusia , p. 7« New York: 
E. P. Dutton and Co. Inc., 1940. 









< ." 

v" 







c ' •• 

, 

T 

t ' ■ : .- ■ 

J. ■ ■ ■ • . .i. * • 1 ' ■ c 


c . 












« 

f ; • ■ •' ' - - 

° 

1 ■ 1 ■: ' 

t 






* 




. . . < . ; . 


i 


' 




, c « . 





162 


sixty years ago, have expressed their pride in such fine works 
as Vera Lysenko T s Men in Sheepskin Coats , her Yellow Boots , and 
recent Westerly Wilds * We find Elias Kiriak writing his epic 
Sons of the Soil . Gus Romaniuk’s autobiography Taking Root in 
Canada , William Paluk f s Canadian Cossacks , and this University 
of Alberta has produced such young writers as Merron Chorney 
who has written his first novel about the early Ukrainian- 
Canadian way of life. 

This pride of the young Ukrainians in their heritage 
and birthright is expressed beautifully by Myra Lazechko-Haas 
in a letter of April 15, 1951*^ 

I write in the English language, mostly on Canadian 
subjects. That bulk of my work which reads on Ukrainian 
themes, is also in English,, It is my sincerest belief 
that the assimilation in verse, of my Ukrainian heritage 
and my Canadian birthright, can best be expressed not in 
the culmination of a national language, but in the cul¬ 
mination of a common language in which is blended the 
richness and potency of my father’s past and the clarity 
and vision of my children’s future. 

My interest is not to arouse interest in those peoples 
to whom the Ukrainian language and customs are familiar; 
but to arouse the interest, sympathy and understanding of 
those peoples of various descents who make up Canada, all 
those peoples whose background is synonymous but different 
from ours. 

Let us say, then, that I believe in the preservation 
of heritage, but that I believe, above all, not in the 
preservation of the original, but in the adaptation of 
that original through the vehicle of a common language, 
for the benefit, stability and pride of those, who through 
intermarriage have been enriched by a history still un¬ 
chartered and unknown to them. 


^Winnipeg Free Essay Contest, first prize for Dominion 
of Cana.da. I.O.D.E. 1935/6. 

Essay Contest, second prize for Dominion of Canada, 

I.O.D.E. 

First prize for poem Prodigal for Canada and British 
Isles, 1947, Canadian Authors’ Association. 














? 




c 










• u - . !}.. . 


o ? 

? ■. ■' : : .. . : .V. 

■ c • ' -j. • " 

* 

1 II !r i) v ;0,_ ; A 'JOAUO^’X 

. T 


»■ ■ 


? . 




i U C d 
, I ■ . ; [ 



♦ - 


/XI 


< ' C 

t ’■ i ■ : : J - . t j !;• 


» 


















163 


Anglo-Saxon Interpreters 

Several prominent Anglo-Saxons have become genuinely 
interested in the Ukrainians, a stateless people, and have 
published authoritative accounts of them. Of these should be 
mentioned Dr. A. J. Hunter, the late Rev. Percial Cundy, Pro¬ 
fessor Watson Kirkconnell, Professor Clarence A. Manning, 

Florence Randal Livesay and Professor George W. Simpson, not 
only for their study and translation of Ukrainian literature 
but for their sympathetic interpretation of the people to the 
general Canadian citizenry. 

Alexander Jardine Hunter (1&63-1940) did missionary work in 
Teulon, Manitoba, among Ukrainian settlers for the Presbyterian 
Church and later United Church. In 1922, he published The Kobzar 
of the Ukraine, a translation with comments on the immortal bard 
of Ukraine, Taras Shewchenko. In 1929, he published A Friendly 
Adventure, the chief religious movements among Ukrainians, and 
was editor of the English section in Kanadiysky Ranok o^ 

Percival Cundy ( -1949) a Presbyterian minister in Western 

Canada, in 1932 published A Voice from Ukraina , submitted scho¬ 
larly articles to the Ukrainian Quarterly and translated Franko’s 
and Lesia Ukrainka f s poetry in Ivan Franko, the Poet of Western 
Ukraine (New York, 1949) and Spirit of Flame (New York, 1950). 
Watson Kirkconnell (1&95- ) Professor of English of McMaster 

University, later President of Acadia University, Nova Scotia, 

4 

Biographical sketch in Manitoba School Journal, 

January, 1941. 















- ' ■ '• 



4 



'■ 4 







. 






, 



• 


<• • 

< 

* o 

• 



C 




4 


■ 


4 

. 


























— . ' 

c c 

4 

.t . : .. . 

? • ' ■ « 

e ^ i: « 

/ ■ ' t •- ' ■ ' . 1 ‘ 

t . $ . 

■ 

' *: . - ... '■>: « ■ 

. < 










164 


and now of Columbia University, is considered the leading Anglo- 
Saxon authority on the Ukrainian Canadians, as translator, 
critic, and interpreter. He has written scholarly articles on 
Ukrainian literature in Canadian Overtones (Winnipeg, 1935) with 
English verse translations of some of the poets, Twilight of 
Liberty (Toronto, 1941), Slavonic Review (London, July, 1934), 
University of Toronto Quarterly (annually since 1937), Opinion 
(Winnipeg, September 1947)* Many other of his books deal with 
the Ukrainian people. 

Clarence A. Manning , Professor of East European Languages of 
Columbia University, is noted for his publications on Ivan Franko 
(New York, 1937), his translations of and commentaries on Shev¬ 
chenko^ poetry in Taras Shevchenko (New Jersey, 1945); Ukrainian 
Literature Studies of the Leading Authors (New Jersey, 1944); as 
well as his many introductions and prefaces to newer publications 
on Ukrainian literature. 

Florence Randal Livesay is noted for her translations of 
Ukrainian poetry publishing, Songs of Ukraina , and fiction, 
Marusia, (New York, 1940). 

Professor Geo. W. Simpson , University of Saskatchewan for his 
lectures and addresses, as well as publications on the Ukrainian 
Canadians and their contribution to Canadian culture. 

Ukrainian-Canaaian Interpreters and Critics 

Dmytro Doroshenko (l3£2-1951) the distinguished Ukrainian 
historian, History of Ukraine (Edmonton, 1939), president of the 






















165 


Ukrainian.Free Academy of Sciences, and Ukrainian educationist 
in Western Canada. 

Leonid Bilecky (1&S2- )formerly professor of Literature in 

Prague, author of many scholarly works on literature, such as 
History of Ukrainian Literature ; Ukrainian Pioneers in Canada 
1&91-1951 % and is noted for a four-volume work, Taras Shev¬ 
chenko T s Kobzar (1952). 

Dr. Ilarion Ohienko , poet and foremost grammatical authority on 
modern Ukrainian, author of numerous works of prose and poetry. 
Jaraslaw B. Rudnycky.j (1910- ) of the University of Manitoba 

established the Department of Slavic Studies. His best research 
works are on Canadian Place Names of Ukrainian Origin . 

C. H. Andrysyshen ,- Winnipeg born, graduate of Manitoba, Paris, 
and Harvard Universities, professor of Slavic Languages, Univer¬ 
sity of Saskatchewan, has published Ukrainian Literature (Winni¬ 
peg-, 1949). He has also translated notable examples for the 
Ukrainian Quarterly (New York). 

M. Luchkovich , former Member of Parliament, translator of Nicholas 
Prychodko’s One of the Fifteen Million , Elias Kiriak T s three 
volume Sons of the Soil , and is one of Western Canada’s best 
known Ukrainian Canadian reviewers, letter writers, and literary 
critics. 

The Ukrainian-Canadian poets fall into three categories: 

(1) The generation that came to Canada before 1914; 

(2) The Post-War emigres and political refugees, many of 
them graduates of European universities; 




















’ ■- . ' . • h , ‘it - 

* 


t . ; v . u i : 

4 • . 1 

< . • • 

< 

. 

* 

0 

c . c . . .* 

t ? 

C 

9 

t ? 

7 «... . 7 ' ■ 

e . •.. 


:v.u 


■ ' ; ' : .. '■ : ' " 

. , 

. t 1 . ■ . fu v j 




■ ■ ■ '. i'vi- 










166 


(3) • The Canadian-born or Canadian-bred group often 
educated in our Canadian Universities* 

The Generation Before 1914 

Within this pioneer group of poets, the following 
should be mentioned: Theodore Fedik, Immigrant Songs of the 
Old Land and the New (Winnipeg, 1911); Joseph Yasenchuk of 
Beilis, Alberta, The Canadian Kobzar (Edmonton, 191$); Michael 
Kumka of Winnipeg; Ivan Novosad of Oakburn; Manitoba; Ivan 
Pavchuk of Oakburn; Vasyl Kudrik of Saskatoon; Semen Kowbel of 
Winnipeg; George Skwarok of Edmonton, History of Ukraine in 
verse (Winnipeg, 191$); Vasil K. Holovatsky of Winnipeg; and 
Dmitro Raragovsky of Edmonton, Alberta* 

The most important of these is Theodore Fedik* His 
Immigrant Songs sold over fifty-thousand copies. He wrote in 
the !f kolomiyka ff or trochaic ballad-measure of Ukrainian folk- 
poetry. This work paints a typical picture of the early 
Ukrainian immigrant, his home-sickness, bitter hardships, patience, 
poverty and resoluteness. It is because of this early poverty 
that Watson Kirkconnell suggests that ten-thousand Ukrainian 
poems lie embalmed in the back files of the newspapers of Wes¬ 
tern Canada. He says, 

Poetry in book form is relatively scanty...Most of 
this material is the saddest sort of doggerel; a quantity 
is tolerable; while a precious remnant is worthy of pre¬ 
servation both as poetry per se and as a moving record 
of the experiences and aspirations of the Ukrainians in 
Canada#^ 

^Watson Kirkconnell, Canadian Overtones , p. 77. Winni¬ 
peg: Columbia Press Ltd., 1935* 









•. - : •; :.//■ -< . .. { j 

. 

' e : .Lii‘ ' 

, al V } _ ? , ; j". .. • ; 



; . 







c ■ ? 



' 

< 





; « 













' 


. < 











« 




< 





0 ■ 

c 







* 









0 



4 









— 




. 











• 


c 

' 


t 




5 








. 







- 






J ' 
















c 


. 



- 


•' : ; , ,. r . ;:c.nr-roo.;-S-ncJi; . 






167 


The Emigre Poets 

The European-trained post-War emigres include Dr. Peter 
Karmansky (Lemberg, Rome); Dr. Mykyta Mandryka (Kiev, Sofia, 
Prague); Andrew Gospodyn (Czechoslovakia); Dr. Ivan Ohienko 
(Warsaw); Vasyl Toolivetroo (Odessa); Professor T. K. Pavlychenko 
of the University of Saskatchewan; Rev. Taras Volohatuka of Swan 
Lake; Rev. Ivan Kmeta-Efimovich of Saskatoon; Rev. Andrew Truh, 
O.S.B.M. of Mundare, Alberta; Volodomir Kupchenko and Joseph 
Sayek. 

Although it is accidental that many of these men are 
writing poetry in Canada, the fact that they are teaching, 
farming, or active in missionary work in Canada, as Father Truh 
has been for twenty-five years, justifies their inclusion among 
Ukrainian-Canadian poets. 

The Canadian-Born or Canadian-Bred Group 

This is probably the most interesting group of all. 

These young poets educated in Canadian schools and universities 
obviously consider themselves as Canadians, yet are deliberately 
trying to create Canadian literature in the Ukrainian language. 
Although they feel that their spiritual roots are buried deeply 
in their Ukrainian past, they draw upon the inspirational 
experiences of their new country for their creative work. This 
viewpoint has been beautifully expressed by Ivan Danylchuk in the 
preface to his first volume of poems, Day Dreams (Winnipeg, 1929, 
PP. 55). 



' • v ' ■ i - .. ! 

? : • < 

; . ■ ' ' : • 

. . . ; . 

. - : 

. . • ; 

...... 

^ , ( • . 

? c 

. 

t . 

c 

. 


163 


.The Canadian Walt Whitman has not arrived. The sound 
of the golden sea has entered into our hearts, bringing 
yearning of supreme beauty and radiance. It incites us 
to sing, but it has not betrayed its secret, for it speaks 
the Indian language. The Ukrainian prairies gave us our 
souls, but the Canadian prairies have stirred us up to 
sing* These influences have united, and we do not grasp 
them: in the sound of the storm we hear tales of Hiawatha 
and in dreams we see Zaporogian Perebynis. We sing, and 
our strange songs, in which we cannot match tones of equal 
force, are not wholly akin either to the golden Canadian 
prairies which have reared and inspired us or to the 
Ukrainian prairies from which we derive our spiritual 
past. 


Among this group may be included: Honore Ewach, (1900- 
), graduate of the University of Saskatchewan; Panteleymon 
Bozyk (1333-1944); Stephen Doroschuk (1394- ); Semen W. 

Sawchuk (1399- ); Peter Basil Chaykiwsky (1333- ); Michael 

Krepiakewich, Elias Kiriak of Vilna, Alberta; Tetiana Kroitor; 
Ivan Danylchuk (1901- }; Paul Crath; Anna Pruska; Maria 

Adamovska; and Myra Lazechko. All of these except Myra Lazechko 
voluntarily use Ukrainian for their works although most of them 
are equally at home in English or Ukrainian. Thus Ewach, Sawchuk 
Danylchuk, and Krepiakewich are graduates of the University of 
Saskatchewan; Tetiana Kroitor is an alumna of Queen T s; Kiriak 
hails from the University of Alberta; while Paul Crath is a gradu 
ate of the Presbyterian Theological College in Saskatoon. Myra 
Lyzechko (born in Winnipeg 1920) is a graduate of the University 
of California. 

Honore Ewach possibly leads all others in his work of 
interpretation in his writing of Ukrainian full-length histories 
of Great Britan and of Canada. He has published an ambitious 





i 







c 

- 

' 


? 


















) : i 






169 


anthology of Ukrainian Songs and Lyrics (Winnipeg, 1933), 
translated into English verse by himself. Myra Lazechko has 
won first prize in 1947 in the nation-wide poetry contest 
sponsored by the Poetry Society of Canada with her poem, 
"Prodigal ”.^ 

As we see in the specimen taken from Danylchuk T s pre¬ 
face, these young writers were masters of the English language, 
yet more often they chose to write in Ukrainian. Kirkconnell 
defends their choice of language when he says, 

Had these poets elected to write in English, it is 
unlikely that they would have been worth reading. And 
finally, we have in this work a spontaneous, moving, 
and profoundly illuminating portrayal of the emotional 
and intellectual reactions involved in a great modern 
migration of peoples into the midst of a strange land 
and an alien culture. Centuries hence, Ukrainian 
poetry will be treasured as a record of human experience.' 


Ukrainian Drama 


Although many of the Ukrainian plays may not be of 
high literary standard they are very practical and appeal to 
the public fancy. They may be slap-stick comedy, or in many 
cases portray Ukrainian history, the struggle for freedom. 

Often they have settings in Canada. 

The first Ukrainian play published in Canada appeared 
in Winnipeg in 1909 entitled The Killers . Other playwrights are: 


Her poems have been published in Canadian magazines 
and newspapers. 

William Paluk, "Rising Poetess”, Opinion , July-August, 

1947. 

7 

Watson Kirkbonnell, Canadian Overtones , p. 81. Winnipeg: 
Columbia Press, Ltd., 1933. 







e . ' c 

. 


< . 

. 

/ 

< « " c 

. 

. 

. 

« 







■ < ' ; ? ■ • f . ' «*: 1 




4 ; 









170 


Dmytro Hu-nkiewich (1393- ), who wrote about fifteen dramas; 

Semen Kowbel who published his first in 1920 and wrote six or 
seven five-act dramas; Myroslaw Irchan (1396- ) whose plays 

had an outright subversive character and were never popular in 
Canada; Michael Krepiakevich mentioned previously; the versatile 
Honore Ewach; and Wasyl Toolivetroo of Hamilton. 

Ukrainian Prose Writers 

In the field of fiction the names of Elias Kiriak 
and Vera Lysenko stand out. Kiriak published his three volume 
epic, Sons of the Soil , in Edmonton, 1939- Vera Lysenko, 
graduate of the University of Manitoba, writing in English, has 
given the first historical account of the Ukrainians in Canada, 
entitled Men in Sheepskin Coats (1947). It contains much 
valuable historical material, but omits much that is of impor¬ 
tance, and displays a definite Ukrainian Communist bias.^ Her 
novel, Yellow Boots (Toronto, 1954, pp* 315), presents a vivid 
portrait of a girl growing up in a Ukrainian immigrant community 
in the Canadian West. It shows her efforts to free herself from 
the shackles of peasant superstition, and at the same time pre¬ 
serve the beautiful and permanent values in her racial heritage. 
Lysenko f s latest novel just off the press is Westerly Wild , 
(Toronto, 1956, pp. 234). It has for its setting the rolling 

3 

Paul Yuzyk, The Ukrainians in Manitoba , p. 141. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1953. 








C . - } 1 . 



- 






































* 



' 




























♦ 








0 








X 














< 




* 

























« . 


. 














c 

















< ' 




i 


- 

t 





c 























• 







<■ 

































' 







- 

. 





















i 






t . .. • 

c 


<■ 



: 




171 


countryside of southwestern Saskatchewan in the time of drought, 
in order to depict its searing effect on human lives and the vio¬ 
lent clash of strong personalities in a corroding environment. 

Other fiction writers are: Apolinar Nowak (1336- ); 

Ivan Pawchuk (1334- ); Honore Ewach; a coming new novelist, 

Merron Chorney of Innisfree, Alberta; Dmytro Sollanych (1374-1939) 
of Meacham, Saskatchewan; Tetiana Kraitor of Winnipeg; Michael 
Petrowsky of Ottawa; and Alexis Luhowy. 

On the more serious side we find: Panteleymon Bozyk 
writing on The Ukrainian Church in Canada ; William Paluk, 

Canadian Cossacks (Winnipeg, 1943) on the Ukrainian-Canadian 
life; Dr. Mykyta Mandryka, Theory of Economic Democracy ; Dr. 
Alexander Koshetz (1375-1944) noted for his works on musicology; 
Dr. Ivan Ohienko on Ukrainian Orthography ; Dr. Dmytro Doroshenko 
who won immediate recognition for his History of the Ukraine ; 
Leonid Bilecky for his many works on Ukrainian literature 
(European); and Jaroslaw B. Rudnyckyj (1910- ) known for his 

"Onomastica” series. 

In the way of autobiography, Gus Romaniuk f s Taking Root 
in Canada (Winnipeg, 1954, pp. 233)• He writes in English and 
tells his Canadian story since coming to this country as a boy 
in 1912. Of the emigre writers Nicholas Prychodka's One of the 
Fifteen Million , translated by M. Luchkovich (J.M. Dent and Sons, 
Toronto, 1952), and Dr. Ivan Nimchuk’s tragic story, 595 Day s 
a Soviet Prisoner (Toronto, 1950) are well worthy of interest. 
















. 

, 

. 

« 

\ ; . • 1 

•. ■ 

; ' 
















, 

-■ r . ; . ' {'■ 

7 ' 


Q . 






7 


. . * ' c.. 

< ‘ . c . 


x, • 














172 


i 

Ellas Kiriak and His Epic, Sons of the Soil^ 


This three volume work by Elias Kiriak is a family 
chronicle dealing with five immigrant families who emigrated to 
Alberta sixty years ago and settled on the virgin prairies of 
the West. This excellent epic novel will soon appear in one 
volume of eight hundred and fifty pages, translated into English 
by the nationally known writer and interpreter of the Ukrainian 
cause and its culture, Michael Luchkowich of Edmonton, Alberta, 
the first Ukrainian Canadian to be elected a Member of Parlia¬ 
ment for Ganada. 

Commenting on the Sons of the Soil . Professor C. H. 
Andrusyshen, University of Saskatchewan, writes,- 1 - 0 

An epic may take place in peaceful surroundings, 
not necessarily in the confusion and hurly-burly of a 
bloody action. It may be well borne in mind that any¬ 
thing that smacks of the primeval elementary force is 
epic in character and nature, regardless of the circum¬ 
stances. 

But if, as has often been emphasized, simplicity is 
the chief attribute of genuine art, then this is indeed 
an artistic product. In any case, the simple ordinary 
deeds of the people that move and have life in it assume 
the magnitude of heroic exploits. Of that, there is no 
doubt. They are indeed simple folks that enliven the 
pages of this book. 

And so simplicity is its main characteristic and, to 
be sure, its chief asset, indeed a factor that elevates 
it to epic height. 


o 

Elias Kiriak, Sons of the Soil , Volume I, II, III. 
Edmonton: The Institute Press, 1939* 

10 

Professor C.H. Andrusyshen, Ukrainian Year Book , 
Winnipeg: F.A. MaCrouch Publisher, 1931-52. 














. 

. 




c - « c 


- 

j 

e t 

J' ’' 

, 

t . . 

. 

e 

c ’ c 

. 


e t . t '• 

f . 

e <.; : : . A. : : 1 









173 


Sons of the Soil is a rare psychological and socio¬ 
logical study of a people who battle against terrible odds 
and finally emerge victorious. In this story the Ukrainian 
element may be said to be representative of all the immig¬ 
rant groups that come to Canada at about the same time. 

Sons of the Soil is a genuinely Canadian epic because 
- what it contains is part of Canadian history, that history 
which is not written with letters of blood on the fields 
of battle where man struggles for the sustenance of God T s 
creatures and where the only thing tamed and laid low is 
the rigidity of nature and its law. There too are heroes; 
but they are the unsung ones, the unproclaimed ones, whose 
only monument is the memory of them and their superhuman 
labor that remains in the minds of grateful and respectful 
generations that follow. 

M. Luchkovich, in a letter to the Editor of Svoboda 11 
on the same theme says, 

Running through the entire eight hundred and fifty 
pages of Sons of the Soil, the reader will find the 
heart touch of a man who knows his theme because of his 
great powers of observation, and because of his close 
association with the locality and the people about whom 
he writes so delightfully. The reader will not find much 
theorizing in this book but he will be surprised over 
how much thinking he will do after he will have read the 
book. For Mr. Kiriak gropes so unobtrusively into the 
reader 1 s consciousness that he will be surprised how 
readily he has come to his own conclusions without being 
told what they should be by the writer. For this is art. 
There isn f t much theory in the Sons of the Soil; but 
there is what one writer called ,T a heap of living”. 


Conclusion 

This report has been a brief attempt to survey the 
literary contribution of Ukrainians in Canada. The Ukrainians 
who came to Canada sixty years ago to till the soil, hew the 
forests, and band the nation with rails of steel have produced 

^Letter to the Editor, Svoboda , March 17, 1956, 
Jersey City, New Jersey. 





. 

c ' 

. 

e < 

' 

. 

c 

c 

' 

. 



. . 


. 


. 

, . , t . 



■ 




. 





; • t 


o 










» 








' 


■ 

< • ■ 







174 


sons and 'daughters who are conscious of pride in their peasant 
forefathers. When the early pioneers sang and composed their 
simple lyrics, it was because they came of a people in whom it 
is inherent to sing. Although little of these early attempts 
at writing have literary merit, it is justified as a record of 
human endeavor and experience 0 The new generations which have 

risen to find an easier and whiter bread have entered the various 

12 

professions and as teachers, "lawyers, nurses, doctors, poli¬ 
ticians, journalists, scientists, and scholars are making them¬ 
selves heard. Many of these, mindful of their Canadian birth¬ 
right and talented with the gift of expressing themselves well 
are emerging as writers of distinction. It is in appreciation 
of these gifts that Saturday Night writes of Vera Lysenko’s 
Yellow Boots . ,f This is without serious question one of the best 
novels ever written by a Canadian,” and the Saskatoon Star - 
Phoenix commenting on the same says, lf Here is writing of the 
Canadians kind at its very best.” Such is Myra Lazechko, winner 
of the Canadian poetry prize. Such is the genius of an Elias 
Kiriak. 

All this is indeed a happy augury. Today Ukrainian 
Canadians are becoming wielders of the pen. Within the last 
decade poets, writers, scholars, are making themselves heard. 

Some are those whose names are as yet but little known, but 

12 

Some school divisions in Alberta now have 80% to 90 % 
of their teachers Ukrainian in origin. H. Kostash, Superintendent, 
Smoky Lake School Division, 1956. 







. 

c ■ 

. 


' • ( • 






„ 



. 











c 


c 

t 

< 








. 


t 


* 






5 

















. 






r 
















t. 





1 5- 







c 

5 ■ 


* 

. 

» 

• ’ 

t < ' C 

t ; . ' ... : •' _ ■ . , ., ' ' > C? ! : • '• : < 


< . 









175 


whose spark of brilliance has already flashed, and who are now 
weaving the pattern for tomorrow* s history of Ukrainian litera¬ 
ture in Canada* 

Little has been done in this field of investigation, 
but already it has attracted not only Ukrainians but men of 
other tongues and climes* This innate ability of the Ukrainian 
to sing whether it be in song or in verse is an element found 
in their Ukrainian birthright and a great tradition of Ukrainian 
literature sparked by the genius of Taras Shevchenko, the poet 
of Ukraine* May these young Canadians come into their own and 
give Canada that cultural contribution which she is only too 
ready to accept from them. 


' ' : :■ j: ‘ w 

f 

. 

. . 

; , ' ■ ' - ■ i; ■ r ,V;: ' \; . J‘:f:: 

» 




176 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Andrusyshen, C. H., Ukrainian Literature . Winnipeg: 

Ukrainian National Youth Federation, 1949. Pp. 5 and 32. 

Bahriany, Ivan, The Hunters and the Hunted . Toronto: 

Burns and MacEachern, 1954* Pp. 7 and 270. 

Bezushko, Vladimir, Ivan Frank o. Germany: UNRRA, 1947. 

Pp. 3 and 11. 

Boresky, Theodosia, Zakhar Berkut . New York: Theo. Gaus 1 
Sons, Inc., 1944. Pp. iv and 230. 

Chyz, Yaroslaw J., The Ukrainian Immigrants in the United 
States . Scranton, Pa., Reprinted from the Almanac of the 
Ukrainian Workingmen 1 s Association for 1940. Pp. 1 and 32. 

Coughlin, James F., Ukrainians . Toronto: £5 Richmond St. 
West, 1945. Pp. 3 and 32 . 

Cundy, Percival, Spirit of Flame , (Works of Lesia Ukrainka). 
New York: Bookman Associates, 1950. Pp. 9 and 320. 

Cundy, Percival, Ivan Franko ,(poems). New York: F. Hubner 
and Co. Inc., 194$. Pp. vii and 263. 

Cundy, Percival, A Voice from Ukraina . Roland, Manitoba: 

R. E. Buffy and Co., 1932. Pp. iii and 74. 

Dear, Allan (S. M. Doroschuk), Canadian Song Lyrics. 

Winnipeg: Canada Music Publishing Co., 1940. Pp. 5 and 65. 

Doroshenko, D., Taras Shevchenko . New York: United Ukrainian 
Organizations, 1936. Pp. 3 and 59. 

Ewach, Honore, Ukrainian Songs and Lyrics . Winnipeg: 
Ukrainian Publishing Co. Ltd., 1933. Pp. ii and 77. 

Gambal, Marie, Our Ukrainian Backgroun d. Scranton, Pa.: 
Ukrainian Workingmens Association, 1936. Pp. 3 and 32. 

Gambal, Marie, The Story of Ukraine . Scranton, Pa.: The 
Ukrainian Workingmen 1 s Association (Date unpublished). Pp. 3 and 
102 . 


Halich, Wasyl, Ukrainians in the United States . Chicago: 
The University of Chicago Press, 1937. Pp. ix and 174. 




























c 








177 


Hunchak, N. J., Canadians of Ukrainian Origin (Population). 
Winnipeg: Ukrainian Canadian Committee, 1945. Pp. 5 and 164. 

Hunter, A. J., The Kobzar of the Ukraine . Winnipeg: 

Dr. A. J. Hunter, 19227 Pp. 6 and 144. 

Kiriak, Elias, Syny Zemli (Sons of the Soil). Vols. I, II, 
and III. Edmonton: The Institute Press, Ltd., 1939. 

Kirkconnell, W., Our Ukrainian Loyalists . Winnipeg: 
Ukrainian Canadian Committee, 1943. Pp. 3 and 23. 

Kirkconnell, W., Canadian Overtones . Winnipeg: The 
Columbia Press Ltd., 1935. Pp. 76 and 104. 

Kirkconnell, Watson, Twilight of Liberty , pp. 105-113, 
125-123. Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1941. 

Kvitka, Hrihory, Marusia . p. 7. E.P. New York, Dutton and 
Co. Inc., 1940. 

Letter to the Editor, Svoboda , March 17, 1956 0 Jersey City, 
New Jersey. 

Lysenko, Vera, Men in Sheepskin Coats . A Study in 
Assimilation. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1947. Pp. 312. 

Lysenko, Vera, Westerly Wild . Toronto: Ryerson Press, 

1956. Pp. 1 and 234. 

Lysenko, Vera, Yellow Boots . Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 
1954o Pp. v and 314. 

Planning, Clarence A., Taras Shevchenko, Selected Poems . 
Jersey City, New Jersey: Ukrainian National Association, 1945. 

Pp. v and 217. 

Manning, Clarence A., Ukrainian Literature (Studies of 
the Leading Authors). Jersey City, New Jersey: Ukrainian National 
Association, 1944. Pp. iv and 126. 

Manning, Clarence A., Ivan Franko . New York: Ukrainian 
University Society, 1937. Pp. iii and 23. 

L 

Myshuha, Dr. 3£uke, Shevchenko and Women . Jersey City, New 
Jersey: The Ukrainian Press and Book Co., 1940. Pp. iii and 95. 

Paluk, William, Canadian Cossacks . Winnipeg: Canadian 
Ukrainian Review Publishing Co. Ltd., 1943. Pp. 9 - 130. 























17 & 


Peters, Anna, Partisans of the Zbruch (A Play). Detroit: 
United Culture Publishing Association, 1946. Pp. 3 and 67. 

Pidhainy, S., Islands of Death . Toronto: Burns and Mac- 
Eachern, 1953 * Pp. v and 240. 

Prychodko, Nicholas, One of the Fifteen Million . Toronto: 

J. M. Dent and Sons (Canada) Ltd., 1952. Pp. ii and 170. 

Romaniuk, Gus, Taking Root in Canada . Winnipeg: The 
Columbia Press Ltd. 1954* Pp. ii and 283* 

Rudnicky, Jaroslaw B., Biblioteka ( The Library ). Winnipeg: 
Ukrainian Cultural and Educational Centre, 1955 • Pp. v and 32. 

Rudnicky, Jaroslaw B., Ukrainski Biblioteky v Kanadi 
(Ukrainian Libraries in Canada), pp. 5 and 46. Winnipeg: 
Ukrainian Free Academy of Science, 1954. 

Rudnicky, Jaroslaw B., Slavica Canadiana A.D. 1953 . Parts 
1 and 2. Winnipeg: Ukrainian Free Academy of Science, 1954. 

Pp. 9 and 32. 

Semenyna, Walter, Moses , (poem by Ivan Franko). New York: 
United Ukrainian Organizations of the United States, 193$. 

Pp. 5 and 93. 

Sharyk, Mychaylo, Pity Viyny (Children of the War). 
Winnipeg: Ivan Tyktor, Publisher, 1955. Pp. 7 and 12&. 

Simpson, Professor George W., Swystun, W., Ukraine (Radio 
Address C.B.C.) pp 0 3-15, pp. 5-13 (Part 11). Saskatoon: 
Ukrainian National Federation, 1939. 

Skwarok, George, Istoria Ukrainy-Rusy (in verse). Winnipeg: 
Kanadiysky Rusyn, 1913. Pp. 3 and 39. 

Snowyd, D., Spirit of Ukraine (Ukrainian Contributions to 
World Culture). New York: United Ukrainian Organizations of 
the United States, 1935* Pp. 3 and 152. 

Ten Years of the Ukrainian Quarterly 1944-1954. An Index 
to the Journal. Pp. 3 and 63. 

Turiansky, Osyp, Lost Shadows . New York: Empire Books, 
1935. Pp. vii and 246. 

Ukrainian Authors (A Reader for Students) . Winnipeg: 
Ukrainian Canadian Committee, 1945. Pp. 1 and 193. 





















t 







t 







179 


Yasenchuk, Joseph, Kanadiyski Kobzar. Edmonton: Ukrainska 
Knyharnia, 1918* Pp. 3 and 64. 

Yuzyk, Paul, The Ukrainians in Manitob a* London: Univer¬ 
sity of Toronto Press, 1953 <» Pp. 127 - 143. 

Zmurkevych, S. M. A., The Ukrainian Canadian Poetry , An 
Attempt to Define the General Idea. Unpublished Doctor T s Thesis, 
University of Ottawa, 1951. Pp. vi and 204. 







ISO 


APPENDIX 

GLOSSARY OF TERMS 


Bukowina- a province of Western Ukraine, 
chlop - a rude male peasant, a serf. 

Galicia - a province of Western Ukraine. 

Hetman - title of Ukrainian military ruler and head of the State. 

hospodarstvo - a farm holding, usually a few acres in size. 

kobzar - an intinerant minstrel who played on the kobza; also 

a collection of the poems composed by Taras Shevchenko. 

kripatstvo - an extreme form of serfdom, almost slavery. 

morg - an area of land equal to 1.3$ acres. 

pan - a landlord. 

panschyna - a system of serfdom > in the manner of feudal tenure^ 
controlled by a landlord. 

rynsky - about forty cents. 

Svoboda - Freedom, a Ukrainian American newspaper. 

Ukrainians - incorrectly called Austrians, Bukowinians, Galicians, 
Little Russians, Russians, Rusky, Russniaks, Rusyns, 
Ruthenians, and Poles. 

Zaporozhian Sich - a stronghold of the Ukrainian Cossack Army at 

the mouth of the Dnieper River. 














c 


f 


s 



c 






