















11810 $ 

mwwiMis 












Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 



https://archive.org/details/waterretentionfrOOjame 


THE UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


WATER RETENTION AND FREEZING CHIRACTERISTICS 
OF FINE COAL 


A DISSERTATION 

SUBMITTED TO THE SCHOOL OF GRADUATE STUDIES 
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF 

MASTER OF SCIENCE 


FACULTY OF ENGINEERING 

DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICAL AND PETROLEUM ENGINEERING 

by 

JAMES L. CAHVETH 

EDMONTON, ALBERTA 
APRIL,19?3 




















PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


The investigations described in this thesis were 
conducted in the laboratories of the Research Council of 
Alberta, under the supervision of Mr, W. A. Lang, Senior 
Research Chemist* The work was carried out under direction 
of a committee composed of Dr. G. W. Govier of the Depart¬ 
ment of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering of the University 
of Alberta, Mr. E. 0. Lilge of the Department of Mining and 
Metallurgy of the University of Alberta, and Mr. W. A. Lang 
of the Research Council of Alberta* Sincere appreciation 
is extended to the members of this committee for their 
helpful advice and guidance during the course of this work* 
The author wishes to extend his sincere thanks 
to the many members of the staff of the Research Council of 
Alberta who have so generously given of their time and as¬ 


sistance, 






























' 




1 


X 


















TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Page 

The Problem 1 

Abstract 2 

I Introduction b 

II Historical Review 7 

1. Specific Surface Area 8 

(a) Carman 1 s Method 8 

(b) Heywood’s Method 9 

(c) Needham and Hill 10 

(d) Water* s Method 11 

2. Moisture 12 

(a) Forms of Moisture in Coal 12 

(b) Determination of Moisture 13 

(c) Dewatering of Fine Coal 17 

3. Surface Treatment of Coal 17 

U. Freezing Characteristics of Fine Coal 21 

III Specific Surface 23 

1. Method of Determination 2b 

2. Experimental Procedure 2$ 

3« Sphericity Constant 26 

lu Discussion of Results 27 

IV Surface Moisture 29 

1. Introduction 30 

2. Preparation of Sample 30 

3* Experimental Procedure 31 

b* Discussion of Results 32 

V Absorbed Moisture 3b 

1. Introduction 35 

2. Determination of Absorbed Moisture 35 

(a) Capacity Moisture 35 

(b) Absorbed Moisture 36 

(c) Discussion of Results U0 





/ ) 



























3# Method of Moisture Absorption U 0 

(a) Development of Capillarity Equation 1*0 

(b) Laboratory Investigation 1*3 

(c) Calculation of Theoretical Curves 111* 

(d) Discussion of Results 1*6 

VI Surface Treatment of Fine Coal k 8 

1* Introduction k9 

2 0 Laboratory Equipment 1*9 

3. Treating Oils 52 

1*. Ejqjerimental Procedure 52 

5. Experimental Results 53 

6* Interpretation of Results 53 

7* Silicone Treatment 57 

VII Freezing Characteristics of Fine Coal 59 

lo Introduction 60 

2* Experimental Equipment and Procedure 60 

3* Effect of Coal Size and Temperature 62 

1** Effect of Oil Treatment 67 

71 


VIII Conclusions 









1 


THE PROBLEM 

The general problem was the investigation of 
water retention by fine coal# Following a literature 
survey, attention was centred on the determination of 
the amount of water that is absorbed by coal during wet 
processing and of the amounts of surface and interstitial 
water retained by coal following wet processing* The 
effects that additions of waterproofing materials may have 
in reducing the amount of water thus held were to be in¬ 
vestigated# Further investigations were to be made on 
the freezing characteristics of fine coal as related to 
transportation and storage during winter months« 



































- 2 - 


ABSTRACT 

Following a literature survey, a method for determining specific 
surface by means of a particle count was developed* The relationship be¬ 
tween surface moisture and specific surface of dewatered coal has been 
shown to be linear indicating that the effect of interstitial moisture is 
negligible even for the finer sizes of coal. 

Determination of the capacity moisture, as developed by Stans- 
field and Gilbert, has been shown to be independent of the length of time 
coal has been immersed in water. "When a coal is immersed in water the ab¬ 
sorbed moisture will reach equilibrium at a value which is less than the 
value obtained by the standard capacity moisture determination due to gases 
having been trapped in the pores and capillaries of the coal. A capillarity 
equation has been shown to characterize the movement of water through a 
piece of coal. 

The effect of oil as a waterproofing agent for fine coal has been 
investigated with respect to quantities of oil required to cover the surface 
of the coal and the effectiveness of the treatment after storage. 

The amount of oil required to give a specific reduction in sur¬ 
face moisture depends largely on the specific surface of the coal. Other 
factors such as agglomeration of the coated particles and the thickness of 
the oil film become important with heavier applications of oil. Substantial 
amounts of oil were required to produce a significant reduction in surface 
moisture for the finer sizes of coal indicating that oil treatment for this 
purpose alone would not prove practical. Tests with silicone DC-XS-1 in¬ 
dicated that this material was unsuitable as a waterproofing agent. 




























- 3 - 

Tests have shown that the physical strength of frozen coal 
reaches a maxim vim as the temperature decreases* The temperature at 
which this maximum is attained depends on the size of the coal; with 
the temperature being lower for finer sizes of coal. Dewatered coal 
above 1/8 inch in diameter has little physical strength when frozen. 
Equations relating breaking force of the frozen samples and surface 
moisture have been developed for the range where the freezing strength 
is dependent on temperature and for the range where freezing strength 
is independent of temperature. These equations were found to be ap¬ 
plicable only for samples of closely sized coal. The effect of part¬ 
icle arrangement on freezing strength was believed responsible for 
the failure of these equations when used for samples with a wide range 
of sizes. 

Investigation of the freezing of oil treated coal indicated 
that a linear relationship exists between surface moisture and freez¬ 
ing strength. The extent of reduction in freezing strength for the finer 
sizes of coal would not justify treatment for that purpose alone. 



r 


■y, 

- ' 




r 


: - 

:: • . :• > ' ■ -f.. " r •: : "« • ■ < - ' 

* - • > • 

. 











»•••• '■ ’ 0 







k - 


I INTRODUCTION 




- 5 - 


A worker is faced with two complications in presenting the 
results of any investigation which involves the relationships of mois¬ 
ture in coal: (1) the confusing nomenclature used by different invest¬ 
igators to classify the forms of moisture in/or associated with coal, 
and (2) the impossibility of designing tests which will differentiate 
between the types of moisture, or which will determine completely the 
total amount of water either physically held by or chemically combined 
in the coal substance# 

In general, it can be said that moisture occurs in coal in 
the following ways: 

(1) as water of constitution 

(2) as water of hydration of mineral components 

(3) as physically adsorbed water 

(U) as capillary condensed water 

(5) as surface water# 

It is also customary to consider the moisture content of a coal as 
being that water which can be driven off at 105>°C#, or at most, at 
the boiling point of xylene# Special tests such as the Capacity 
moisture test 11 have been developed to evaluate the total amount of 
water a coal will hold under saturated conditions at a specific temper- 
attire# 

In this investigation, which is an engineering study, an 
attempt has been made to determine the amounts of water that may be 
taken up by coal under differing conditions of immersion# This water 
may be (1) absorbed by the coal substance, (2) retained as a film on 
the surface of the coal and/or (3) held in the interstitial spaces be¬ 
tween the particles of coal forming the composite# The amount of water 


* ■ 


• • 


■ r 







r * 


' 


- ■ 






r 








* 




. 






8 

■ • ■ 


1 











- 6 - 


retained depends on a number of factors* (l) the time that the coal is 
in contact with the water, (2) the rank of coal and its surface character¬ 
istics, (3) the sizing of the coal, and (U) the method used to drain or 
otherwise dewater the coal# 

The problem of water retention by coal is increasing in impor¬ 
tance since in recent years larger amounts of water are being added to 
the coal to allay dust during mining operations and also wet cleaning 
processes are being used to a much greater extent than previously. The 
problem is particularly significant with respect to fine coal since not 
only does the fine coal retain a greater percentage of water than does 
coarse coal but wet fine coal will freeze to a solid mass under winter 
conditions. 

Since little data were available relative to the retention of 
water by Alberta coals, an investigation related to this subject was 
commenced by the Research Council of Alberta late in 1951* In pursuing 
the investigation it has been necessary to determine the ways in which 
water is held by coal, to measure such factors as surface moisture, as- 
sorbed moisture, capillarity, etc., to develop a method of measure¬ 
ment of specific surface area, to design and build equipment for oil 
treatment of fine coal, to develop apparatus for freezing wet coal at 
low temperatures and for measuring the properties of the frozen coal# 

Two coals were used in this investigation, a high volatile C 
bituminous coal from the Lethbridge area and a medium volatile coal 
from the Crowsnest Pass area. Water repellant agents used for water 
proofing the coal included two oil sprays supplied by Imperial Oil Com¬ 
pany Ltd., and a silicone from Dow-Coming Corp# 







C ' 




t - 



■ 




C ’ 


t 




- 













II HISTORICAL REVTEW 







1. Specific Surface 


The retention of water on the surface of coal depends largely 
on its specific surface. A survey of the literature has provided the 
following approaches to the problem of measuring specific surface. 

(a) Carman* s Method 

Carman (5) described a method of determining permeability 
of a bed of coal particles to a liquid of known viscosity and calculated 
the specific surface area using the Kozeny equation. The permeability 
is calculated by the D'Arcy equation: 

K = Q i 

A “^P 


K = permeability 

= absolute viscosity of liquid 
Q = volume rate of flow through coal bed 
A = cross-sectional area of coal bed 
= depth of bed 
= pressure drop across bed 

The porosity e is then calculated from the weight and density of the 
coal and the volume of the bed. 

e = 1 - volume of coal 
volume of becT 

Carman modified the kozeny equation to relate permeability and specific 
surface: 


So = Hi. 


f JL- 

l_ K<r (T^cJ 


(e3)2J 1/2 


So = specific surface 


CT = kinematic viscosity = / la ^ where/3 = density 

r 


K = permeability 
e = porosity 






































9 


When assessing the accuracy of his method, the author claimed 
that the error did not exceed U .0 per cent -where the determinations were 
made on samples of known specific surface# 

Oberholtzer (35>) modified Carman* s apparatus for use with air 
and obtained results comparable in accuracy with those of Carman# Gaudin 
( 19 ) defined the degree of sphericity as the ratio of the surface area 
of a sphere to tne surface area of a coal particle of the same weight 
and specific gravity and suggested values of 0 #*> - 0*7 for coal# When 
checked by Oberholtzer this constant was found to be O .36 - 0#1*9> but 
he believed that the presence of fines in the sized coal fractions ac¬ 
counted for the lower values# 

(b) Heywood*s Method 

This method (21) was developed for use with fine coal but 
Heywood suggests that it may be used for sizes up to 3/3 inch# This 
approach to the problem involves the determination of a volume constant, 
h, and a surface constant, f, which are defined by the equations: 

V - hd.3 
S - f d 2 

when V = volume of coal particle 

S * surface area of coal particle 
d » diameter of circle of area equal to that of the 
projection of the particle# 

The diameter, d, is defined as the statistical mean diameter 
and is obtained by measuring the average length of a line bisecting the 
projected area of the particle# This is accomplished by aligning 100 
particles haphazardly and measuring the length of the line from which 
the statistical mean diameter is calculated# 


I 


. 

» 

■ • : ■ ■ \ 




Ci • 




V 






■: ,£;r:x! ) ‘ >. 



















- 10 


If the density of the material is fD , the 5, the surface area 

h 

per unit weight is given by the equation: 


5 ° 1 fd 2 

S ** 3 


S » f 

The constant h is determined by counting and weighing a number 
of average sized particles, the density of which is known* Heywood did 
not measure f directly for coal particles but by determining the sur¬ 
face area of stones of various shapes and sizes, obtained data giving a 
relation between f and h for different degrees of irregularity* He 
expressed the degree of irregularity as the ratio of the diameter of a 
circle of equivalent perimeter to the circle of equivalent area* 

Heywood 1 s calculations fail to account for the third dimension 
of the coal particle* 

(c) Needham and Hill 

Heywood* s method has been modified by Needham and Hill (33) 
as they believed a coal particle could be better represented by a rec¬ 
tangular prismatic shape* Then the surface area could be calculated by 
the equation: 



S = surface area of particle 
d ■ statistical mean diameter 
h • volume constant defined by V - hd^ 
r » length to breadth ratio 

Then the surface area per unit weight ? is given by the equation: 

s’- [rr + h /(i+r) 2 W 2 ! 1 
L 55 * \TFrJ Jpd 

'5 










■ 


"c 





■ 






o 






■. . ■ il, ' 















\ 



< 


: 'I 


. 










- 11 - 


• specific gravity of coal* 

The constant r was found to be close to 1*5 and the value of U 



varies little with a large variation r, The surface constant, f, is 
defined by 3 ■ fd^ and is expressed by the equation: 

£ = TT+ Iih /(1+r) 2 } X / 2 

7 V TFr J 

The mean statistical diameter was determined by Heywood 1 s method. The 
constant h was found to vary with the size of coal and could be ex¬ 
pressed in terms of the mean screen opening, M, 


h - 0.2? 


However, the author pointed out that it would be necessary to determine 
a separate equation for each type of coal as h varied considerably for 
different types of coals, 

(d) Water* s Method 

This investigator (UW assumes the particles are either spher¬ 
ical or cubical. The weight of a sphere ocr a cube may be expressed by 
the equations* 

W «/ 7a3 p (in the case of the sphere) 

W » (in the case of the cube) 

W » wei^it of coal particle 
a » mean sieve opening 
^ ■ specific gravity of coal 

The surface area A of the sphere and cube are expressed by the equations: 

A «/7a 2 (sphere) 

A « 6a 2 (cube) 


Then the specific surface area, S, 

S “ (/7 a 2 ) ( 6 (sphere) 




















1 





o 


L ' 



O ' 





















12 - 


S = (6a2) 

Then for both cases 

B = 6 

*'t° 

The assumption that the particles are either spherical or cubical sim¬ 
plifies this determination to the extent that the results may be en¬ 
tirely misleading. 

2. Moisture 

(a) Forms of Moisture in Coal 

Investigators have used various names in an attempt to dis¬ 
tinguish between different forms of moisture in coal. The terms in¬ 
herent, hygroscopic, bound, combined, adsorbed, free, surface, inter¬ 
stitial, etc. appear in the literature, but are seldom adequately defined 
(2?). This confusing nomenclature has resulted from the failure of in¬ 
vestigators to revert to basic principles upon which the designation of 
the various forms of moisture should be based. The moisture in, or as¬ 
sociated with, coal is present as (27): 

1. water of constitution 

2. water of hydration of inorganic components 

3. physically adsorbed water 
U. capillary condensed water 

surface moisture 

The water of constitution and the water of hydration of in¬ 
organic components which are part of the coal may not be recovered by 
the standard moisture determinations. The amount of moisture held by 
the coal in these ways will remain constant unless the coal is exposed 
to conditions which result in a change in the 


( 1 ) (cube) 










- 
















- 13 - 

constitution of the coal* 

Surface moisture is that moisture held by the coal which exhibits 
the normal vapor pressure of water. This may be classed as a practical de¬ 
finition as the lowering of vapor pressure due to the surface tension of 
droplets of water is disregarded. 

Physically adsorbed water is that moisture which is adsorbed on 
the walls of the capillaries of the coal and has a distinct difference in 
phase behavior from capillary condensed water. In capillaries of relatively 
small diameter, the physically adsorbed moisture will condense to form a 
liquid plug. This form of moisture is designated capillary condensed water. 
Both the physically adsorbed moisture and the capillary condensed moisture 
will exhibit a depressed vapor pressure. 

As the humidity to which coal has been subjected is increased to 
saturation, the thickness of the layer of the physically adsorbed moisture 
will increase until it becomes visible. In the smaller capillaries this 
condensed moisture will become capillary condensed water while in the 
larger capillaries it will remain as surface moisture exhibiting the normal 
vapor pressure of water. 

(b) Determination of Moisture 

The determination of moisture in, or associated with, a sample 
of coal is empirical (2?) with the actual result depending on conditions, 
such as sizing of coal, time and temperature of heating, atmosphere in 
the drying oven, etc. Furthermore, it is difficult to distinguish between 
the amounts of surface moisture and absorbed moisture present (27). 

Standard laboratory determinations measure the n as received” moisture 
which is the moisture content as it is received in the laboratory. 

In the determination of the n as received" moisture 














- 1U - 


in coal, the coarsely crashed sample is subjected to a preliminary 
partial drying, termed M air drying” before pulverizing for analysis# 
Different laboratories have different procedures* The A*S.T.M* method 
(15>) consists of grinding the coal to pass a 20 mesh sieve and spreading 
the 50 gram sauqple on a tared pan at room temperature or in a special 
drying erven at 10 to l5*G above room temperature. The coal is all wed 
to dry until the loss in weight is not more than 0*1 per cent per hour* 

The British Standard method (16) uses a sample of one lb. for 
coal with a size consist of one inch, two lbs. for coal with a two inch 
size consist, and etc. This coal is not ground below lh mesh size. 

The sample is weighed in the container, spread on suitable trays and 
allowed to air dry at room temperature in an atmosphere free from dust. 
If it is necessary to accelerate the drying, the temperature may be 
raised to a maximum of 50°-C. Drying is continued until the sample does 
not lose more than 0.1 per cent moisture per hour. 

A simple method has been developed by the Research Council of 
Alberta (1*0) for air drying coals without oxidation which has been 
shown to be an important factor in low rank coals (hi). The coal sample 
of 100 - 200 grams is subjected to a relative humidity of 32 per cent 
at 30°C. in an evacuated desiccator containing a saturated solution of 

magnesium chloride and crystals of the same to maintain the humidity. 

determination 

The moisture )$£&&&& of this air dried coal by the A.S.T.M. 
method (15) consists of grinding the coal to pass a 60 mesh screen, and 
weighing out a one gram sample in a porcelain capsule equipped with 
cover. The dimensions of this capsule are 7/8 inch in height and 1 3/h 
inches in diameter. The capsules with covers removed are placed in a 
toluene oven at a temperature of 10h to 110° C. for one hour. A current 











of dried air is passed through the even* Upon completion of the drying 
the capsules with covers in place are removed to a desiccator for cool¬ 
ing# The moisture content is calculated from the loss in weight# 

Using the British Standard method (16), the air dried coal is 
ground to pass a 72 mesh B.S# test sieve# A 10 gram sample of this coal 
is weighed in a shallow vessel with a well fitting cover# The area of 
the bottom of this vessel must be such that the coal does not exceed 0#3 
grains per square centimeter# The uncovered coal is heated for one hour 
at 105 - 110°C#, then allowed to cool in a desiccator while covered# A 
current of dried nitrogen is passed through the oven at a rate suffic¬ 
ient to change the atmosphere in the oven five times per hour# Altern¬ 
ately a vacuum of 20 - 25 inches of mercury may be maintained in the 
oven# 

An extraction method is used as an alternative by the British 
Standard (16). A sample of exactly 100 grams of air dried coal is 
weighed out into a 500 ml. flask# One hundred and fifty ml# of toluene 
which has been saturated with water is added and mixed thoroughly with 
the coal# The distilling flask is imnersed to the neck in an oil bath# 

A standard condenser is used and water is collected in a 7*5 ml# grad¬ 
uated receiver# Heat is applied to the apparatus and the distillation 
continued until no further water collects in the receiver# At the 
conclusion of distilling, water which has adhered to the side of the 
condenser is swept into the graduated cylinder with a spray of toluene 
and a camel’s hair brush, moistened with toluene# The volume of cooled 
water represents the moisture content of the sample# There are other 
methods for the determination of moisture (27) in coal# Conductions trie 
methods (27) have been used in Europe for the determination of moisture 


r 





* 


■' 








> 




' 







- 16 - 

in brown coal# The application of a direct Karl Fischer reagent titrst¬ 
ive (I4.) for determination of moisture in bituminous coal has been found 
satisfactory# 

Capacity moisture has been designated (39) as amount of water 
present in a coal ’which is in equilibrium with a saturated atmosphere 
at 30°C# The capacity moisture of a coal which is largely dependent on 
its degree of coalification, decreases as the coal series passes from 
peat through lignite, subbituminous, and bituminous to anthracite# A 
simple determination of capacity moisture has been developed by the 
Research Council of Alberta (U0). A fresh portion of the original 
sample is ground to pass a ll* mesh screen# A five gram sample of this 
coal is exposed for U8 hours at 30°C. in an evacuated desiccator con¬ 
taining an atmosphere of 97*6 per cent humidity which is obtained from 
a solution of potassium sulphate containing crystals of same# The 
sample is then dried in a vacuum oven at 10$ - 110°C# for three hours# 
The moisture content at 97*6 per cent humidity when multiplied by the 

factor 100 give the capacity moisture of the coal# 

98#6 

A sample of coal which contains surface moisture will lose 
moisture to the salt in the desiccator, therefore total moisture will 
be greater than the capacity moisture and the difference between total 
moisture and capacity moisture represents surface moisture# On the 
other hand if the sample was in a partially dried condition when it was 
received at the laboratory, it would take up water in the desiccator 
and the capacity moisture would be higher than the total moisture# 
Generally the capacity moisture on a dried sample of coal is not quite 
as high as it would be on a freshly rained sample of coal (10) 0 














! , 




' 



















< ' 






- 17 


(c) Dewatering of Fine Coal 

The amount of surface moisture that can be held by a coal 
depends on the specific surface area of the coal (30), the surface 
characteristics of the coal (2?) and in the amount of dewatering that 
has taken place (20)* It is believed that wettability and capillarity 
are the main factors in water retention (25)* The wettability of a 
coal depends on the polarity of the surface, a hydrophil surface being 
more easily wetted and more difficult to dewater* Usually low rank 
coals have more clearly defined hydrophil characteristics# Capillarity 
depends on the specific surface area of the coal as the voids between 
particles increase in size with a corresponding decrease in specific 
surface area# The capillarity forces are an inverse function of the 
distance between particles# 

Gilmore and Donald (20) have investigated the dewatering char¬ 
acteristics of fine coal and have shown that if an eight foot column of 
coal is allowed to drain, the majority of the draining will occur in 
the first few hours* The coal in the bottom of the column will have a 
higher concentration of moisture than coal in the top section of the 
column* Another investigation (28) of the dewatering characteristics 
of fine coal has shown that there is a minimum moisture content to which 
any sample of fine coal may be dewatered# This value appears to be in¬ 
dependent of the dewatering procedure providing the method is reasonably 
efficient# 

3# Surface Treatment of Coal 

The treatment of coal surfaces with oils, chemicals, dyes, 
and other materials has been practiced by coal operators for the past 
30 years# The earliest form of treatment for coal surfaces was in the 







i ■ ■ 


1C 




















. - V 






. 


. , 

-■ •• ■ • . 


* 


■ 














* 


a ■ 





- 18 - 


form of labels stencilled or pasted on individual lumps of coal for id¬ 
entification purposes ( 26 ). 

Some operators have attempted treatment as a means of altering 
or modifying the appearance of the coal to promote sales. There are 
many patents on the materials used for this purpose, such as ammonium 
persulphate, hydrochloric acid, titanium chloride, etc., however the pra¬ 
ctice has never become widely used. 

Many forms of coal treatment have been prescribed to decrease 
difficulty with soot, slag, and to increase the efficiency of combustion. 
Patents on chemicals for this purpose were issued as far back as I 8 I 4 . 5 . 

Some of these chemicals were common salt, zinc salts, boric acid, and 
permanganate. Combustion engineers were extremely skeptical of this form 
of treatment. In 1937 the U.S. Bureau of Mines carried out very exten¬ 
sive tests of these materials and concluded that the beneficial effects 
of these chemicals were negligible with the exception of sodium carbonate 
which increased the burning rate of high temperature coke. Investigations 
(11, 37) on the addition of materials such as borax and sodium silicate 
to promote clinker formation proved that such additions were effective, 
but were not as effective as was indicated theoretically. A& a result 
they could only be used economically in cases of emergency. 

Water is used extensively to reduce the dust in the mine, and 
during storage, and transportation of coal. It is cheap and readily avail¬ 
able, but has several disadvantages. It does not "wet" the coal readily, 
it promotes freezing, increases weathering, and is added weight which in¬ 
creases transportation costs. The addition of wetting agents to the water 
has allowed a substantial reduction in the amount of water necessary, and 
this has helped to reduce the above-mentioned disadvantages. 










, 










' 













19 


The practice of dust-proofing and freeze-proofing coal with 
calcium chloride which began in 1926 has spread until it has become 
fairly widespread in the United States at the present time. A film of 
water is adsorbed on the surface of coal particles which have been 
treated with calcium chloride due to the hygroscopic nature of the lat¬ 
ter. The water is adsorbed until equilibrium is reached, i.e. until 
the vapor pressure of the calcium chloride solution is in equilibrium 
with the partial pressure of water in the atmosphere. Therefore the 
extent of the film will depend on the relative humidity of the atmos¬ 
phere. The calcium chloride may be applied as dry flake or sprayed on 
in solution. The amount required depends on the surface moisture con¬ 
tent and the temperature to which it is to be protected fran freezing. 
'Jbe Calcium Chloride Institute (12) gives the amounts of calcium chlor¬ 
ide required and suggestions as to the best methods of application. In¬ 
vestigators at the Battelle Memorial Institute (17) (18) concluded that 
calcium chloride provided effective freeze proofing when properly ap¬ 
plied. The disadvantages of this material as listed by Sherman (36) 
are: 

(1) corrosion of railway oars and burning equipment 

(2) loss of calcium chloride due to rain 

(3) absorption of calcium chloride by low rank coals 

(U) objectionable mist surrounding spraying equipment. 

Oil treatment has gained steadily in popularity since its in¬ 
ception in 1922 as oil not only reduces the dustiness of coal, but also 
its water holding capacity and its tendency to freeze are reduced* Other 
secondary effects such as improved burning characteristics, reduction of 
the tendency of spontaneous combustion, improved carbonization, and no 














: ; i : 






- 




. 










20 - 


increase in ash content are claimed by the oil distributors. Most oils 
used are of an asphaltic base cutback with kerosene which allows the oil 
to be deposited in a thin film on the surface of the coal. The kerosene 
volatilizes leaving a tenacious film of asphaltic material. The oil is 
sprayed on at a point when the coal is tumbling to obtain better cover¬ 
age. Oil spraying equipment, which is marketed by several companies 
consists of an oil storage tank, pressure pump and motor, supply lines, 
valves and meters, nozzles, and a heating unit. The four main types of 
nozzles used by the industry ares 

(1) flat spray type 

(2) tangential type 

(3) impact type 

(U) atomizing type. 

The latter two are designed for cold oil systems, while all four types 
are suitable for use with hot oil. The atomizing-type nozzle has not 
proved popular as compressed air is necessary and it is difficult to 
prevent significant losses of oil to the surrounding atmosphere# 

Investigations of the results of oil treatment (29) (liU) have 
shown that the amount of oil required depended mainly on the specific 
surface of the coal# Some investigators claim that the initial vis¬ 
cosity is not Important for oil with an asphalt base, provided that the 
oil has been heated to a point where the viscosity would be low enough 
to allow good coverage. They have found that the extent of reduction 
in the dust index could be related to the amount of asphalt applied so 
that if more diluent is used, a larger volume of oil would be required 
to obtain the same effectiveness# The Ashland Oil & Refining Co 0 (1) 
has found that oil treatment prevented freezing in railway cars but for 







, V 






















, 

■ ■ , ■ ' ' 

- 





21 - 


fine coal it was better to use a layer treatment while loading the car* 
They also reported that as little as two quarts of oil per ton of coal 
increased the bulk density and the shatter index of the resulting coke 
significantly* This company has investigated oil treatment before wet 
washing but the results Indicated that a large percentage of the oil was 
lost during the cleaning process* A survey (32) in the United States in 
19 U 6 indicated that all clases of consumers were enthusiastic about the 
effects of oil treatment* The use of ultra-violet (13) to determine the 
extent of coverage of the oil spray is a recent development of consider¬ 
able merit. The oil-treated coal is flourescent under ultraviolet light 
enabling the operator or investigator to estimate fairly accurately the 
percentage of coal surfaces which were coated with oil* 
k* Freezing Characteristics of Wet Coal 

Host investigations reported in the literature relate to the 
freezing of coal in railway cars (17) ( 18 ) but there remains a lack of 
basic information on freezing characteristics. Donald (9) in commenting 
on an investigation being carried out at Pennsylvania State College on 
this phase of the subject states that they have found that there exists 
a critical moisture content for each size of coal below which the frozen 
coal has no physical strength* An investigation of the bond holding the 
frozen coal together has shown that this bond occurs within the ice and 
not in the coal or at the coal-ice interface. Tests on the relationship 
between surface moisture and breaking strength are being carried out at 
the present time* Preliminary tests on a No, 3 buckwheat sized coal in¬ 
dicate that the breaking strength is approximately proportional to the 
0*8 power of the surface moisture* 

The Bat telle Memorial Institute ( 36 ) has investigated the 



„ 






, ■ 






• 

' 

- 



, ' - ; . ! 



$ 


• 







' 




• 


■ ' • 








* 












" 




- ■ 

• 

d 

t 








■ d 







- " 

* 





' ’ 



‘ 



1 

„ 

■ 

' 

* ( ■ ■ ■ ... ' :. : 

> ' ...Vu 

> I . 














* • • 

■: ■■); j 

* • ~ " . ■ 

* ‘ 

■ 

' 

■ 





- 22 - 


freeze proofing of coal with calcium chloride* This treatment proved 
effective if the coal was not subjected tc^teraperature of below 0°F# 
for any length of time* 




- 23 


in SPECIFIC SURFACE 





- 21 * - 


1, Method of Determination 

A review of the literature has failed to produce a suitable 
method for the determination of specific surface which could be used 
for coals ranging in size from one half inch to 100 mesh* Permeability 
methods (5) (35) are suitable for only very fine coal. The methods of 
Heywood (21) and others (33) are cumbersome and also fail to account for 
the third dimension of the coal particle. A modification of the method used 
by Waters (kk) seemed to hold the most promise as this method is simple and 
the results fairly accurate when a sphericity constant is included in the 
equation. 


In this method the weight of a sphere is expressed by the equation: 


W, = J7T&P 
1 ~TT 


where: 


W-jl = weight of sphere, grams 
D = diameter of sphere, centimeters 



The diameter D is expressed as 


D = 



The diameter of a sphere of same weight and specific gravity 


as the coal particle may be calculated by the equation: 




c 


/6tni/3 

(rr/>) 


where: 


D c = diameter of sphere of same weight and 


specific gravity as the coal particle 


W ■ weight of the coal particle 

The surface area. A, of a sphere of same weight and specific gravity as 
























- 25 - 

the coal sample is expressed by 

a = m) 0 2 

The inclusion of a sphericity constant allows the expression of the surface 

area of the coal particle: 

Al = 7K>c 2 

F" 

The sphericity constant, k, is the ratio of surface area of a sphere to 
the surface area of a coal particle of the same volume. 

The specific surface, S, is equal to the product of the number of 
coal particles per unit weight and the surface area of one particle. 

Then: 

S = 6 _ 

k D c 

When: S = specific surface, car?/ cm3 of coal 

k = sphericity constant 

This equation expresses the specific surface in terms of the diameter and 
a sphericity constant. The inclusion of the specific gravity in the equ¬ 
ation would change the basis of specific surface to unit weight rather 
than unit volume. 

2, Experimental Procedure 

The specific gravity as determined by the volumeter (26) was 
I.I 4 .O for all sizes of Lethbridge coal from 3/U inch to 1$ mesh. The 
average weight of the coal particle was determined by a particle count, 
i,e. by weighing a known number of coal particles from each size fraction. 
The diameter of a sphere that would occupy the same volume as the coal 
particle was determined by the equation: 

■ (%) 1/3 









- 26 - 

3» Sphericity Cons tant 

The sphericity constant is defined as the ratio of the surface 
area of a sphere to the surface area of a coal particle of the same weight 
and specific gravity (19)* Gaudin (19) states that the value of this 
constant for coal ranges from 0#5 to 0#7* Heywood (21) suggests values 
ranging from 0#U8 to 0#60# Other investigators (lU) quote experimental 
values as low as 0#1|0* 

AH of these workers have calculated the sphericity constant 
from data obtained by measurement of specific surface and mean particle 
diameter# As methods for the determination of specific surface give 
empirical results it is not surprising to find such variations in the 
sphericity constant values# Also the value for mean particle diameter 
may vary depending on its definition and method of determination* Some 
investigators used mean screen opening (31) (7), others, the diameter 
of a circle of the same area as the projected area of the coal particle 
(21) (33)» In this work the mean particle diameter is defined as the 
diameter of a sphere of the same weight and specific gravity as the coal 
particle# 

Oberholtzer (35) and Clarke (7) suggest that the sphericity 
constant is relatively constant for most Alberta coals, and used a value 
of 0#60 which was also used by Morimoto (31)* As the method used to 
arrive at this value was not clearly evident, the values of specific 
surface obtained by Clarke (7) and Oberholtzer (35) were plotted against 
mean screen opening in Fig# I* It was found by bracketting that the 
values of specific surface were in agreement when a sphericity constant 
of 0#53 was used as shown in Fig# I* The values of specific surface ob¬ 
tained using this sphericity constant are given in Table I# The graph 









. 




















4 A 






j !!■. 


* 


, 



- 27 - 

in Fig. II illustrates the discrepancy between mean screen opening and 
mean particle diameter* 


Table I 

Specific Surface Area of Lethbridge Coal 


Size Range 

Mean 

Sieve 

Opening 

cm* 

Spec¬ 

ific 

Gravity 

Ave* 

Particle 

wt.gm* 

Mean 

Particle 

Diameter 

cm. 

Spher¬ 

icity 

Con¬ 

stant 

Specific 
Surface 
Area 
C!Tl2/ cm3 

-3/1* + 1/2 in. 

1.588 

1.1*0 

3.10 

1.62 

0.58 

6.39 

-1/2 + l/l* in. 

0.9525 

1.1*0 

0*71 

0.987 

o.58 

10.1*8 

-l/h + 1/8 in. 

0.1+76 

1.1*0 

0*0595 

0.1*33 

0.58 

23.9 

-1/8 in. + 10 M. 

0.21)1 

1.1*0 

6.1*xl0“ 3 0.206 

0.58 

50.3 

-10 + 28 M 

0.112 

1.1*0 

l*. 19x10"^ 0.0830 

0.58 

121*. 8 

-28 + 1*8 M 

0.01*1)2 

1.1*0 

5.26x10-5 0.01*13 

0.58 

251 


k. Discussion of Results 

The value of 0*58 for the sphericity constant is in close 
agreement with the value of 0*60 used by Clarke, Oberholtzer and Mor- 
iraoto* The consistent discrepancy between mean screen opening and mean 
particle diameter could be caused by an uneven distribution of particles 
between the size limits, or to presence of particles smaller than the 
lower limiting screen opening* 

An examination of Fig* II indicates that the discrepancy be¬ 
tween mean particle diameter and mean screen opening increases with de¬ 
creasing particle size. As the difficulty of obtaining complete separ¬ 
ation in screening also increases with decreasing particle size it would 
suggest that the difference in slope of the curves is caused by the pre¬ 
sence of material finer than the smaller screen opening. It would appear 























. 




c. 


f 


*< 




f • ' 















0.01 01 1.0 

DIAMETER OF PARTICLE (CM.) 




3 0 




















23 


that for samples of coal where a quantitative separation may be attained, 
the mean screen opening and mean particle diameter might be used inter¬ 
changeably* The use of a value of 0.60 for the sphericity constant by 
Oberholtzer is significant in that his investigation must have pointed 
to a screening efficiency of the same order as found in this investig¬ 
ation. If this were not the case the sphericity constants would not have 
been in such close agreement* 

The values of specific surface area which were obtained by 
Clarke when using the air permeability method and which are shown in 
Fig. I are interesting. It is obvious that his values are meaningless 
for the larger sizes of coals tested* This is due to the change from 
laminar to turbulent flow of the air through the coal bed when larger 
sized coal particles were tested* The calculation of specific surface 
from the pressure drop through the coal bed was based on laminar flow 
conditions. The larger pressure drop due to turbulence produced the 
misleading results shown in Fig. I* 




2 9 


IV SURFACE MOISTURE 









30 


1, Introduction 

Surface moisture is that water associated with coal which ex¬ 
hibits the normal vapor pressure of water 0 It is extraneous moisture 
caused by the coal coming from a wet section of the mine or because water 
had been added during mining,preparation or storage* Surface moisture 
may be determined by subtracting capacity moisture from the total mois¬ 
ture under conditions of equilibrium. However, if coal is immersed in 
water for such a short length of time that the amount of moisture ab¬ 
sorbed is insignificant, the gain in weight will give a measure of sur¬ 
face moisture. This is discussed more fully in the section on absorbed 
moisture. 

As the surface moisture content of a dewatered coal is believed 
to depend largely on its specific surface, an investigation of this rel¬ 
ationship was undertaken for Lethbridge coal. 

2. Preparation of Sample 

The importance of representative sampling in an investigation 
of moisture in/or associated with coal cannot be over stressed as there 
are two factors which are often disregarded in the process of separating 
coal into size fractions. 

Firstly, the separation must approach quantitative proportions, 
i.e. all of the coal which isjimaller than the lower screen opening must 
be allowed to pass through the screen and the difficulty of obtaining a 
high degree of separation increases with decreasing screen size. The 
coal for this investigation was allowed to pass very slowly over a shaking 
screen constructed in these laboratories. It was found that the degree 
of separation depended primarily on the rate at which the coal passed 
over the screen. A good separation was obtained by this method. 








3 


. v • ; ■ .. . 

■ 

K *. 





- 31 - 


Secondly, an even distribution of the coal particle size be¬ 
tween the limits of the screen openings for any given size range is of 
extreme importance. This problem was minimized by grinding the coal so 
that the desired size fraction was midway between the largest and small¬ 
est sizes present in the ground coal as shown in Fig, III, The proced¬ 
ure required a large quantity of coal 
as the overall sample could not be 
split in several fractions without 
violating this principle. Once the 
coal had been screened it was rel¬ 
atively simple to obtain a represent¬ 
ative sample by riffling, but it was 
extremely difficult to mix the coal 
so thoroughly that every portion taken from the stock sample could be 
considered representative without causing undue abrasion to the coal 
surfaces, 

3, Experimental Procedure 

Coal samples of the following sizes were prepared using the 
procedure outlined: 

3A inch to 1/2 inch, l/2 inch to lA inch, l/k inch 
to 1/8 inch, 1/8 inch to 10 mesh, 10 mesh to 28 mesh, 
and 28 mesh to U8 mesh, 

A 1000 gram coal sample was weighed and immersed in water for 30 seconds. 
This sample was then transferred to a weighed 100 mesh standard screen 
where most of the water drained off. To further the dewatering process 
the sieve containing the coal was placed at a 1$ degree angle to the 
horizontal on a Cenco-Meinzer sieve shaker for 10 minutes. The dewater¬ 
ing was completed by allowing the sieve to stand at a degree angle 



Fig, III 






I 




t 







; ( 


% 





O: ‘ ' ' 


„l !’ ' . ■ * . . ' v' . o 

* . ' ~ - 













- 32 - 

for a further period of 10 minutes# The gain in weight was considered 
surface moisture# Duplicate determinations were made for each sample# 
The results of these tests are given in Table II# The surface moisture 
has been plotted against mean particle diameter in Fig, 17# 

Table II 

Surface Moisture Tests 


Moisture expressed in gm# water per 100 gm. as rec*d coal 



-3A+1/2 in. 

-1/2+lA in. 

-lA+l/8 in. 

-1/8 in+lOM 

-10+28M 

-28+U8M 

1 

1.67 

3.82 

5.2U 

11.52 

29.91 

50.52 

2 

1.65 

3.33 

5.6U 

12.06 

2U.0U 

50.U9 

3 

I.69 

3.20 

5.87 

11.35 

27.10 

I48.7I4 

h 

mmmk 

3.5b 

6.02 

11.143 

29.67 

50.30 

5 


3.31 

6.38 

11.35 

29.53 

51.06 

6 

mm mm. 

3.59 

5.32 

H.Jj 9 

26.82 

U9.97 

7 

— 

2# 92 

5.86 

12.77 

25.514 

51.02 

8 

— 

— 

-- 

11.50 

214.99 

149.67 

9 

— 

— 

— 

11. H3 

27.39 

1)9.96 

10 

— 

— 

- 

11.69 

25.6U 

50.10 

11 

— 

— 

tm mm 

n.5o 

— 

-- 

Ave# 

1.67 

3.39 

5.7 6 

n.6!j 

27.09 

50.18 

Mean Dia¬ 
meter cm 1#62 

.987 

.U33 

.206 

.0830 

.0103 


U# Discussion of Results 

If the surface moisture were dependent only on the specific sur¬ 
face the curve in Fig. IV could be expressed by the equation: 

S «- K 
d 














1,000 


_J 

< 

o 

o 


FIGURE m 
SURFACE MOISTURE 

VS.. 






33 


where: 

S = surface moisture content 
d s mean particle diameter 
K = constant 

The curve represented by the equation when plotted on logarithmic graph 
paper would have a slope of -1.0 whereas the experimental curve has a 
slope of -0.925. It would appear that this deviation ie slope, although 
small, is a function of particle diameter. This could be caused by a 
constant error in the experimental method employed, or be due to a change 
in sphericity constant with size. It was expected that interstitial mois¬ 
ture would be a factor in the finer sizes of coal tested, but this would 
result in a slope steeper than -1.0, therefore the presence of interst¬ 
itial moisture held by finer sizes of dewatered coal may be considered 
insignificant. 






, 


* c 
















'■ t . ’ • • .C ■ - • . ■: ■ 

- 

* 























ABSORBED MOISTIRE 











. 

















- 35 - 


1. Introduction 

As was pointed out in the general introduction, coal absorbs 
water upon immersion. This moisture is retained as physically adsorbed 
water and capillary condensed water. The amount of water which would be 
absorbed depends on: (l) the amount the coal has been dried, (2) the pet¬ 
rographic constituents of the coal, (3) the rank of the coal, and (Ij.) 
the length of time of immersion. 

Upon indefinite immersion, coal will absorb water until it be¬ 
comes saturated. In the coal preparation industry however, the length 
of time of immersion may be such that the moisture in the coal does not 
reach equilibrium. Further it was not known whether coal 111 absorb 
moisture to the same extent when immersed in water as when maintained in a 
vacuum desiccator at a high humidity as is the case in the capacity mois¬ 
ture determination. In this investigation, fine coal has been used to de¬ 
termine the extent of moisture absorption whereas larger coal pieces were 
found more applicable to a study of the method of absorption. 

2. Determination of Absorbed Moisture 
(a) Capacity Moisture 

The amount of xyster coal will absorb upon immersion is dependent 
upon the extent the coal has been dried below its capacity moisture value. 
The method of determination of capacity moisture has been outlined in a 
previous section, but it was not known whether the immersion of coal in 
water for different periods of time would affect the results obtained from 
this determination. Therefore before assuming the validity of the test 
in these circumstances, an investigation was necessary. 

Samples of -10 +28 mesh Lethbridge coal were immersed in water 
for periods of time varying from 30 seconds to one hour. These samples 









-36 - 

were dewatered as described previously* Capacity moisture determinations 
were made on four sauples of the dewatered coal for each immersion time# 
The results shown in Table III indicate that the capacity moisture values 
are independent of immersion time. This suggests that the coal does not 
absorb more moisture when immersed in water than under the conditions 
present in the capacity moisture determination# It may even not absorb 
as much moisture as under the conditions in the capacity moisture test# 

Table III 

Capacity Moisture Test 
Lethbridge Coal 
-1C +28 Mesh 


Immersion 

Time 

Test #1 

Moisture expressed in per cent on dry basis 
Test #2 Test #3 Test § h fare. 

0 

10.6U 

10.65 

10.66 

10.62 

10.61t 

30 sec# 

10.63 

10.73 

10. ?U 

10.83 

10.73 

1 min# 

10.66 

10.66 

10.69 

10.60 

10.65 

2 min. 

10.76 

10. 7U 

10.62 

10.70 

10.71 

5 min# 

10.75 

10.57 

10.65 

10.73 

10.68 

10 min# 

10.7U 

10.68 

10.68 

10.69 

10.70 

20 min# 

10.71 

10.65 

10.61 

10.65 

10.66 

1 hr# 

10.67 

10.70 

10.66 

10.66 

10.67 


(b) Absorbed Moisture 

The rate of absorption of moisture and the time required 
for the moisture to reach equilibrium was determined by immersing the 
coal in water for varying lengths of time, dewatering and determining 
the retained moisture content by difference# 














•) , t i 


X ■ rci : -v 










37 


Samples of 1000 grams each, of two size fractions, -3/1* +1/2 
inch and -l/i; +1/8 inch coal, prepared as previously described, were 
used in this work* 

Duplicate determinations of the retained moisture were made 
for each sample* The average values of retained moisture are shown in 
column four of Tables 17 and V* The as received moisture and the cap¬ 
acity moisture recorded in column two and three were determined by the 
standard laboratory methods described previously* The values for total 
moisture in column five were obtained by adding retained moisture and 
as received moisture* Total moisture has been plotted against immer¬ 
sion time in Fig. V and VI. These curves when extrapolated to zero 
give a value which is the sum of the as received moisture and surface 
moisture* The as received moisture has been determined, so that sur¬ 
face moisture may now be obtained by subtraction. These values are 
recorded in column six of Tables TV and V. The absorbed moisture ob¬ 
tained by the difference between surface moisture and retained mois¬ 
ture is shown in column seven of Tables IV and V* lhat a better under¬ 
standing may be obtained of the relationship between the different forms 
of moisture, the lines representing as received moisture, capacity mois¬ 
ture, as received plus surface moisture, maximum total moisture, and 
capacity plus surface moisture have been included in these graphs. All 
values of moisture are expressed in grams of water per 100 grams of dry 


coal, 


x 


- 38 - 


Table 17 

Absorbed Moisture Tests 


Lethbridge Coal 
3 A - 1/2 in. 


Immersion 

Time 

Capacity 

Moisture 

Moisture 
As Rec*d 
Moisture 

in gm. water per 100 
Retained Total 

Moisture Moisture 

gm. dry coal 
Surface Absorbed 
Moisture Moisture 

0 

H .03 

11.08 

1 . 8 ? 

— 

1 . 8 ? 

— 

30 sec. 

— 

— 

1.86 

12.9U 

1 . 8 ? 

0.01 

1 min. 

— 

— 

1.87 

12.95 

1 . 8 ? 

0.02 

2 min. 

— 

— 

1.96 

13 . 01 * 

1 . 8 ? 

0.11 

10 min* 

— 

— 

2.19 

13.27 

1 . 8 ? 

0.3U 

20 min. 

— 

— 

2.23 

13.31 

1 . 8 ? 

0 . 1-8 

1 hr. 

— 

— 

2 . 1 A 

13.52 

1 . 8 ? 

0.?9 

2 hr. 

— 

— 

2.2i3 

13.51 

1 . 8 ? 

0.?8 

5 hr. 

— 

— 

2.38 

13.1(6 

1 . 8 ? 

0.?3 

2) 4 hr. 

— 

— 

2.31 

13.39 

1 . 8 ? 

0 . 1*6 

72 hr. 

— 

mm mm 

2.32 

13 . 1|0 

1 . 8 ? 

0.1*7 

7 days 

—— 

— 

2.30 

13.38 

1 . 8 ? 

0 .!*? 




























- 39 - 


Table V 

Ab sorbed Moisture Tests 
Lethbridge Coal 
lA -1/8 in. 


Moisture in gm. water per 100 gm. dry coal 


Immersion Capacity 
Time Moisture 

As Rec*d 
Moisture 

Retained 

Moisture 

Total 

Moisture 

Surface 

Moisture 

Absorbed 

Moisture 

0 

12.00 

11.37 

5.53 

— 

5.53 

— 

30 sec* 

— 

— 

5.62 

16.99 

5.53 

0*09 

1 min* 

— 

—- 

5.98 

17.35 

5.53 

o.li5 

2 min. 

— 


5.53 

16*90 

5.53 

0 

5 min* 


—— 

5.80 

17.17 

5.53 

0.27 

10 min* 

— 

— 

5.80 

17.17 

5.53 

0.27 

20 min* 


—— 

5.96 

17.33 

5.53 

0.k3 

1 hr* 


— 

6.02 

17.39 

5.53 

0.1)9 

2 hr* 

— 

*mm*m*mm 

6.® 

17.96 

5.53 

1.06 

5 hr* 


—— 

5.72 

17.09 

5.53 

0.19 

















• • ot. • 










































"IVOD AH0 IAI0 OOI / d 31 VM 1AI9 synisioiN 




































ho 


(c) Discussion of Results 

The results indicate that an immersion time of approximately 
one hour was required before the moisture content of both the 3/h inch 
to 1/2 inch fraction and the l/h inch to 1/8 inch fraction reached equil¬ 
ibrium* It would be expected that the smaller sized coal would reach 
equilibrium first but the accuracy of the results on the finer-sized 
coal was not sufficient to warrant the drawing of any conclusions of 
this nature* 

While it was expected that the retained moisture at saturation 
would equal the sum of the capacity moisture plus the surface moisture, 
in every case the retained moisture at saturation was below the expected 
maximum. This is significant as it suggests that the capacity moisture 
as determined in the laboratory is able to fill the pores and capillaries 
of the coal with water to a greater extent than if the coal were immersed 
in water until equilibrium conditions were established. This difference 
may be attributed to the vacuum conditions under which the capacity 
moisture determination is carried out. The low pressure surrounding the 
coal allows the escape of gas which would be trapped in the coal if it 
were immersed in water* These trapped gases prevent the pores and cap¬ 
illaries of the coal being filled with water to the extent that is the 
case in the capacity moisture determination. 

3o Method of Moisture Absorption 

(a) Development of Capillarity Equation 

The movement of water through a porous solid has been attributed 
to several mechanisms (22). As capillarity has been shown to be the con¬ 
trolling factor in many cases, an equation based on this phenomena has 
been employed in an attempt to characterize the movement of water through 


coal, 









- 

















t ■ 





- Ill - 


When a single capillary is immersed in water, the effects of 
surface tension -will cause the water to rise in the capillary. The pres¬ 
sure differential which exists across the gas-liquid interface may be 
expressed by the equation (20a): 

<&P 0 = 2_JT_cos^ 
r 

Where: 

= pressure differential across gas-liquid interface 
T = surface tension 
r = radius of capillary 
e - contact angle 

In the case of the coal-air-water system (2) 
cos<5= 1.0 


Then: 

^P 0 = 2T 
r 

The effect of compression of the entrapped air in a closed 
capillary will reduce the height to which the water will rise. The 
pressure differential,in this case, between atmospheric pressure 
and the pressure on the water side of the meniscus, may be expressed by 
the equation: 


= 2_T - AP a 
r 

Where difference between atmospheric pressure and the pressure of 

the air entrapped in the capillary. 

In the case of water flowing through a capillary the driving 
force is a u capillary potential 11 which depends on^P, the difference be¬ 
tween atmosphere pressure and the pressure on the water side of the men¬ 
iscus. The driving force x-dll decrease in magnitude as the water proceeds 













£ 













eg 











- la a - 


along the capillary due to the compression of entrapped air. 

Capillary flow may be described by the D'Arcy equation: 

q x = ic Aq ? 






Inhere; 


Qx = rate of flow in the x-direction, cm.3/sec. 
A = cross-sectional area of flow, cm? 

P = pressure, gm./cm? 

= viscosity, gm./cm. sec. 
x = direction of flow, cm. 

K = permeability, cm.3/sec 0 2 

Consider flow in the x-direction through the increment, d x: 


U-y = J 


=_^A 


x d P 



JyU 1 X 

Where: 

W* = rate of flow in x-direction, gm./sec. 

/Ow = density of water in gm./cm. 

= }&■&•* fc^x) ’(ilU -) 

yAs (d YJjtKf'tCx) 

Then by material balance W x - ) ~ do 

c!& 

\^here: C = moisture content gm. water per gm. coal 

f> s = density of coal, gm/cm 0 3 


Wx+oLx, 


^wAx 1/dP) - /d?\ 

fyU, [yd xM (d x/| 


= A xZJ s d x J c 


K/D \ j d P - s do 

It!? 


y 


K^r 


y <5 



















i 





Let k = K /Qyj 

ST* 

Where k is a constant depending on the density of both the solid and 
the liquid, the viscosity of the liquid, and the permeability of the 
solid. 




c 


Je 


k 


^2 p 

—A— g- 

V x 


It is possible to integrate this equation if the following two assump¬ 
tions are made: 


1* that k is independent of P 

2. that c and P are related linearly 
The question then reduces to the La Place equation: 

c/ c = k 

This equation is a special case of the general equation and 
is believed to only apply over very small ranges in moisture content 
or in materials with very fine pores (6). 

Assume that the dry coal particle is spherical and that the 
radius, a, is the radius of a sphere of the same volume as the coal 
particle. Let, r, be any point on the radius, a. In this case the 
La Place equation becomes: 

^c = k/ do, + 2 J c / 

Let c = moisture content at any location at any time 
Wj_ = surface moisture content 

= retained moisture content at saturation 
Ihe equation may now be integrated with the following boundary cond¬ 
itions (2U) (3l|): 









- 1*3 - 

c - at & = 0 

c - Wf «• 0 at r ■ a 



-1/2 sin 2/fr e 
a 



3/n-e 


-9k0J}- z 


■] 


The retained moisture content W at time, , 
integrating this equation over the limits r s o to r 


may be obtained by 
= a 


/ rv = y 

W « 1 - 6 > le' 

ITT S? 

u *-o 

This equation expresses the retained moisture content in terms 
of surface moisture content, moisture content at saturation, immersion 
time, and particle radius. This equation does not account for particle 
shape. It should be noted that this capillarity equation applies only 
when the constant k is independent of the driving force and when there 
is a linear relationship between the driving force and the moisture grad¬ 
ient. It is not known whether both these assumptions are valid in the 
case of coal, but this equation should illustrate the applicability of 
capillarity equations in characterizing the movement of water through 
coal. 



2 (k m 2 


(b) Laboratory Investigation 

Large pieces of coal were used in the examination of rate and 
mechanism of the movement of water into a coal particle. It was not 
possible to analyse these large pieces for as received moisture and cap¬ 
acity moisture, and still have the pieces left intact for experimental 
purposes. Therefore the basis of calculation, by necessity, is the as 
received basis. 


Pieces of coal varying in weight from 200 grams to 600 grams 









. 


V 














- lib 


were carefully selected so that they would have approximately the same 
degree of sphericity* These lumps were suspended in water for 10 seconds* 
removed, the excess moisture shaken off, weighed, end replaced in the water. 
This procedure was repeated for times of one minute, two minutes, five 
minutes, etc. until equilibrium was reached* 


The results of a representative test are given in Table VI and 


Fig. VII. Tests were made on ten pieces of coal. Although the rate and 
extent of moisture absorption varied a certain amount with different lumps, 
depending on their petrographic constituents size, sphericity, ash content, 
and the amount the lump had dried below its capacity moisture content, the 
general pattern was the same. 

(c) Calculation of Theoretical Curves 


The experimental results from Test 10-1 were considered to be 


representative for all the lumps used in the investigation so that all 
theoretical calculations have been based on the results of this test. 

The theoretical curves were calculated from the capillarity 
equation which has been developed: 



Where 


Wf * retained moisture content of dewatered coal at saturation 
in gm. water per 100 gm. as rec*d coal. 

* retained surface moisture content of dewatered coal in 
gm. water per 100 gm. as rec ! d coal. 

W « retained moisture content of dewatered coal after an 

immersion time in gm. water per 100 gm. as rec*d coal. 

6 ■ immersion time in seconds. 

k « constant in cm2 p er second. 

a » radius of sphere of same volume as coal particle in cm. 








ir : 1 








c. 


. 







■ 









I 










Water Immersion Test 


Lethbridge Goal 
Table VI 
Test 10-1 


Immersion 

Time 

Wt* of Goal 
Lump Gm, 

Retained 

Moisture 

Gm. 

Retained 

Moisture 

Gm. Water/100 
Gm. as Rec*d 
Coal 

Absorbed 

Moisture 

Gm. Water/100 

Gm. as Rec 1 d 

Coal 

0 

36 U .3 

0 

0.48 

0 

10 sec* 

366.0 

1.7 

0.48 

0 

30 sec. 

366.1 

1.8 

0.49 

0.01 

5 mins* 

366 . 4 

2.1 

0.58 

0.10 

10 mins* 

366.5 

2.2 

0.60 

0.12 

20 mins* 

366.7 

2 .U 

0.66 

0.18 

1 hr. 

366.9 

2.6 

0.71 

0.23 

2 hr. 

367.4 

3.1 

0.85 

0.37 

5 hr. 

367.9 

3.6 

0.99 

0.51 

7.5 hr. 

368.2 

3.9 

1.06 

0.58 

24 hr. 

369.1 

it. 8 

1.33 

0.85 

72 hr. 

369.7 

5.U 

1.58 

1.00 

7 days 

369.8 

5.5 

1.51 

1.03 

10 days 

369.8 

5.5 

1.51 

1.03 


Wt. of coal 36U.3 gin* 
Specific Gravity l«2jl 
Mean Diameter 7.82 cm* 





















• - t 







RETAINED MOISTURE AT SATURATION 

































- he - 


The constant k was found to be 2.0 x 10cm^ per second 
when calculated from experimental results at an immersion time of 72 
hours. The value of k at an immersion time of 10 minutes was k.Q 
x 10"5 cm^ p er second. The theoretical curves based on these values 
of k are shown in Fig. VII. 

(o) Discussion of Results 

An examination of the theoretical curve indicates the move¬ 
ment of water through a piece of coal may be characterized by use of 
a capillarity equation. The discrepancy between the experimental 
curve and the theoretical curve may be attributed to the irregular 
shape of the coal particle and to the assumptions made in the develop¬ 
ment of the theoretical equation. 

It would be difficult to incorporate a factor which would 
allow for particle shape as the effective sphericity is not only a 
function of the particle shape but depends on the radius of the coal 
particle. As the water moves toward the centre of the particle, the 
effective front through which this water must pass would tend to ap¬ 
proach the shape of a sphere. 

The assumption that k was independent of P and that c 
and P are related linearly were necessary in order that the differ¬ 
ential equation could be solved mathematically. 

In order that this equation could be used for the prediction 
of the absorption of moisture upon immersion, a value of the constant, 
k, which would be representative of a specific coal would have to be 
obtained experimentally. This constant may be obtained by means of a 
number of tests similar to those carried out in this investigation* 
These tests were relatively simple to perform and gave remarkably 










V 



-In¬ 
consistent results as evidenced by the points on the graph in Fig* VII* 

The value of k would be expected to vary with the rank, the petrographic 
constituents, and the as received moisture content of the coal. 





SURFACE TREATMENT OF FINE COAL 





- h9 


1, Introduction 

The dustproofing coal with oil has become widely practiced 
in the United States in recent years. This form of surface treatment 
has increased in Alberta in recent years as coal operators have attempted 
to meet serious competition from natural gas, L*P*G*, and fuel oil* 

Coal preparation engineers have suggested that it may prove practical 
to treat fine coal with oil prior to wet processing in order to reduce 
or eliminate the drying operation* However before such an undertaking 
can be properly assessed, it is necessary that preliminary information 
on the water holding capacity of oil treated fine coal be investigated# 
Therefore in these studies the amounts of oil required to give a sub¬ 
stantial reduction in surface moisture have been examined and the effect 
of storage on oil treatment investigated* 

2* laboratory Equipment 

In the most widely used method of oil treatment the heated 
oil is sprayed under pressure through a nozzle directly onto a moving 
stream of coal* This is easily done on an industrial scale, but was 
difficult to design on a laboratory scale as it was not possible to 
obtain a nozzle of a suitable type which would give a small enough dis¬ 
charge when used with the amounts of coal that would be handled in the 
laboratory* However, after much experimentation a satisfactory labor¬ 
atory apparatus was developed for adding very small amounts of oil to 
coal* The apparatus shown diagrammatically in Fig* VIII consists es¬ 
sentially of four parts, (a) a vibrating feeder for the coal, (b) an 
oil treating chamber, (c) an assemblage for atomizing very small quant¬ 
ities of oil, and (d) a source of pressure for use in the atomization 
of the oil. Details of the essential parts shown in the diagram follow* 





■ V V 'C 




- 






t 









i 

, : ■; ; ; * 

. . - . 











cr 

o 

H 

< 

_1 

ID 

CD 

LlJ 

cr 


o 


FIGURE 3ZHE 

OIL SPRAYING EQUIPMENT 





















































































- 51 - 


(a) The rate of feed of coal was maintained constant by use 
of a vibrating feeder controlled by means of a voltage regulator* 

(b) The atomized oil made contact with the coal at the point 
where the coal tumbled off the lip of the vibrating feeder to effect 
maximum coverage* A metal shield positioned around the falling stress 
of coal minimized the loss of atomized oil to the atmosphere* The 
treated coal was collected in a paper bag which was fitted to the bottom 
of the shield* 

(c) A 1 1 /h inch black iron pipe served as an oil reservoir, 
all other piping with the exception of the l/8 inch copper heating coil 
were 1/8 inch black iron* The oil was circulated through the system 

by means of small centrifugal pump. A voltage regulator in series with 
the electric heater allowed control of the oil temperature* 

The most significant part of the apparatus was the assemblage 
used to atomize the oil, this is shown in detail in Fig. IX. The glass 
nozzle with an orifice of approximately 0.002 inches was fixed in the 
oil line in a l/k inch union by means of gaskets* The fine stream of oil 
issuing from this orifice under high pressure was mixed with the low 
pressure stream of nitrogen. This mixture was discharged from the flat 
spray nozzle in the form of an atomized spray* The assembly was pos¬ 
itioned so that the oil issuing from this nozzle made contact with the 
coal as it fell off the lip of the vibrating feeder* As the spray angle 
of this nozzle was 6? degrees, complete coverage of the 3.0 inch coal 
stream was effected when the nozzle was fixed 2*h inches above the lip 
of the vibrating feeder. The pressure of the nitrogen was maintained 
high enough to produce good atomization, but not high enough to cause 
a significant loss of oil to the atmosphere. A pressure of 20-2*> p.s. 







' 


c 


. 







HIGH PRESSURE 



ja 


NITROGEN 
LOW PRESSURE 


2.4" 



SCALE FULL SIZE 


VALVE 


FILTER 

200 MESH SCREEN 
GASKET SEAL 


GLASS NOZZLE 
0.002 INCHES 


FIGURE IX 

NOZZLE ARRANGEMENT 
FOR 

OIL SPRAYING. 


FILTER 

200 MESH SCREEN 


NOZZLE 

EQUIVALENT ORIFICE 
DIAMETER 0.011 INCH 


SPRAY ANGLE 65° 


LIP OF VIBRATING FEEDER 




















































































i.g 0 was found to be the most satisfactory. The rate of oil discharge 
was regulated by adjusting the pressure in the oil line. Variations in 
application from 1.0 to 12.0 U. S. quarts per ton of coal were achieved 
by this method. 

(d) A cylinder of nitrogen supplied pressure to both the high 
and low pressure parts of the system by means of two pressure regulators. 

3. Treating Oils 

The two oils used in this investigation, Imperial Oil Spray 100 
and Imperial Oil Spray 200, were supplied by the Imperial Oil Go* Ltd. 

The numbers refer to their respective viscosities in S.S.U* at 100®F. 

These oils are an asphalt cutback with kerosene to the desired viscosity. 
The graph in Fig. X shows the change in viscosity of these oils with 
temperature. 

U. Experimental Procedure 

The investigation was carried out on a medium volatile bitum¬ 
inous coaL obtained from the International mine of Coleman Collieries 
Ltd., Coleman. The work being done on the followings 
size fractionsj -l/8 inch to 10 mesh, 10 mesh to 28 mesh, and 28 mesh 
to 1*8 mesh. The coal was placed in the vibrating feeder which had been 
adjusted to give a rate of feed of approximately four pounds per minute. 
The reservoir was filled with oil and pressure applied to the oil line 
which was then bled of airlocks. The heater and circulating pump was 
used to bring the oil to the required temperature for the tests. The 
desired temperature was obtained by means of a voltage regulator in series 
with the heater. The spray was turned on in order to allow the temper¬ 
ature of the nozzle arrangement to reach equilibrium. The oil spray was 
collected in a graduate cylinder for one minute before and after each 







, 









- 




FIGURE X 



■j— o 


o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

ID 

to 

o 

o 

CM 

O 

O 

O 

ID 

o 

to 

o 

OJ 

ID 

o 


CD 

ID 


to 

to 


'SCIN003S “lVSy3AIND 1309AVS ‘A1IS00SIA 


100 150 200 250 300 35C 

TEMPERATURE DEGREES FAHRENHEIT 


























































































































% 3dnisiow 3 o vj dns ni NOi±ona3d 


3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 II. 0 12.0 

OIL APPLICATION US. QT PER TON 












^60 






FIGURE xnr 

SURFACE MOISTURE REDUCTION 



% 3idnisio iai aovjyns ni Nouonaaa 


40 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0 10.0 NO 12.0 

OIL APPLICATION u.s. ot per ton 




















FIGURE xnr 

SURFACE MOISTURE REDUCTION 










FIGURE X3 L 

SURFACE MOISTURE REDUCTION 



% synisiow 30 vjyns ni Nouonasy 


120 15.0 18.0 210 24.0 27.0 30.0 33 0 34 0 

STORAGE TIME DAYS 






run to determine and check the rate of discharge. The vibrating feeder 

which 

was started for the test which lasted one minute during/the treated coal 
was collected in a paper bag. The extent of oil application was calculated 
from the rate of flow measurements and the weight of coal collected during 
the one minute run. The surface moisture content of the treated samples 
was obtained by immersing a $00 gram sample in water for 30 seconds, then 
dewatering by the method used in the section on surface moisture. 

5* Experimental Results 

The results of the tests using Imperial Oil Spray 100 at room 
temperature on the three size fractions of coal are shown graphically 
in Figs. XI, XII and XIII. The results for Imperial Oil Spray 200 with 
1/8 inch to 10 mesh coal which allows a comparison of the effects of these 
two oils, are given in Fig. XIV. Imperial Oil Spray 200 was applied at 
the temperature of 132° F. at which its viscosity was equal to the viscosity 
of the light oil at rocm temperature. 

The change in effectiveness of oil treatment during storage is 
illustrated in Fig* XV where the l/8 inch to 10 mesh coal was treated at 
the rate of 5.86 U.S. quarts of oil per ton of coal* The overall sample 
was mixed thoroughly at the start which allowed for representative sampl¬ 
ing. Surface moisture determinations were made at intervals over a period 
of 36 days during which the coal was stored in an open paper bag. 

6. Interpretation of Results 

The treatment of the 1/8 inch to 10 mesh size fraction with 
Imperial Oil Spray 100 as shown in Fig* XI illustrates a linear relation¬ 
ship between percentage surface moisture reduction and amounts of oil 
applied up to approximately six U.S. quarts per ton. A levelling off 
then occurs which may be the result of a heavier layer of oil being ap¬ 
plied to the already treated coal surfaces before the remainder of the 













' 





- 51 * - 

surfaces had been coated. Ihe same effect is evident for the 10 mesh 
to 28 mesh coal although the levelling off appears to have been more 
gradual in this case. Ihe curve for the 28 mesh to 1$ mesh coal shown 
in Fig. ZIII is most interesting in that there is a sudden increase in 
the rate of surface moisture reduction with heavier oil application. 

The cause of this effect was evident during the surface moisture deter¬ 
minations. This fine coal, when treated with more than five U.S. quarts 
per ton, tended to agglomerate to such a degree that a substantial part 
of the surface of the coal did not come in contact with the water. 

The amount of oil used to treat coal was believed to be mainly 
dependent on the specific surface of the coal, suggesting that the curves 
could be reduced to a common basis from which it would be possible to 
calculate the amount of oil which was required to obtain a specific re¬ 
duction in surface moisture for size fractions above the agglomerating 
range. The surface moisture reduction has been plotted against the 
amount of oil applied per unit area of coal surface in Fig. XVI. 

The specific surface of the l/Q inch to 10 mesh sized coal was 
obtained from the equations 

S « 6 

F3 

which was developed in the section on specific surface. 

S ■ specific surface in cm2 p er cm3, 
k = sphericity constant 
d » mean particle diameter in cm. 

The sphericity constant was assumed to be 0.58 as determined earlier for 
Lethbridge coal. The mean particle diameter of the 1/8 inch to 10 mesh 
fraction was found to be 0.231 cm. 

S ■ 4 U .3 cm2/cm3 for the 1/8 inch to 10 mesh coal. 


Then 





1 


- 











55 


The section on surface moisture has shown that the relation¬ 
ship between surface moisture, M, and specific surface, S, could be ap¬ 
proximated by the equation; 

M ~ K S 

Where K is a constant* From the specific surface of the 1/8 inch to 10 
mesh coal and the surface moisture of the untreated coal, it was possible 
to calculate the constant K and hence the specific surface of the other 
size fractions. This method was used in preference to the particle count 
method as the results were considered more representative. This is evid¬ 
ent from the results of the tests on Imperial Oil Spray 100 and Imperial 
Oil Spray 200 where although the same size range of coal was used in each 
test, there was a considerable change in the surface moisture of the un¬ 
treated coal indicating a corresponding difference in specific surface. 

The points in Fig. XVI depict a scattered band which may be due 
to inconsistent effects of heavier applications. An average line has been 
drawn through the points and when extrapolated represents an average value 
which might be used for the prediction of the approximate amounts of oil 
necessary to give a specific moisture reduction for any given size range 
of International coal. 

The effect of oil treatment on surface moisture reduction for 
various sizes of coal is evident in Fig. XVII where surface moisture has 
been plotted against mean screen opening. Contours for various amounts 
of oil applied have been indicated. The discrepancy evident in the lower 
portion of the 10.0 U.S. quart per ton curve is due to the agglomerating 
effect of fine coal which caused a greater reduction in surface moisture 
than would be anticipated in this range. It is evident from these curves 
that a large amount of oil is required to obtain a substantial reduction 
in surface moisture for the finer sizes of coal* 













% Nononaaa 3an±sioiAi aovaans 


i 


OIL APPLICATION CM 3 OIL PER CM 2 COAL SURFACE XIO 








% NOiiona3d 3anisioiAi sovaans 


0.6 0.8 1.0 I 2 1.4 

MEAN SCREEN OPENING MM. 













56 


A comparison of the effectiveness of Imperial Oil Spray 100 
and Imperial Oil Spray 200 is shown in Fig. XVIII where the two curves 
have been plotted on the basis of oil applied per unit area of coal 
surface* This step was necessary as the surface moisture of the untreated 
coal samples differed considerably in the two cases indicating a sub¬ 
stantial difference in specific surface areas* The results show that 
the heavier oil was less effective even though it had been heated to a 
temperature of 132°F* at which the viscosity was the same as that of 
the lighter oil at room temperature* These results had been expected 
since a larger portion of the kerosene would be lost at the higher tem¬ 
perature due to volatilization* Although the kerosene does not provide 
permanent treatment, it does affect an initial reduction in surface 
moisture* 

The effectiveness of the treatment of Imperial Oil Spray 100 
on 1/8 inch to 10 mesh coal during storage is shown in Fig. XV by the 
straight line relationship between storage time and surface moisture re¬ 
duction* In the course of 36 days the surface moisture reduction de¬ 
creased from 2iu0 per cent to 12. U per cent or a decrease of U8*3 per 
cent* This decrease may be attributed to the loss of the kerosene from 
the coal surface through evaporation and by absorption into the coal* 

It was anticipated that this trend would level off asyrapototic to a 
value of surface moisture reduction resulting from the presence of the 
asphalt alone but the work was not extended for a sufficient period to 
determine this result* 

The effect of abrasion on the effectiveness of oil treatment 
is evident from the above tests. In the original tests an application 
of 5.86 U.S. quarts of oil per ton on l/Q inch to 10 mesh coal resulted 












2 


* 






o. 



:> 








fc- 


■ 





0 











57 


in a reduction of surface moisture of 5U*5 per cent, whereas the surface 
moisture reduction before storage in this test was 21^0 per cent* The 
difference was caused by abrasion produced when the coal was thoroughly 
mixed after treating* Very little mixing was necessary for the smaller 
samples used in the original tests* 

7* Silicone Treatment 

A sample of silicone, DC-X3-1, supplied by the Bow-Corning Gorp* 
was tested as a water-proofing agent for coal. This material was strcngly 
alkaline. Solutions of 1.0, 2.0, 5.0 and 10.0 per cent by volume sili¬ 
cone in water were tested. The 1/8 inch to 10 mesh coal was immersed in 
the silicone solution for 30 seconds, dewatered and allowed to dry for 
U8 hours. Surface moisture determinations were then made in duplicate 
on the treated samples* The results are given in Table VII. 

Table VII 

Silicone Treatment of Coal 


Test No. 

Silicone 

Solution 

% 

Surface Moisture 

Gm. Water/100 Gm. 

As Rec*d Coal 

Surface Moisture 
Reduction 
% 

91 

0 

10.08 

— 

87 

1.0 

8.73 

12.60 

88 

2*0 

8.86 

11.31 

89 

5.0 

9.81* 

1.39 

90 

10.0 

11.28 

0 


The alkalinity of the solution was believed responsible for the poor re¬ 
sults obtained from the more concentrated solution. The color of the 
liquid drained from the coal suggested that a chemical reaction of sig¬ 
nificant proportions had taken place which had probably altered the 
































00 




o 

<3- 


CD 

rO 


OJ 

rO 


00 

OJ 


OJ 


O 

OJ 


CD 


OJ 


00 




O 


OIL APPLICATION CM OIL PER CM COAL SURFACE XIO 







surface characteristics of the coal. Time did not permit tests being 
made with other silicones or with silicone DC-XS-1 under different con¬ 


ditions, 



VII FREEZING CHARACTERISTICS OF FINE COAL 





- 60 - 


lo Introduction 

A serious difficulty id the transportation and storage of fine 
coal during winter months is caused by the freezing of the coal in cars, 
coal bunkers, engine tenders, etc* Although it is one of the major oper¬ 
ating problems for the railroads, there is little fundamental information 
available relative to the relationship between surface moisture content, 
size of coal, strength of frozen coal at various temperatures, and methods 
by which the coal can be treated, in order to minimize freezing difficult¬ 
ies* 

This investigation, therefore, was directed toward two aspects 
of this problem, namely (l) a study of the effect that coal size and 
temperature have on the freezing strength of the coal, and (2) tests to 
evaluate the effectiveness of oil treatment as a freeze proofing measure* 
2* Experimental Equipment & Procedure 

In the experimental procedure followed, the coal was screened, 
sampled, immersed in water for 30 seconds and dewatered* The dewatered 
coal was then placed in metal cylinders to freeze* The dimensions of 
these cylinders were 2*0 inches inside diameter and 2.5 inches in height. 
After filling the cylinders with wet coal, the open ends were covered 
with paraffin coated paper to prevent loss of moisture* 

Two pieces of equipment were used to freeze the wet coal* For 
the higher temperature (-10°C.) a household refrigerator was found satis¬ 
factory but for the samples frozen at -20°C. and -30°C. it was necessary 
to construct the freezing apparatus shown in Fig. XIX. A similar freezing 
unit built in the Gasoline Testing Laboratory of the Research Council of 
Alberta aided the design and construction of this apparatus. 

The equipment consisted of the following parts: 








THERMO-REGULATOR 































- 61 - 

(a) an insulated alcohol compartment containing two wells in 
which sanples were placed for freezing 

(b) an insulated dry ice compartment containing copper coils 

(c) a centrifugal pump 

(d) an electric stirrer 

(e) a Fenwal thermoregulator 

Dry ice which had been mixed with kerosene to form a slurry 
was used as the cooling medium. The alcohol was circulated through the 
copper coils in the dry ice compartment by means of the centrifugal 
pump. Temperature control of the alcohol bath was maintained by use of 
the Fenwal themoregulator in series with the pump. The electric stirrer 
kept the temperature gradient in the alcohol bath at a minimum. 

Samples of coal which had been frozen at -10°C. in the house- 
held refrigerator were allowed to warm until the metal cylinders could 
be removed without difficulty. These samples were then enclosed in par¬ 
affin-coated paper and replaced in the refrigerator for a further 2k 
hours after which they were either subjected to the compression test or 
in the case of the tests at -20°C. and -30°C, were placed in the sample 
wells of the above described freezing unit for further cooling. These 
frozen samples were maintained at the desired temperature for six hours 
after which they were subjected to a compression test to determine the 
freezing strength. It was found later that this test had certain weak¬ 
nesses and it was thought that a tensile strength would have been more 
satisfactory than the test of compressibility. This will be discussed 
in a later section. 

The freezing strength of the coal was obtained by use of the 
hydraulic press shown in Fig. XX. The press was equipped with a pressure 


































COMPRESSION TESTING APPARATUS 
FOR FROZEN COAL. 

FIGURE XX 






















































































































































- 62 - 

gauge having a range of 0 - 5000 p.s.i. Loading the specimens at a con¬ 
stant rate was extremely difficult as several strokes of the handle were 
necessary before the maximum reading was reached* 

KL1 values of breaking force were corrected for mechanical errors 
in the pressure gauge because of the severe strain to which it was subjected. 
Re-calibration was necessary at frequent intervals* 

In a number of instances a large number of determinations were 
made in which case the average value of the breaking strength is given 
in. the results together with the number of determinations and the average 
deviation of the mean* The average deviation of the mean was obtained by 
dividing the mean deviation by the square root of the number of determin¬ 
ations (38). 

3* Effect of Coal Size and Temperature 

Determination of surface moisture content and of breaking 
strength were made on samples of the following size fractions of the 
dewatered coal at -10®C., -20°C. and -30°G.: 

1/8 inch to 10 mesh, 10 to 28 mesh, 28 to U8 mesh, 1*8 to 65 mesh, 65 to 
100 mesh. The physical strength of dewatered frozen coal larger than 
1/8 inch was found to be such that it was impossible to obtain results, 
therefore all work was done on -1/8 inch coal. The results of these tests 
are shown in Tables VIII, IX and X* Breaking strength has been plotted 
against mean screen opening in Fig* XXI for temperatures of -10®C., -20° G. 
and -30°C. The effect of temperature on breaking strength for the var¬ 
ious sizes is shown in Fig. XXII. These graphs suggest that as the size 
of coal decreases the temperature at which the maximum breaking strength 
occurs, also decreases. For example the strength of the 1/8 inch to 10 
mesh coal is independent of temperatures below -10® G. whereas the -10 mesh 















■ 















- 63 - 

28 mesh fraction must be cooled to below -20®C. before its maximum freez¬ 
ing strength is reached, Die -20° G, and -30®G, contours in Fig* XXI ind¬ 
icate that at these temperatures the breaking strength is practically 
independent of temperatures for all sizes. The break in the -10®G, curve 
illustrates the failure of the compression test to cope with fine coal at 
temperatures as high as -10° C, The frozen specimens in this range tended 
to compress rather than break. The graph of breaking strength vs surface 
moisture (Fig, XXIII) indicates that these factors do not have linear re¬ 
lationship, This was expected since these are two definite ranges which 
must be considered. Die evidence is that at higher temperatures the 
breaking strength is dependent on temperature, but once a maximum has,, 
been reached the temperature becomes an independent factor. The results 
of tests at -10®C. where the breaking force is dependent upon temperature 
which have been plotted in Fig, XXIV, They show a linear relationship 
between surface moisture and the logarithm of the breaking force. There¬ 
fore the breaking strength and the surface moisture, F, may be related 
by the equation: 

F = 282 e 0 *°^ 06s 

Where: 

F » breaking strength in lbs, 

S * surface moisture in gm. water per 100 gm, as 
received coal* 

A relationship for the section of the curve which is not dependent on 
temperature was obtained where the logarithm of surface moisture was 
plotted against the logarithm of breaking force at -30®G, This is shewn 
in Fig, XXV, The equation of the line in this case was 

F - 2.35 s 1 *^ 

The above equations express breaking strength in terms of surface moisture 












« 

























o 

o 

o 

m 


O O o 
O O o 
o o o 

^ ^ CM 


o o 

o 

o 


an aoaoa ONixvaaa 


0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20 0.22 0.24 

MEAN SCREEN OPENING CM. 









BREAKING FORCE LB. 


JMO 


4 000 


3 ooo 


2 000 ’ 


1000 ■ 


figure xn 
BREAKING FORCE 


VS 


TEMPERATURE 

LETHBRIDGE COAL 



i 


lOHtSH 


-10 -20 

TEMPERATURE °C 


'30 





















- 61 + - 


Table VIII 
Freezing Tests 

Lethbridge Goal 
At a Temperature of -10° C. 


Size Range Mean Ave. No. of Ave. Ave. No. 

Screen Breaking Deter- Devia.- Moisture of 
Opening Strength minat- tion of Gm. Water/ Deter- 



Cm. 

Lbs. 

ions 

the 

Mean 

Lbs. 

100 wt. 
As Rec*d 
Coal 

min- 

ations 

—1/8+10 mesh 

0.241 

570 

20 

12.9 

16.49 

4 

-10+28 mesh 

0.0X2 

894 

20 

19.6 

30.21 

4 

-28+1*8 mesh 

0.0442 

2259 

20 

32.4 

51.87 

4 

-1*8+65 mesh 

0.0251 

2676 

20 

15.6 

55.88 

4 

-65+100 mesh 

0.0178 

2455 

15 

41.7 

53.08 

3 


Ave. 
Devia¬ 
tion 
of the 
Mean 

Gm. Water/ 
100 Gm. 
As Rec*d 
Coal 


0.22 

0.67 

0.13 

0.18 

0.80 
























I ■ 








65 


Table IX 
Freezing Tests 
Lethbridge Goal 
At a Temperature of -20°C, 


Size Range Mean Ave. Ho. of Ave. Aire. No. Ave. 

Screen Breaking Deter- Devia- Moisture of Devia- 
Opening Strength minat- tion of Gm. Water/ Deter- tion 
Cm. Lbs. ions the 100 Wt. min- of the 

Mean As Rec ! d at ions Mean 
Lbs. Coal Gm.Water/ 


100 Gm. 
As rec*d 
Goal 


-1/8+10 mesh 

0.21a 

1*01* 

8 

16.2 

13.02 

2 

0.08 

-10+28 mesh 

0.112 

1925 

6 

73.1 

33.88 

2 

0.62 

-28+U8 mesh 

0.01*1*2 

3569 

8 

11*0.2 

51.15 

2 

0.06 

-U8+65 mesh 

0.0251 

1*275 

8 

117.0 

56.06 

2 

0.35 
























i . 


t. 












- 66 - 


Table X 
Freezing Tests 
Lethbridge Coal 
At a Temper at lore of -30° C. 


Size Range Mean Ave. No. of Ave. Ave. No. Ave. 


Screen Breaking Deter- 
Opening Strength min at- 
Lbs. ions 


-1/8+10 mesh 

0« 21(1 

5oo 

8 

-10+28 mesh 

0.112 

1900 

8 

-28+U8 mesh 

0.014*2 

3269 

8 

-l|8+65 mesh 

00.025)1 

1*869 

8 


Devia- Moisture of Devia¬ 
tion of Gm.Water/ Deter- tion 
the 100 Wt. min- of the 
Mean As Rec ! d ations Mean 


Lb S o 

Coal 


Gm. Water/ 
100 On. 
As Rec*d 
Coal 

2l*o3 

16.73 

2 

o.ol* 

79.5 

31*. 21* 

2 

1.20 

11*7.9 

51.1*6 

2 

o.ol* 

72.9 

55.12 

2 

1.39 




























FIGURE XZHI 



cr cr (— 

m 3 llj 

oo -i 


o 

CD 


in 


O 

ID 


ID 


o 


ID 

ro 


O 

rO 


ID 

OJ 


O 

CM 


ID 


O 


J_3_ o 


o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 


o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 


CD 

ID 

s}- 

ro 

CVJ 

— 



an aoaoj 9Nix\/3aa 


SURFACE MOISTURE GM. WATER / 100 GM AS REC'D COAL 







BREAKING FORCE LB. 







BREAKING FORCE LB. 



COAL 















- 6 ? - 

and may he used to predict the breaking strength of a given sample of 
coal* It is pointed out however that the constants in these equations 
would vary for different coals because of their surface characteristics* 

In order to test the validity of these equations for coal con¬ 
taining a wide range of sizes, freezing tests on mixtures of varying per¬ 
centages of U8-65 mesh coal in l/8 inch to 10 mesh coal* The results of 
deviation of the mean are given in Table XI* 

Theoretical values were calculated using the equation: 

F a 282 e°*^06 s 

it 

This equation is applicable in this case as these tests were perfumed 
at -10° C* where the freezing strength was dependent on temperature* Hie 
experimental and theoretical curves which have been plotted in Fig, XXVI 
illustrate the failure of the theoretical curve to predict the experimental 
results in this case* This suggests that the arrangement of particles in 
a composite sample containing wide range of sizes, is an important factor 
in the strength of freezing* The experimental curve indicates that small 
amounts of fine coal have no effect on the freezing strength* This sug¬ 
gests that the fine coal has no effect on the freezing strength until suf- 
ficent has been added to fill the spaces between the larger particles* 

These tests emphasize the complexity of the factors affecting freezing 
strength and the difficulties which would be encountered in attempting 
to estimate the degree of freezing which could be expected for a given 
sample of coal* The equations which have been developed, must be assumed 
applicable only to closely sized coals* 

Effect of Oil Treatment 

A series of freezing tests on 28 mesh to 1|8 mesh International 
coal frozen at -10°C* have been made to determine the effects of oil 
treatment upon freezing strength* The results of these tests are shown 
















- 









o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O' 

o 

o 

o 

in 

o 

m 

rO 

C\J 

CM 

— 


an aoaoj omxvaaa 


LU 

<r 

3 

h- 

co 


co 

> 


CO 
LU 

o ctr 

2 3 

v« *— 
< * 


o 

o 

in 


SURFACE MOISTURE GM WATER PER 100 CM AS REC'D COAL 







- 68 - 


in Table XII with the number of deteminations and the average deviation 
of the mean* 

The plot of breaking force versus the amount of oil applied 
(Fig* XXVII) shows that the oil reduced the freezing strength a consider¬ 
able extent when added in sufficient quantities* As this coal has a large 
specific surface* it would be expected that oil should prove satisfactory 
as a freeze proofing measure in cases 'there the amount of fine material 
was not unduly large* Fig* XXVIII shows a straight line relationship 
between breaking strength and surface moisture content* If it is assumed 
that lowering of freezing strength in oil treated coal is caused by the 
reduction in surface moisture, then these results may be canpared with 
those of Donald (9) who has found that for No* 3 buckwheat size coal the 
breaking strength varies to 0*8 power of the surface moisture* 






69 - 


Table XI 
Freezing Tests 
Lethbridge Goal 

Mixtures of U8-6$ Mesh and 1/8 -10 Mesh at -10* C. 


Per cent 

1*8-65 

Mesh 

Exper- 

mental 

Force 

Lbs© 

No. of 
Deter¬ 
mina¬ 
tions 

Ave. 
Devi¬ 
ation 
of the 
Mean 
Lbs* 

Ave. 
Surface 
Moistnre 
Gm. Water/ 
100 Gra. 

As Rec’d 
Coal 

No. of 
Deter¬ 
mina¬ 
tions 

Ave. 

Devi¬ 
ation 
of th© 
Gm.Water/ 
100 (In. 
.4s Rec*d 
Coal 

0 

1*93 

6 

toa 

15.06 

6 

0.78 

10 

1*75 

8 

28*7 

20.37 

2 

0.25 

20 

728 

8 

32.0 

22.1*5 

2 

0.19 

30 

1200 

8 

70.7 

21*. 99 

2 

0.83 

UO 

1563 

11 

100.3 

26,71* 

3 

0.19 

to 

2187 

8 

66.2 

30.1*9 

3 

0.35 

60 

231*2 

7 

to. 8 

31*. 58 

3 

0.77 

70 

261? 

8 

97.7 

1*0.62 

2 

0.16 

80 

2787 

8 

96.0 

l*l*o 60 

2 

0.07 

90 

2922 

8 

80.6 

50.59 

2 

0.18 

100 

281*8 

6 

93.5 

51*. 92 

5 

0.69 
























1 












- 70 


Table XII 

Effect of Oil Treatment on Freezing 
International Coal l&8-6$ Mesh at -10° C® 


Test 

No* 

Oil Ap¬ 
plication 
U.S. Qt./ 
Ton 

Ave® 

Breaking 

Force 

Lb® 

No* of 
Deter¬ 
mina¬ 
tions 

Ave® 
Devia¬ 
tion of 
the Mean 
Lb® 

Ave® No® 

Stir face of 

Moisture Deter- 
Gm® Water/ mina- 
100 Cfoi. tions 
As Rec ? d 

Coal 

Ava® 
Devi¬ 
ation 
of the 
Mean 

Qm* Water/ 
100 Gm® 
As Rec*d 
Coal 

—— 

0 

21+85 

10 

1+6.8 

14-7*30 

5 

0.59 

60 

2.05 

2512 

ii 

115.7 

1+7.13 

2 

0.02 

61 

3.61+ 

2300 

k 

96.3 

1+6.30 

2 

0.93 

51+ 

1+.1+0 

2iiliO 

u 

93.8 

1+7.06 

2 

0.17 

59 

1+.57 

2256 

k 

28.1 

1+5.1+3 

2 

1.36 

53 

6.1a 

1862 

2 

97.2 

1+1+.00 

1 

— 

65 

8.18 

1038 

h 

72.0 

39.29 

2 

0*22 

66 

9.1+5 

638 

h 

18.8 

35.85 

2 

0.33 

61+ 

10.72 

U75 

2 

53.0 

33.1+0 

1 































an aoaod ONi^vaaa 


o o 
o 

CM 










*91 309 03 0NIXV399 











CONCLUSIONS 




- 72 


A relatively simple method of determining the specific surface 
of coal by means of a particle count has been developed® This is applic¬ 
able only where the degree of sphericity of the coal is known. 

The investigation indicated that the amount of surface moisture 

retained by dewatered coal was dependent primarily on its specific surface 

a 

and that interstitial moisture was not/significant factor® 

It has been shown that the values obtained from -tile capacity 
moisture test were independent of the length of time the coal has been 
immersed in water® When coal is immersed in water it will not absorb 
water to a greater extent than is the case in the capacity moisture test® 
On the contrary the absorbed moisture after immersion will remain below 
the capacity moisture as determined by the standard method due to gases 
having been trapped in the pores and capillaries of the coal. 

The extent of absorption of water by coal during immersion 
may be predicted by use of the capillarity equation* devedUspscfc However, 
the amount of moisture absorbed by a freshly mined coal during wet pro¬ 
cessing usually is insignificant as compared to surface moisture adhering 
to the coal. 

The amount of oil required to give a specific reduction in 
surface moisture is dependent largely on the specific surface of the 
coal® As the amount of oil applied increases other factors such as thick¬ 
ness of film and agglomeration of oil coated particles become important. 
The results obtained indicate that the use of oil as a water proofing 
agent for fine coal would not be practical unless other effects such as 
dust proofing and freeze proofing were also required. The effectiveness 
of the treatment was found to decrease as much as 50 per cent in 36 days 
in the case of the lighter oil due to loss of kerosene from the protective 









- 73 - 

film* The effect of abrasion subsequent to the addition of oil was be¬ 
lieved to be an important factor in reducing the effectiveness of oil 
treatment. The few tests made with silicone DG-X3-X indicated that it 
was unsuitable as a water proofing agent. 

Freezing tests have shown that frozen coal reaches a maximum 
strength as the temperature decreases. The temperature at which this 
maximum is attained depends on the coal size; with the temperature being 
lower for the finer sizes of coal. Dewatered coal above 1/8 inch in dia¬ 
meter has little physical strength when frozen. Equations have been dev¬ 
eloped which relate freezing strength to surface moisture of dewatered 
coal for the range where the freezing strength is dependent on temperature, 
and also for the range where freezing strength is independent of the 
temperature# However, tests on coal of varying sizes indicated that these 
equations were only applicable for use with closely sized coal* The fail¬ 
ure of the equations when used with coal containing a wide size range is 
believed to be due to particle arrangement which affects the freezing 
strength significantly. 

Freezing tests on oiled coal indicated that a linear relaticn- 
ship existed between freezing strength and the surface moisture of the 
oil treated coal* The extent of reduction in freezing strength of the 
finer coal sizes would not justify treatment for that purpose alone. In 
most cases oil is applied with a view of dust proofing, water proofing 
and freeze proofing* These combined effects make the operation more likely, 
but there remains a limiting size below which, this treatment would not 
prove economical. 








* h 

t - ' 


|H 






References 


1* Ashland Oil and Refining Go., Private communication, 1952. 

2. Beeching, R., Radiographic examination of coal. J. Inst, of Fuel, 

Vol. 12, 1938, pp# 35-39. 

3. Brady, G.A. and Gauger, A.W., Properties of coal surfaces, Ind. and 
Eng. Ghem., Vol. 32, 19l*0, pp. l599-l60lu 

It. Bryson, A. and Pickering, W.F., The determination of moisture in coal 
using the Karl Fischer reagent, J* Inst, of Fuel, Vol. 25, No. ll*l, 

1952, pp. 28. 

5. Carman, P.C., Permeability and specific surfaces, Trans. Inst, of 
Ghem. Eng., Vol. 15, 1937, pp. 150 - 166. 

6* Ceaglske, N.H. and Kiesling, F.C., Capillary flow in porous solids, 
Trans. A.I. Ch. E., Vol. 36 , 19U0, pp. 211 - 225. 

7. Clarke, D.W., Some Physical Properties of Alberta Coals, M.Sc. Thesis, 
University of Alberta, 19U3, pp# 69 - 72. 

8. Cudwrorth, J.R. and Hertzog, E.S., U.S. Bureau of Mines, Information 
Circular 7009, 1938. 

9« Donald, H. J 0 , Private communication, 1953. 

10. Dumingham, A.C., The inherent moisture in coal. The Ultra Fine 
Siruebure of Coals and Cokes, B.C.U.R.A., 19UU, PP# 57 - 70. 

11. Dunningham, A.C. and Grumell, F.S., Control of the physical properties 
of clinkers by various additions to coal, J. Inst, of Fuel, Vol. 15, 

i9ia, pp# 23 - 25 . 

12. Editor, Calcium Chloride Institute Information Service, Brief No. CoB-l« 

13. Editor-, Coal Age, Vol. 57, Jan. 1952, pp. 120. 

III. Editor, Determination of Particle Size in Sub-Sieve Range, B.C.0.R.A., 
B.C.U.R.A., 19ljl. 

15. Editor, Laboratory Sampling and Analysis of Coal and Coke, A.S.T.M. 
Designation D 2?1-I#, pp. 6-7. 

16. Editor, Sampling and Analysis of Coal and Coke, British Standards 
Institution, B.S. 735, 19U1|, pp. ll[ - 25# 

17. Foster, J.F. and Sherman, R.A., Freezeproofing coal shipments. Mech¬ 
anization, Vol. 9, No. 12, Dec. 19U5. 

. Foster, J.F., Freezeproofing coal shipments. Mechanization, Vol. 11, 

No. 1, Jan. 19U7. 


18 , 



) »■ 




«. ■ 


19o Gaudin, A.M., Principles of Mineral Dressing, 1st Edition, McGraw 
Hill Book Go., 1939, pp. 195-198. 

20. Gilmore, D.¥. and Donald, H. J., Dewatering - A major problem in the 
anthracite industry, Penn. State Engineer, Feb. 1950. 

20a Glasstone, S., Textbook of Physical Chemistry, 2 nd Edition, I 9 I 4 . 6 , 
pp. 1 |B 6 - 1 $ 8 . 

21. Heywood, H., Calculation of specific surfaces of a powder, Proc. 

Inst, of Mech. Eng., Vol. 125, 1933, -pp. 383-la6. 

22. Hinder, Nora, Rank variation, in vitrain and rdations to the physical 
nature of its carbonised products, Proc. of Royal Society of New 
South Wales, Vol. 83 , pp.~195-209. 

23o Hougen, O.A., McCauley, H.J, and Marshall, W.R., Limitations of 

diffusional equations in drying, Trans. A.I.Ch. E*,. Vol. 36 , 19U0, 

pp. 183 - 210 . 

2It. Jakob, M., Heat Transfer, Wiley and Sons, Vol. 1, 191;9, PP* 2?8. 

25* Jones, I.D., Surface characteristics of coal. Iron and Coal Trades 
Review, Vol. 6 ll, Sept. 1, 1950, pp. Il29—U31® 

26. Lotegan, P.N., A volumetric method for the determination of the ash 
content and calorific value of coal, Fuel Vol. 6 , 1927, pp. I}1|.7—UU 8 . 

27. Lowry, H.H., Chemistry of Coal Utilization, Vol. 1, 19H5, pp. 600-625. 

28. Lyons, O.R., Filter cake consists and moisture relationships. Mining 
Engineering, Vol. 3, Oct. 1951, pp. 868 - 87 O. 

29. Martin, G.A. and Cloyd, R.W., Dustproofing with oil. Coal Age. Vol. 

56, July 1951, PP# 86 - 89 . 

30. Mitchell, D.R., Coal Preparation, 2nd Edition, A.I.M.M.E., pp. 61j8-67iu 

31. Morduioto, T.B., Studies on the Cleaning of Fine Coal, M. Sc. Thesis, 
University of Alberta, 1952, pp. 3k» 

32. Morris, H.H., Dustproofing build markets. Coal Age, Jan. 19I 4 . 6 . 

33. Needham, L.W. and Hill, N.W., The shape and specific surface of coal 
particles. Fuel in Science and Practice, Vol. 1 ) 4 , 1935, pp. 222-230. 

3i|. Newman, A.B., The drying of porous solids - diffusion calculations, 
Trans. A.I.Ch.E., Vol. 27, 1931,pp. 310-331. 

35. Oberholtzer, J.E., Some Physical Properties of Alberta Coals, M.Sc. 
Thesis, University of Alberta, I 9 I 1 I, pp. 53-69. 

36 . Sherman, R.A. Treatment of coal surfaces. Coal Preparation, 2nd 
Edition, A.I.M.M.E., pp. 739-772. 

37 . Sherman, R.A. and Kaiser, E.R., Clinker formation in underfeed stokers. 
Bituminous Coal Research Inc., Inf. Bull. 1, 1936, pp. 10. 




1 



38, Sherwood, T.K. and Reed, G.E., Applied Mathematics for Engineers, 
McGraw-Hill Book Go., 1st Edition, 1936, pp. 36l. 

39* Stansfield, E. and Gilbert, K.C., Moisture determination for coal 
classification, Trans. A.I.M.M.E., Vol. 101, 1932, pp. 12$ - lltf. 

i*0. Stansfield, E., and Lang, W.A_., Goals of Alberta, Report No. 3$, 
Research Council of Alberta, ±9hh$ PP* 2k - 25® 

id® Stansfield, E., Lang, W.A., and Gilbart, K.C., Oxidation of coal 

and its relation to analysis, A.I.M.M.E., Contribution 69 (Class F. 
Coal Division), March, \93h% 

42 * Stewart, J.L., Use of oil in coal preparation, Ashland Oil Spray 
Bulletin, Vol. 3, No. 1, Feb. 19*3. 

1*3. Wadell, H., Sphericity and roundness of rock particles. Journal of 
Geology, Vol. id, 1933, pp. 310 - 331. 

Ulu Waters, G.W., Oil treatment of coal. Coal Age, Vol. 53, 19W, pp. 

97 - 102 . 


" * 







