For Reference 


Sllfel 


mmmi 


Mmmm 


Mj- 


: ■' 

m&wm 




mm 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 




HW 


slnM 

rt:;: >Mi\ Vv* 

^»»»- - 


SEKECA'S COICEPTIOI OF THE STOIC SAGE 
AS SHOWS II HIS PROSE WORKS 


JESSIE HE LEI LOUISE WETMORE 




. ■ 


^;f%k 04 Z;' ll#§ 

Bww® ;lB • y,"'< 4 
'i , y& 


: ■ 








st^f ,'S®^||t|> jf$Lt v * ***■ li a f f jr *?#/» r t '*i 
y?lv.'«T.*'V* W.\..; 





, 



.*? & • ’ ’ MB jjBMpaW 

£'‘ r if r v*^. offiVj •'.< iff® - # 5‘<s/J? * “ - U** , ; 

BBH||M !■■■■ ■■, 

ftJraMUi&^&SSiK i;&:. 










(3x HIBIfflS 

otwebsiwis 

aiBIMMUSIS 



















SENECA’S CONCEPTION OP THE STOIC SAGE 
AS SHOWN IN HIS PROSE WORKS 


BY 

JESSIE HELEN LOUISE WETMORE, B.A. , 
DEPARTMENT OP CLASSICS 
UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 


A THESIS SUBMITTED TO THE 
UNIVERSITY OP ALBERTA 
IN PARTIAL PULPILMENT OP THE REQUIREMENTS 
POR THE DEGREE OP MASTER OP ARTS 


UNDER THE DIRECTION OP DR, W. H, ALEXANDER 


EDMONTON, ALBERTA 


APRIL, 1935 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/wetmore1936 


UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA 


FACULTY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES 


The undersigned hereby certify that they 


have read, and recommend to the Committee on 
Graduate Studies for acceptance, a thesis on 
"Seneca’s Conception of the Stoic Sage as shoura in 
his Prose Works", submitted by Jessie Helen Louise 
Wetmore, B.A., in partial fulfilment of the 
requirements for the degree of Master of Arts. 


Professor 


C c. H. 



Professor 



Professor 




















ACKUOWLEDGI'£SNTS 


I wish to take this opportunity to thank 
Dr* W. H. Alexander, under whose direction the 
work was carried out, for the valuable criticisms 
and suggestions which he has given throughout my 
study of this subject. 


I am also greatly indebted to the 
Robert Tegler Trust Fund, by which this study was 
made possible for me. 












TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

Preface ...... ..... .a ~ b 

Introduction: Seneca’s Milieu ....... . 1 

I. The Sage of the Orthodox Stoic Tradition ,. 22 

II. The Novitiate ... 39 

”1 speak not as one having attained” 

III. The Just Man made Perfect ................. 62 

’’Mark the perfect man and behold the upright” 

IV. The Just Man of Greek Humanism . 83 

V. Seneca the Man .. 98 

Actual and Ideal in Conflict 

“But I see another law in my members, warring 
against the law of my mind” 

VI. Enduring Values in the Stoic Ideal ........ 127 

Books Consulted 146 












' 

. 

- 

. 















PREFACE 


My interest in Seneca and the later Stoicism is due 
to two courses pursued in the University relating speci¬ 
fically - in the one case to the "Letters”, and in the 
other to the "Dialogues' 5 , of the Roman philosopher. From 
the wide field of topics which these and his other prose 
writings suggest, I have been led to choose for my 
thesis subject a study of the character of the Sage or 
Vise Man, both developmentally in the whole Stoic 
philosophy, and more particularly in the prose writings 
Df Seneca. It is a task which has commended itself as 
intrinsically worth while, both from the standpoint of 
arriving at a better understanding of ancient thought, 
and also from that of attempting an estimate of the 
permanence of the ideal enshrined in that exalted 
character. There is not, and cannot possibly be, any 
pretence to completeness in this study, but it is hoped 
chat it may serve its part as one of many contributions 
■;o establishing our knowledge of this ideal figure upon a 
foundation of definite fact. 

With regard to the matter of references to original 
authorities, Greek and Latin, it has not been my policy 
to multiply these indefinitely in a series of footnotes 
for the very good reason that they have already been 







accumulated and set out in detail in works like 
Arnold’s ’’Roman Stoicism” and Zeller’s ^Stoics, Epi¬ 
cureans and Sceptics”} to repeat these here could serve 
no good purpose and consequently references made to 
the ancient authorities have been strictly limited to 
quotations "bearing on essential points. I have also 
added, from time to time, an occasional footnote of a 
general character which appears to illuminate the 
subject "by calling attention to corroborative or 
antagonistic points of view, ancient or modern. 













( 1 . 


Introductio n 
SENECA’S MILIEU 

The Imperator Caesar Augustus, Princeps Civitatis, 
Pater Patriae, Pontifex Maximus, adopted son of the 
deified Julius, himself a god in the East, whose genius 
was worshipped in Horne, wore the laurel wreath and sat 
on the ivory chair between the consuls in the year in 
which Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Roman knight from Corduba, 
entered the city'with his wife and three young sons* 

It was for their sakes that the family had come. True, 
the old regime of senate and people had gone. In the 
latter’s place stood the Princeps, to whom they had 
delegated the greater part of their powers. They were 
still summoned for the election of the magistrates, but 
all men knew that every name on the list had been 
approved by the Princeps, There would not be even the 
excitement of a contest among these favored ones, for 
their number would be that of the positions to be filled, 
10 more, no less. Even the power of legislation was being 
taken from them. Less and less frequently was the 
Assembly of the People summoned for that purpose. Leges 
were becoming extinct; soon there would be only the 
consulta of the senate and the edicts of the princeps. 

Such a change was not likely to trouble the elder 
















(2 


Seneca. His concern was with the freedom and power of 
the Senators and Knights, the "two orders" which formed 
the Aristocracy of Rome. Here the opportunities for 
ambitious young men seemed more numerous, for Senate and 
Princeps, theoretically, were partners in the government 
of the Roman world. To be sure, if a man looked closely 
at this partnership, he was forced to realize that the 
Princeps had the actual power. He was the commander-in- 
chief of all armed forces on sea or on land, his were 
those provinces where troops were needed, Rgypt was his 
private property, even in the Senatorial provinces his 
maius imperium permitted him to interfere if he so chose. 
In Rome itself he had the power to veto any act or 
decision of the Senate, - for on the civil side he 
possessed the Tribunician power; he controlled the 
election of magistrates, he revised the list of the 
Knights, and when he so chose, the Senate was willing to 
grant him censorial powers; his was the voice that decided 
peace and warj he convened the Senate when he so desired 
and at its meetings his was the first proposal made and 
the first vote cast; he sat as judge in his own court, 
a judge himself, subject to no criminal prosecution or 
process of impeachment; his person was sacrosanct and due 
observance of this privilege was encouraged by the 
Princeps* bodyguard of Germans and by the nine cohorts of 















































. 


: 

- 


































(3. 

the Praetorian guards, three always in Rome, the rest 
nearby. 

Yet the Senate’s role was dignified and important. 

In Italy its control was unchallenged; the Princeps' in¬ 
terfered only when the situation was beyond control and 
his help was desired. It, too, was now a court over which 
the Consul presided. The old courts under the Praetors 
had been left undisturbed, but all the important criminal 
cases came before either the Senate or the Princeps. It 
had its new legislative power. The princeps’ consilium 
was composed of senators and knights; he was always polite, 
and, after all, his pov/ers were merely extensions of old 
magisterial functions to which the Romans had been ac¬ 
customed for generations. What if he could not be 
prosecuted? Neither could consul nor praeter, so long as 
they held office, and a princeps could be judged after 
death and his acts then set aside. The princeps was a 
magistrate, not rex or dominus; he was the first citizen 
of the state, M first among equals 0 . Yes, decided Seneca 
pere, sufficient freedom was possible under a princeps. 

So he sent his sons to school and planned public careers 
for them. 

While the boys were still busy with their studies, 
the old Princeps died and Tiberius Claudius Nero, the man 
















1 







„ 





























he had adopted as his son for M the good of the Homan 
state”, ^ “became ruler in his stead. In the Senate’s 
confirmation of his power, there was one sign of approach¬ 
ing monarchy; the new princeps was invested with power 
for an undefined period; there would he no renewals at 
stated intervals.as there had been under Augustus. Still, 
there seemed no cause for alarm. The princeps had 
recognized the Senate’s right of election; he had been 
duly invested with the proconsular imperium, the tri- 
bunician power, and, by the lex de imperio, the other 
rights Augustus had found necessary. Probably Seneca pere 
was more worried by certain aspects of his sons’ education. 
Rhetoric he agreed was a necessary subject; even if the 
days of Cicero had gone, a man still had to know how to 
speak. He might address an army, the Senate, or plead as 
advocate, accuser or defendant in a court of law. Decided¬ 
ly rhetoric was necessary, but the style now taught was 
abominable and those senseless, far-fetched, fantastic or 
else trite subjects used in the schools merely encouraged 
glib emptiness. Then, too, there was a dangerous tendency 
to honour the old Republican heroes, even those who were 
the opponents or assassins of the deified Julius, Of 


(l)fsuet. ■ Tib. XXI in "lives of the Caesars" 














( 5 . 


course, so long as that was done only in school exercises 
it could he done safely; no notice would he taken of them. 
But there was always the possibility that a young student 
would carry both admiration and habit over into public 
life. That, distinctly, was not safe. It was, for one 
thing, decidedly tactless to tell the successor of the 
murdered man that his predecessor had been a "tyrant % 
righteously slain by heroic patriots. When, in addition, 
the Princeps who heard this realized very clearly that his 
power rested on military force and that legally every 
citizen had an equal right to the headship of the state, 
such behaviour was little short of suicidal. 

Then there was the devotion to philosophy. It had 
become a craze so ubiquitous that even 'women had their 
recognized philosophers to advise and encourage them, 
while philosophical conversations were the height of 
fashion. He had had to discourage his own wife, Helvia, 
from the study and now that second son of his, who bore 
his own name, had been so deeply tainted by his studies 
that he was turning vegetarian and forswearing luxury. 
There was danger there. Augustus had restored the old 
state religion and his successor cherished it carefully. 
These addicts to philosophy seemed able to reconcile out¬ 
ward conformity and due observance of all the rites with 
their own interpretations of what the old deities 












represented (some seemed to believe there "was only one 
great power, so that it did not matter under what name 
you worshipped his manifestation) or even with an utter 
disbelief in these same gods. That alone might not 
bring a man to harm; Tiberius, himself was not credited 
with any belief in them or in the old omens. He trusted 
astrology, though. That was worse than philosophy and 
even more widespread. Every class, from the plebs to the 
princeps* household ran after the Ghaldaeans asking for 
horoscopes*. They did it, although they knew that to 
possess a horoscope of the Princeps, or to ask questions 
about his liffe or death, might bring them before the 
senoute on a charge of conspiracy and high treason. Yet 
philosophy had its risks. These fads in eating and 
manner of life, for instance, might easily be considered 
proofs of adherence to some one of the Eastern sects 
which then were sv/amping Rome and which might suddenly 
find themselves expelled from city and country on a charge 
of immorality. Even politically, philosophy might bring 
one under suspicion; too many of these malcontents who 
paraded ostentatiously their devotion to Republican heroes 
and Republican conditions belonged to the Stoic school. 

(2) Cf. the charges against Thrasea reported b}'- Tacitus, 
Ann . XVI, 21-22. Even the milder Flavian emperors 
found fanatic Stoics unendurable. Seneca was probably re¬ 
plying to critics when (Ep.LXXIII,1-10) he protested that 
philosophers were, of all citizens, the ones most grateful 
to their rulers. ’’It’s a great mistake...... .to put down, 

as some people do, all loyal votaries of philosophy as 
stiff-necked irreconcii sables. f1 














. 











. 


. 











. 











(7. 

The eldest lad, Uovatus, showed none of these trouble¬ 
some tendencies. He followed the normal path of a young 
Roman of good family and entered public life. There the 
prizes were still well worth securing. As quaestor he saw 
within his reach the badges of distinction and the social 
prestige which were the privilege of the Senatorial 
order; as praetor he had duties which yet retained their 
old-time importance; as consul, could he reach that height, 
he and his colleague presided over the body with which 
alone the Princeps shared the task of governing the known 
world, the f, orbis terrarum", Then only the Princeps was 
their superior, their lictors equalled his, between their 
chairs his was placed. Hor was this all. There still 
remained the governorship of the senatorial provinces, 
open to those who had completed their year as praetor or 
as consul. Moreover, the Princeps chose his governors from 
the senatorial ranks. Let a man prove his efficiency, and 
he might find himself placed over an imperial province. 

In that case, not only was he like a king to the provincials 
under him, but he found himself the commander of Roman 
legions and answerable to the Princeps alone. Or, if a 
province was not given him, he might, had he shown military 
talent, be appointed to one of the high commands in the 
army. There were civil posts as well. Did he hold 
praetorian rank, he might, for instance, he placed over 














(8 


the great roads of Italy; was he an ex-consul, he might 

he chosen prefect of Rome, with a court of his own and the 

three cohortes urhanae at his disposal* Tempting prizes 

all, especially to the son of a provincial knight. 

C 3) 

Rovatus rose to he proconsul of Achaia.^ J 

Mela, the youngest brother, found other prospects 
more alluring. If a man were content with equestrian rank 
he could not, it is true, he the commanding officer of an 
army, hut there were many intermediate commissions 
reserved for him. He could not he the governor of the 
older provinces, hut he could he prefect of Egypt; Mela’s 
uncle had held that office for sixteen years. He might he 
procurator of a smaller region, governor of one newly 
annexed, or one of the Princeps’ tax officers in any 
province. He might have charge of the less important 
roads in Italy, of various civic posts, of the fire- 
brigade, of the Praetonian guards themselves; he might he 
on the list of iudices. If his desire was for wealth 
rather than for honour, he had roads open to him which the 
law closed to senators. To he sure, these last understood 
perfectly the role of “sleeping partner'’, hut there was 
always some risk. A knight could openly engage in trade 
or manufacture with no fear of running foul of the law. 

(3) Adopted by the orator Gallic, Rovatus is commonly 
identified with that Gallic, proconsul of Achaia, 
before whom st. Paul was brought for trial hut who drove 
the accusers from his court since he "cared for none of 
those things". 
















■ 








































( 9 . 


Mela had shrewd "business instincts; he remained a 
knight and amassed a fortune* 

The remaining son, Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Junior, 
had reason to think long and carefully "before he decided 
what career to choose. His delicate health made military 
glory an impossible dream. Grave risks faced the aspirant 
for official honours, Tiberius, reserved, austere, un¬ 
popular, fearing conspiracy and assassination, revived 
for his protection the old law of maiestas. To it he gave 
a new interpretation whereby an insult, in speech or in 
writing, might be brought within its scope and made the 
basils of a tri&l for high treason. He permitted, and at 
last encouraged, the practice of delation, upholding the 
old custom that successful accusers should receive one- 
quarter of their victim’s property. With the growth of 
the law of maiestas, delation proved very profitable. It 
soon became a regular profession; delatores accumulated 
large fortunes. Knights and senators stooped, to the 
practice; words spoken in jest or under influence of 
drunkenness might be brought against their authors; the 
citizens lived in fear and terror, they dared not trust 
their closest friends and relatives, they eyed i/ith 
suspicion even walls and ceilings. 

The mob were not troubled by such fears. They had 
lost their last pretence to political power when Tiberius 













( 10 . 


transferred the elections from the comitia to the senate. 
They had not cared enough to do more than grumble. All 
taste for such action and for the responsibility it 
entailed had left them. They were, in fact, no longer of 
the pure Homan stock. Hundreds of thousands of slaves 
had been brought to Rome in the two centuries preceding; 
thousands of these had been freed and at once enrolled in 
the lists of citizens; they, their children and grand¬ 
children, had intermarried with the native-born until all 
had fused into a cosmopolitan mass. This could not be 
accomplished without its effect cn the character of the 
plebian Romans. Had the majority of the new citizens 
been from tribes such as the hardy and independent Gauls 
and Germans, the change might have been less marked. Un¬ 
fortunate^, such slaves generally ended their lives on 
some country estate or in some mine; those who won the 
favour of their masters, or had the skill and education 
to earn their freedom, were almost always from Greece or 
the countries of the East. Such men had been too long 
accustomed to another’s despotic rule to worry if 
Princeps or Senate took from them, rights only half under¬ 
stood. ’’Panem et circenses” was their demand. This eaeh 
Prineeps understood and each, in turn assumed the burden 
of feeding and amusing them. There was no need to fear 
the populace; the Praetorian guards were at hand; but it 
was convenient to have thousands of pensioners to cheer 












(11 

whenever the Princeps made a public appearance at the 
games, in solemn procession, or at some festival. All 
that was done then was to limit the days on which the 
people might expect entertainment and to keep a watch on 
the number entitled to cheap or free grain, while if 
special enthusiasm was desired, the Princeps simply gave 
an extra show or scattered, a donation of money or food, 
or fed them at some huge banquet. Seneca could not 
know that only Tiberius would venture to incur un¬ 
popularity by his dislike for gladiatorial shows. Gaius 
was to satiate them with such spectacles. However, 

Seneca must have noticed the large numbers of freedmen 
not on the-dole. Many a Roman still clung to the old 
prejudices and despised manual labour and the lowlier 
trades; he would rather beg than work. But the freedrnan 
had no such feeling. He saw that the disdain of the 
Romans had left for him a wide and promising field; he 
was, as a class, quite ready to assent to the principle 
that money, whatever its source, has no smell; he was 
shrewd, industrious, ambitious; and he prospered. "Breed- 
man’s wealth" became proverbial. Before manumission, 
many had held positions of trust in the huge households 
of their wealthy masters; they had been bailiffs of an 
estate, stewards of the great town house, masters of 
their masters’ correspondence, studies, or accounts; the 

sole change was that their former masters were their 
present patrons. 













This arrangement Augustus had copied in the organi¬ 
sation of the imperial household. As a result, freedmen 
had charge of his correspondence, of all petitions 
addressed to him, of his finances; and as the private 
affairs of the Prineeps gradually fused with those of the 
Empire, these men came to occupy a position closely akin 
to that of the great ministers of state of today. Under 
Augustus and Tiberius they had been merely servants, 
useful and highly valued, but servants for all that. 

Their conduct depended on the character of the ruler. 
Given, a weak prince, they could make themselves masters 
of their master, and open for themselves unlimited op¬ 
portunity for the securing of wealth and power by 
terrorization, bribery, and the sale of offices and 
honours. Under Claudius this came to pass. Then they 
not only acquired fabulous w’ealth, great and dreaded 
power, but - sweetest morsel of all - even those proud 
Roman senators who despised them so heartily as members 
of an inferior race and class, they saw fawning upon them 
and entreating from their slaves at the door the right 
of entry to their homes. 

This development Seneca lived to see, but had anyone 

(4) In Ep. XLVII, 9, Seneca tells the story of Callistus 
and his master. The slave, sold as worthless, lived 
to repel the greetings of his former owner. '‘I’ve seen 

Callistus’ master at Callistus’ front door. 

refused admittance when others were passing in’ 1 . 






























1 


■ 


















* 

















. : • 






















(13. 

described it to dim in those early years, he would 
have laughed it to scorn. To him it would have seemed in¬ 
credible that the senate could ever be so degraded. He 
was still outside the Curia; he would see the studied 
politeness of Tiberius to the Senators; he would, it is 
true, see something of the subserviency of the Senate to 
the Princeps, but he would be far from realizing how 
servile that once proud and kingly body had become; he 
would see that it was now the high court of criminal 
jurisdiction, but it is doubtful if he would also see 
that the .Princeps* will was paramount and that in all 
cases affecting him they did but carry out his desire. 

Even after he had entered upon the cursus honorum it is 
scarcely likel}^ that he at once realized how inevitably 
the power of the Princeps must grow and that of the 
senate decline. The senators, it is true, by their 
sickening servility, encouraged usurpation of power on 
the part of their supposed partner; but had they been as 
bold, as sturdily independent as they showed themselves 
the opposite, they must have broken themselves uselessly 
in an opposition to the master of.the armed forces of 
the state. Seneca’s philosophy advocated the rule of 
one. Had doubts as to the correctness of this dogma been . 
raised by the mad Caligula’s excesses, they must have been 
laid to rest by the abortive Republican attempt in 41 A.D. 
Once and for all the Senate demonstrated its utter in- 



















( 14 . 

competency. When its members scurried away to humble 

themselves before the nominee of the Praetorian guards, 

they wrecked completely the hope of any return to the 

Republic. Thenceforth there was no choice; the Princeps 

must rule; Rome’s only prayer could be that he might 

prove just and wise and merciful. 

If the Princeps should change into a tyrant, life 

and fortune undoubtedly would be uncertain possessions. 

Seneca’s .own narrow escape from the jealousy of Caligula 

had brought the lesson home to him. He was to have it 

even more forcibly impressed on him in the next reign, 

when the whim of Messalina, ’’the imperial harlot”, 

sufficed to banish him to Corsica on an unproven charge 
/ k s 

of adulte^.' ; But in the years that lay between, he 
had known the best and the worst in the society of Rome. 

He had become known as one of the best speakers and 
writers of the day. It was, indeed, his reputation as 
an advocate that roused the prineepS’ anger. He promptly 


'(5) See Bury; ( Stud ent’s Roma n Empi re, p.2 ^sff) Seneca, 
whose reputation as author and jpleader had roused 
Caligula’s envious ire, escaped the death sentence only 
because a mistress of the Princeps pointed out that as the 
offender was in the last stages of consumption, it was 
useless to incur the odium of executing a dying man. The 
co-respondent in the charge of adultery was Julia, Caligula’s 
sister and Claudius’ niece, whose youth and wealth and 
beauty had wakened Messalina’s jealousy. 





















- (15. " 

retired from the Forum, hut; it; was not necessary to give 

up his literary work. Well nigh all Rome wrote, then 
hired a hall and read the literary gem to a circle of 
friends and acquaintances. Of course there were risks 
involved: an audience free from informers was hard to 
find and if only one slipped in ,a veiled reference to 
the Princeps, a pointed allusion to some great crime or 
outstanding deed of virtue in the past, a word in praise 
of Cato, of Cassius, or of Brutus, and the unfortunate 
author would find himself facing a charge of maiestas. 
However, these risks could be lessened, in some cases 
almost eliminated, by a careful choice of subjects. A 
jurist was safe; his work had no political bearing. The 
author of a scientific treatise was likewise free from 
danger, and so, up to.a certain point, was the writer of 

1 

a novel of low life. Seneca was fairly secure in writing 

philosophical essays on a high moral plane, though here 

there lurked the danger that the guilty conscience of the 

Princeps would read into them a hidden reproof. But a 

history dealing with recent or contemporary events could 

not hope to escape the jealous scrutiny of a suspicious 

ruler; flattery might save work and author; otherwise the 

book would be condemned to the flames and the man to exile or 

( 6 ) 

to suicide. Pastoral poetry, love poetry, and their kin 

(6) C~f.~ "the'' 'fate “of Gremutlus Cordus^ ( Ad. Marc . 1. 2-' 3~; 

Tac. Ann . IV.34.1^355) In his history he had commended 
Brutus and called Cassius ’’The last of the Romans”. The 
Senate ordered his history burned; the author, to escape 
Sejanus, committed suicide. 
































. 












- 















































might he freely -written, unless, like Kero, the Prineeps 
too yearned for a poet’s fame; hut to compose an epic on 
the civil wars - was to try skating on the thinnest ice 
and the reckless poet would he lucky indeed if he escaped 
with an icy plunge. Still, men took risks. Sometimes 
they took unnecessary ones. It was a social age. Men and 
women loved banquets and gay gatherings where the latest 
gossip was dished up spiced to perfection, where the 
latest news from distant provinces or the last edict of the 
prince or senate was discussed with due attention to detail,, 
where wit was matched with wit and a successful bon mot 
went from lip to lip. Men would risk their lives for a 
stinging rejoinder. They knew how to temper despotism 
with epigram and it was little wonder they occasionally 
suffered for it. There are times when the risk, of being 
burned lends an additional attraction to playing with 
fire. “I have become reconciled with Thrasea 51 , said Kero, 
n I congratulate you”, retorted Seneca.W 


(?) As Lucan did. Tacitus ( Ann, XV.49) says Kero, through 
jealousy, forbade Lucan to publish his verse. But 
Lucan brought his final fate on his own head. See Ramsay 5 s 
note(P.285, Vo1.2,Trans. of Tac. Ann.) on the “spoilt 
child’s** behaviour. See also Suet. “Life of Lucan'* in his 
“Lives-of the Poets’ 1 . 

(8) See Tac. Ann .XV.25.6. G.G.Ramsay, in his excellent 

transition of the Annals of Tacitus, says (Footnote,6, 
p.254,Vol.l) “The cultivated society of Rome knew how to 
temper despotism by epigram, and we cannot marvel if they 
occasionally suffered for it.“ When a statue of Sejanus 
was placed in the restored theatre of Pompey, that same 
Cremutius Cordus Y;hose fate was previously mentioned, re¬ 
marked, “Kow, indeed, the theatre is destroyed. 51 (Sen. 

Ad Marciara . XXII, 4) 






































(17 

They were the masters of the known world and they 
desired to play. Was it hot in Rome? They went to some 
gay watering place, such as Baiae, to enjoy the delights 
of a society which had cast convention aside. Was Baiae 
too noisy, too tiring? There were their own villas, 
their sites chosen for beauty, with grottoes built to 
exclude the sun on the hottest day summer might bring. 

Was it all repetition? They might travel; long trips 
were quite the fashion; only let them ask permission 
first, for the Princeps regarded a secret journey with 
suspicion. Had the social season recommenced? They re¬ 
turned to Rome, to their great palaces standing in the 
midst of spacious, beautiful gardens, where waited slaves 
chosen for some special skill, for beauty, even for the 
pertness which might cause a laugh among the guests. 

Here they gave the banquets at which men and women mingled, 
clad in silks, decked with jewels, crowned with roses. 
r ’And the people sat down to eat and to drink and rose up 
to play.“ But he who would learn the details of their 
play must read them in Suetonius and Tacitus. They were 
no novices. 

There were darker hours, when all pleasures palled; 
when the jaded senses loathed all stimuli; when, despite 
the restless change from amusement to amusement, the 
hours dragged heavily by; when, perhaps, all life seemed 























(18 

a frenzied reaching for an empty bubble which burst as 
the fingers touched it. One man recalled the brave 
dreams of youth and with hopeless bitterness contrasted 
what he was and what he had meant to be. Another saw the 
stately mansion of the Princeps’ freedman secretary, and 
shuddered as he remembered the Fathers stabbing their 
fellow-senator at an ex-slave’s word.''^ To yet another 
came the news that one acquaintance was banished and his 
goods confiscated on a delator’s false charge, that a 
second had committed suicide at Caesar’s order, that a 
third’s son had been compelled to fight as a gladiator in 
the arena and was dead. Did the gods see this? Did they 
care? Did they favour the evil-doer? Hay, were there 
gods at all? 

So these men and women turned to the one source from 
which they might hope to gain the courage necessary fcr 
life, to philosophy. It could not guarantee perpetual 
possession of fortune’s gifts, but it promised to all 
sincere seekers that magnanimity and peace of mind which 
made temporal losses a matter of indifference. To them 
the philosopher played the part of doctor of souls, help¬ 
ing them in times of grief, or in illness, or at the 
approach of death. The philosophy which the elder Seneca 


(9) The story is told by Dio Cassius, LIX, 26, 1-2. 































distrusted proved a useful shield in the troubled times 
of tyranny. 



Still, men and women learn to accustom themselves 
to most conditions. If fortune’s frown stopped short of 
death, there was hope; wealth might be regained, exiles 
recalled; even Seneca returned from Corsica and rose to 
be chief minister to a prince, to share with Burrus the 
task of governing the Roman world, to know the burden and 
responsibility that high position brings; to re-enter, too, 
the glittering society of Rome. How it affected him, we 
do not really know. There may have been a period during 
which he flung himself into all its luxurious ways and 
licentious joys; the intimate knowledge of social life, 
the fervour of his later teaching might be used to 
support such a theory; as a future age learned, the 
saint too often had suffered a terrible repentance. But 
there was another possible source for this knowledge, 
Seneca was admittedly the leading philosopher, pre¬ 
eminent among contemporary philosophers, and we have 
already seen that these then acted in much the same 
capacity as does the Rather Confessor in this our age; it 
is hardly possible that the man who acted as mentor to 
kucilius and Serenus did not likewise help many others, 
whose confessions left untouched few of the darker aspects 
of that luxurious period. Seneca could hardly have viewed 





















( 20 . 


conditions in the same light as did the city-horn heirs 
of consular houses. He -was of provincial stock, a scion 
of a family akin to those men who, though then admitted 
to the Senate, retained to the end their simpler mode of 




life. He had been reared in a household inhere the close" 

ness of the family ties refuted the ancient proverb of 

brotherly hate. His mother was an unusual woman, an 

ideal Roman matron, with an intellect which enabled her, 

despite her husband’s objections, to master the main 

principles of philosophy. Her relations with her son 

( 10 ) 

were very close, her influence must have been deepened 

by the delicate health from which he suffered all his 
life. His father, though perhaps in public life for a 
time, was by preference a scholar, a man whose old- 
fashioned austerity censured the "moral•decadence" of his 
age.^***' in his student years the son had come into 
contact with philosophers whose characters accorded with 
their teachings and his reverence for these masters never 


(10) Gf. Sen. Ad Helv . XIV, 2, to XV, 3; XVI, 3-5; XVII, 3-4. 

(11) J. Wight Duff, in his Lit. Hist, of Rome in the Silver 
Age (Lit. under Tib. etc., Chap. I, p. 45. See Lit. 

of the Heronian Period, Chap, III, pp. 197-199 for an 
account of the family) depicts Senaca’s father. Due 
possibly to early memories are Seneca’s own descriptions 
( Do Prov . 11,5,6) of the contrasting ways fathers and 
mothers show their love, and his idea of G-od as cherishing 
a "manly love" (illos fortiter amat) for good .men. 



























(21 

left him.^ 12 ^ An environment such as this .must have pre¬ 
disposed him to acceptance of the Stoic doctrine that 
virtue is the highest good of man. He failed to reach 
those passionless heights wjere dwelt the Sage* he had 
moments of grave moral weakness, hut to his credit, must 
he placed the quinquennium Heronis, those first five 
years of Hero’s reign, when the world seemed to have re- * 
turned to an idealized principals of Augustus. For forty 
years Home had seen hut one such period of calm* the seven 
months before madness overtook Caligula. Then, Burrus 
dead, the old minister gave place to Tigellinus, living 
quietly on, busied with literary pursuits, until the day 
when Hero’s centurion brought the command to die. If 
his life had been marred by flaws, his death was free 
from any cause of grief to his friends, of triumph to 
his enemies. 


(12) This influence is shown by the numerous laudatory 
references to Attains and Demetrius scattered 
throughout Seneca’s works. 






















Chapter I 


The Stoics, -whose doctrines Seneca preached, 
held that only those things are real which can act or 
be acted upon, and that these must be material. So 
they postulated a primal Fire, not the common domestic 
fire, but an all-pervading essence, a "fiery breath” 

(- 7 Tvedua ) 9 possessed of activity, of thought and of 
will. From this creative, volitional Fire came the 
Universe, a definite, limited body in space, having 
the perfect shape of a sphere, at once creator and 
created, “the combination of heaven and earth and all 
natures that are in them" a cosmos born of Fire 
and destined in due course to pass again into Fire, 
out of which would once more come a universe, like to 
its predecessor in all respects. For though the 
Universe, the manifestation, passes away, the Fire 
is never-dying, and to all eternity orders the great 
cydles through which pass the procession of the 
succeeding universes, all alike fated to know birth, 
life, re-absorption. And this Universe is God, and 
the Reason which broods upon it, and works within it, 
which is a part of it and yet separate from it, is God. 

(1) quoted by Arnold, in Roman Sto icism, p. 177, from 
Areius Didymus, frag. 31, as a definition by 
Chrysippus. 






















‘ 














. 


; 




























(23 


For God is the ’’universal intelligence”, he is ’’all 

that you see and all that you cannot see; His greatness 

exceeds the hounds of thought”; ”He is all in all, He 

is at once within and without his works”; **in Him there 

is nothing except spirit; He is wholly reason”; He is 

Jupiter, ”the guardian and ruler of the Universe, its 

soul and "breath, the maker and lord of this earthly 

frame of things, to whom every name of power is 

appropriate”® He is Pate, for ”He it is on whom depend 

all things, from whom proceed all causes of causes”. 

He is Providence, ”for He it is by whose counsel pro- ‘ 

vision is made for the world that it may pursue its 

orderly course and unfold the drama of its being”. 

He is Hature, ”for it is He from whom all things derive 

being, and by whose breath we live”. He is the World, 

w for he is everything that you can see. He is wholly 

infused in all His parts, self-sustained through in¬ 
fo) 

herent powers”. v ' 

Such a conception of God represents a fusion 
between the earlier and later views of the Stoic school. 
In the older, God is ”a rational and fiery spirit, 
having no shape, but changing to what it wills and 

(2) For these many definitions of God see Seneca, 
Hatur a les ^ uaes tiones. I Pref., 13-14; Bk. II, 

XLV, 1-3. 

















































. 














. 























■ 

!• 

- 

. 

. 

> x -v\ . 

7 










( 24 . 


made like to all things”. The change comes -when 
God is endowed with personality and moral qualities, 
when he becomes "a living being, blessed, imperishable, 
the benefactor of mankind*. ^ 3 4 ^ This god (o Geos t j 

is one and tends to become assimilated with the Greek 
Zeus and the Latin Jove or Jupiter. Since, however, 
the one God can assume all shapes, and can appear under 
many names, the Stoics frequently refer to him by some 
plural noun, as, for example, di immortales . The use 
of such terms probably aided the allegorical interpre¬ 
tation through which the Stoics took over the old 
pantheon, thus enabling the new convert to use old 
formulae and practices with a new meaning. They made 


(3) Quoted by Arnold, Roman Stoi cism , p. 222, from 

Aetius, Placita v h Ilosophiae^, I, 6, 1. 


(4) Plut., De Stoicoru m Repugnant iis . 38 (1051, P) : * ^ 

/ / »A ' C 

>/., > J - — - - — ~ /} / r / 

/ 

£ 


:/ 

I Vd 


TOUS 


u 

'\js 

'1' 


& a e u s 


7T o T <~> o b 
ra d ra 


k a 


0 “-t V 


„ . n°n 

n*° * ro\ddd * 

M U'JL° 1 ; r )K0 v 


a A A 6 rravjOLb* 

6 v ~V <2 tt € /O / v f 

\ , C TOO O- O^udVT OS Ao '0U r kv*pY* tC ** 

tre - ) Q t o o y )a J 


/ 

V"/ 

V 0 0 UUt V/ ^ UJ O d ^Oi K CAjiO l o v" 

~~w —a > 1 /> » 

j •/ c< j u) rr u) 


J „ . 

U Tl A 6 r 10 O'** V Q 
\0 >/ * 

K, a l Of (ft &QAJ TO V 

























(25 


the old myths symbols of scientific truth, rejected all 
ideas that the gods are greedy, jealous, or mischievous, 
and asserted instead that they (the gods) are happy, 
and that their happiness consists in activity, an 
activity which has for its aim the happiness of men. 
Moreover, these gods are not eternal, but like the 
universe are destined to pass away in the general con¬ 
flagration. Only the Supreme God, a living all-wise 
Being, active and benevolent, remains immortal. 

With a Deity so constantly concerned with the 
comfort and happiness of his creatures, it is indeed 
reasonable to "honour the Gods". Since the best and 
most pious worship consists in honouring them with 
pure mind and voice, the Stoics, in principle, reject 
the whole existing system of public worship. In 
practice, however, they consider it a seemly and 
ancient custom and, as such, take part in it, ^ ^ 

Nevertheless, the Stoic who rightly believes in 
the Gods, who acknowledges their greatness and benev¬ 
olence, who accepts them as creators and rulers of the 

(5) Such rationalization is always easy. If church¬ 
goers today were examined, there might be found 
an interesting difference between actual belief and 
professed creed. 




























I ' 

■ - 










































’ 








■ .. 




. 














* 




















( 26 . 


universe, bias not yet completed his duty towards them. 

He must make himself like unto them. Can he do so, 

( 6 ) 

he will be a Sage, the man made perfect, the Stoic 
ideal. Such a man, like all men, finds in self- 
preservation the primary impulse to action; he feels 
affection for those things that aid this impulse, 
aversion for those that threaten destruction. The 
former he regards as being according to nature; they 
are things valuable, ’advantages’; as such he chooses 
them for their own sakes. The latter, being opposed 
to nature, and valueless, ’disadvantages’, he rejects. 
Thus, if given free choice, a man naturally wishes 
health, strength, riches, and, as naturally, shuns 
their opposites. Only the Wise Man, however, is able 
to make a choice which is fully rational and in harmony 
with nature. He, having attained to understanding, 
has discerned the order, or harmony, which should govern 
conduct, and infers that in this harmony resides the 
Chief Good (Summum Bonum) of man, the thing desirable 
and praise-worthy for its own sake. This Good, the 
end to which all else is a means, is to be attained 

(6) In this and succeeding chapters, the spelling of 
H Sage M or "Wise Man M with capitals indicates the 
Sage par excellence, the Stoic Ideal. 

















. 














' 

. 

' 

* • ' 


















■ 






- 











( 27 . 


"by living in conformity with nature; that is, with 
one’s own nature and with universal nature; man, a 
part of nature, must bring himself into harmony with 
the whole; he must agree and cooperate. This is Virtue 
(virtue, 7 ), which is one, even as the End for 

man is one, though both may be regarded under many 
aspects* The Wise Man, then, feels a most marvellous 
love for Virtue; he seeks her, as a man seeks his 
bride, that she may dwell with him forever; he has 
learned that but one good exists, that "very light of 
Virtue”, Moral Worth (quod honestum estj; but one 
evil. Moral Baseness (quod turpe est)* 

But, though Virtue is one, men commonly speak of 
her four sub-divisions as the four Virtues. These 
are Wisdom, Justice, Courage, Soberness, and of these 
the Wise Man, the sole possessor of Virtue, must be 
the veritable embodiment. Wisdom’s sphere includes 
learning; but Wisdom, according to the Stoics, must 
justify herself by practical results.and in consequence 
there is a regrettable tendency to value only those 
studies which produce such results. Justice, a 
political virtue, leads the Wise Man to respect the 
rights and property of others. All things are, indeed, 
common by nature, but through conquest or law they have 

























' 

■ 

























. 




- 










t 




- 




- 
























(28 


long passed over into private property. The Wise Man, 
then, as well as the others, may keep what is his, 
provided he does not forget his duty of contributing 
to the common good. Nor does his duty end there; he 
must respect the rights of others, not merely by 
doing no harm to them himself, but also by shielding 
from wrong those upon irhom it is being inflicted; for 
he "who does not prevent or oppose wrong, if he can, 
is just as guilty of wrong as if he deserted his 
parents or his friends or his country”.^ 

Closely related to Justice, and, indeed, a sub¬ 
division of it, is Beneficence. This virtue needs 
the guidance of principle. The Wise Man must guard 
against exhausting the fount of generosity by over¬ 
lavishness. Considerations of person and occasion 
are useful guides; all are not equally deserving; all 
have not the same claims upon us; a child, for 
instance, comes before a friend. 

Courage, both active and passive, the Wise Man 
must show. On the passive side, he will despise 
fortune and her buffeting®. Here come in all those 
"advantages” which even the Wise Man may choose in 
preference to the "disadvantages”. But he is to be 


(7) Cie., Be O ff., I, vii, 23 


















. 




' 














. 

. 
















( 29 . 


careful; these are things "preferable", they are not 
things "desirable", they are not Goods, but "Indif¬ 
ferent ia". Moral Worth is the sole Good and he who 
has that has all. He is then and forever rich, 
handsome, happy. In the face of death, in the 
extremity of torture, his happiness Is undiminished. 
Death, an integral part of nature f s course, cannot 
be an evil. Length of time has nothing to do with 
Happiness; only the quality matters. When Death 
beckons, the Wise Man follows cheerfully. If such a 
course seems reasonable, he will even go in search 
of it. Mere existence is not worth clinging to; 
life has no savour without honour; illness and pain 
may exact a too costly price; with the mind gone, 
man degenerates into a beast; if for any cause, the 
disadvantages outweigh the natural advantages, the 
Wise Man will quietly put off life as he would an 
outworn mantle. 

Opposed to this passive virtue is Greatness of 
Soul (rj txe /<* , magnitude animi), the acting, 

spirit which the Wise Man shows in the undertaking 
of great enterprises, lor the Wise Man does not 
live to himself alone; he is no hermit in the desert, 
but a citizen in a state. He is more; he is in 







’ 










. 

* . 






' 







. 


. 


































( 30 . 


reality a citizen in two states and one is the great 
commonwealth of the world. In it all men are brothers; 
there are no barriers of caste or race; even the 
barrier of sex is down - "women and slaves may become 

(o) 

philosophers" - women have potentialities for 
virtue equal to those of men, slaves are human beings; 
eve^r member of the human race is capable of being 
a citizen of the cosmopolis. A Y/ise Man, then, has 
duties to every other man, even if that other be his 
servant, bought in the market-place, rated in the 
eyes of the law as a chattel; his chattel is in truth 
to be regarded rather as his hired labourer; the 
universal law outweighs these temporal local codes; 
only to the beasts does he owe nothing; they are 
created for his use. 

But the Wise Man is in addition the citizen of 
some particular state, of Rome, of Athens. He must, 
unless some insuperable obstacle blocks his road, 
take part in the life of the community. In no other 
way can hie character reach its full perfection, for 
man is formed by nature for social union, he is a 

( Q ) 

"social animal", ' whose reason does not come into 


(8) quoted by Arnold in Roman Stoicism , p. 279, from 
Lactantius, Divinarum Institutionum. Ill, 25. 


(9) Socjale anima l. Seneca makes use of the phrase in 


his De Beneficiis, VII, 
itus mundu g. 
Simeon Stylites. 


in commune genitus | , S?6i! i sl|l i !^lt n ^r et 

have been St 









' 



. ; is , 















play until he recognizes and acts upon that fact. It 
is natural that the Wise Man should desire to engage 
in politics and governments those men who are 
occupied solely with their own affairs, who have no 
interest, no effort, no means to spare for the corn* 
munity are traitors to social life. The Wise Man 
remembers that men are horn for the sake of men, for 
mutual help, that by their skill, their industry, 
their talents, they may "cement human society more 
closely together, man to man".^ 

Accordingly the Wise Man prefers to live the 
normal life of the perfect citizen. In addition to 
his public activities, he will marry and beget 
children. Hor will he do this solely as a duty; he 
desires it; wife and children will be dear to him, 
for nature has so ordered it that the closest bond of 
all bonds is that between husband and Vi?if@, the next, 
that between parents and children. Kbr will these 
be the only bonds of fellowship that the Wise Man 

(10) Cic. De Of f., I, vii, 22. Compare this with the 
laissez fairs attitude of the Epicureans. 

Arnold (p. 500) sums up the Epicurean Sage by calling 
him "essentially easy-going and a quietist, little 
inclined to risk his peace of mind by meddling with 
the troubles of others". 















' 














. 










- ■ 

* 











. 










( 32 . 


knows. He seeks friends as well, men having like 

ideals and like tastes whom he will love as he loves 

himself. Utility will not enter into the relation- 

ill) 

ship; friendship is to be sought for itself. 

There still remains a fourth virtue. Temperance 
or Soberness cru^w j, temperantia), the virtue 
which includes not only moderation in all things, 
but complete mastery over the passions. It is also 
concerned with decorum or propriety. This latter 
point the Wise Man might or might not accept. Should 
he accept it, he will behave like a polished gentle¬ 
man, respecting the feelings and opinions of others, 
avoiding all rough games, all obscene jests, 
observing the proprieties of his age and rank, dis¬ 
playing decorum, especially in personal modesty and 
decency and in the choice of allusive instead of 
blunt terms; he will even, with careful regard to his 
individual character, choose a '**gentlemanly” pro¬ 
fession. He must, however, be careful or he will 
find himself departing from a life based on reason 

(11) Aristotle would agree with this. As will be 
seen later, his ideal man breaks his life of 
contemplation by ”virtuous activity” in the world of 
men ( Hie. Ethics, X, viii, 6), and although (Hie. 
Ethics, Bk. VIII, iii, 1) there are three kiid s of 
friendship - of Utility, of Pleasure, and of Virtue - 
it is only the last that the good man desires; for 
only the last is ”the perfect form of friendship” 
(VIII, iii, 6) 













« 

' 










■ 


' 
















. 






• ■ 















. 



■ 
















(33 


and accepting instead one subservient to tlie pre¬ 
judices and conventions of inis day. Should he toss 
decorum aside, he will find Zeno and the main body on 
his side, assuring him that the doctrine is false in 
principle and ridiculous in detail. Even Cicero, the 
great upholder of decorum, is forced to adroit that 

among the Stoics "the Wise Man will blurt things 
(18) 

straight out". But there is no such escape from 

moderation and the mastery of the emotions. The Wise 
Man must see to it that he duly regulates the 
appetites and impulses common to him as to the lower 
animals, so that his soul may be in a healthy state. 
Such appetites are largely concerned with sex, with 
food and with drink. In regard to sex, the Wise Man, 


(12) Gic. Fain, IX, 22. "Habes scholam Stoicam: o 

cro^i {cic. gam. XX. 22. 4) 

This is but repeating in somewhat different words what 
he had said at the beginning of his letters M Sed...... 

placet Stoicis suo quamque rem nomine appellare. 1 * 

(Cic. Fam . IX, 1). Cicero’s own attitude is opposed to 
this bluntness; H Ego servo et servabo - sic enim 
adsuevi - Platonis verecundiam; itaqus tectis verbis 
ea ad te scrips!, quae apertissimis agunt Stoici. f ' 

(Cic. Fam . IX, 22. 5) Later this theory of decorum 
seems to have been abandoned; Bern ineptissimam fecero, 
si nunc verba quaesiero, quemadmodum dicam ilium 
mate11am sumpsisse (Sen. De. Benef . Ill, xxvi. 2.) 
Doubtless such variations are due to the different 
milieus. 
























, 

■ 

' 

£ 
























■ 








. o i: ' 



































• 

• 

. 



, 
































. 



. 


















. 












































( 34 . 


forced to argue that no natural act is indecent, that 
the only question can "be one of seemliness for the 
individuals concerned, has to tell his horrified critic 
that incest itself is not an abomination. In practice, 
that same Sage shows an austere morality; adultery is 
his special dislike, sexual relations with slaves or 
with free women outside marriage are unbecoming to him; 
even in marriage, restraint is desirable; boy favourites 
are beyond the pale. In matters of food and of drink, 
all tendencies to gluttony, to any excess or "greedi¬ 
ness”, are considered grave faults; the Wise Man must 
so eat and drink as to maintain the health of his 
body. This he does because the body (though by many 
considered essentially evil), appears to the Sage 
who follows the true Stoic doctrines a masterpiece 
of divine skill, an evidence of the care of 
providence for man; as such, it merits proper 
respect and attention. To him there is no dualism 
of soul and body, for "soul is body”, and the body 
itself is permeated by divinity. As a matter of 
fact, the question troubles the Stoics so little that 
the Wise Man seems hardly conscious that he has a 
body. Perhaps he might be more aware of it did he 
give pleasure a larger place in his life. But to a 





’ 

' 

1 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

0 • ... V " • « 










: 




















* 

- 












135 


true Stoic, pleasure is either worthless or else among 
those 11 indifferentia" which may be welcomed if they 
come but are so trivial that no sensible man pays 
much attention to them. 

The passions receive severer treatment than the 
appetites. The latter the Stoic Sage controls; the 
former he completely subjugates. Man is a rational 
being whose life should be one harmonious ?i?hole. When 
passion enters, reason and harmony flee. Therefore 
the Wise Man cannot permit fear, greed, anger, cruelty, 
grief in any form, to shake his soul. They and all 
their kin must be rooted out. Even pity must go, for 
it is the weakness of a feeble mind, which thinks 
another’s troubles evils. Mourning, too, must be 
checked, though the mourner be a father who has just 
buried his child; it is the Wise Man*s duty to set an 
example of firmness; excessive grief is unbecoming 
to him. Besides, though his child*s body be dead, yet 
the soul is immortal, for it is part of that primitive 
Eire out of which the universe is formed. It, then, 
still exists somewhere, though not doomed to tortures 
or to chill helplessness in Hades, for all the 
stories of the dread regions of the Kingdom of the 
Dead are the dreams of poets. The soul may have to 


I 














































' 











• 






. 


























(36. 


undergo purgation, but only until all stains are washed 
* 

away A *it is fit to rise to that clear upper ether where 
dwell the spirits of the righteous. It must be 
admitted that the soul which has survived death can no 
longer be identified with the person who once lived 
but has become something else which fills his place 
in the universe; it must be granted, too, that the 
souls of the wicked may not rise as high as do those 
of the good, and their time of separate existence after 
death may be shorter; even the souls of the good will 
be reabsorbed into the primal Fire at the great con¬ 
flagration of the world. But the Wise Man, whatever 
his uncertainty as to his fate, cannot allow this 
doubt to influence his conduct. In the presence of 
death, as at all times, in every situation, he must 
bear himself with becoming dignity, conscious that he 
has a Kingdom in his soul, a kingdom governed by that 
Virtue which is Reason, where the storms of passion 
die away into a great calm. 

”How dignified, how lofty, how consistent is the 

character of the Wise Man. I Since reason has 

proved that moral worth is the sole good, it follows 
that he must always be happy, and that all those 
titles which the ignorant are so fond of deriding, do 

in very truth belong to him. For he will have a 









































































. 




. 












































(37 


better claim to the title of King than Tarquin, who 

could not rule either himself or his subjects;. .... 

Rightly will he be said to own all things, who alone 
knows how to use all things; rightly also will he be 
styled beautiful, for the beauty of the soul is fairer 
than that of the body; rightly the one and only free 
man, as subject to no man’s authority, and slave of no 
appetite; rightly unconquerable, for though his body 

(33) 

be thrown into fetters, no bondage can enchain his soul, 11 

The founders of Stoicism had looked forv^ard to a 
Gosmopolis in which every citizen would be wise; they 
never doubted that Wise Men could and did exist. Their 
successors hesitated; they themselves were not Sages; 
hard pressed by questions of impertinent interlocutors, 
they considered the subject troublesome; perhaps the 
Wise Man had existed in the Golden Age; perhaps he was 
only an ideal; in any case, he had not yet been found. 
Meanwhile, they would suggest certain mythical heroes 
like Hercules and Ulysses, whose lives - carefully 

(lsf.De Fin. Ill, xxii, 75. Gf. Horace, Sat. Ill, 

11. 125 ff. The contrast illustrates the possi¬ 
bilities of ridicule latent in the Stoic doctrine. 

It is fair to add, however, that such opponents failed 
to see that the Stoics were maintaining the pote nti¬ 
alities of the Sage rather than the actuality of any 
man then living. 































■ 








' 










. 








■ 



■ 










(38. 

expurgated - might serve as models. Or, if a Roman 
were preferred, Cato of Utica came close to being the 
Ideal Sage. 

Some model was indeed most desirable. The lesson 
of virtue is best learnt by considering virtuous men 
and the Stoics had no doubts as to the need of teach¬ 
ing virtue. It is, they said, an aspect of reason and 
children lack reason. The child may have, by birth, 
a disposition favourable to virtue, but not virtue; 
that can come only by training. Daily the probationer 
draws closer to the prise, till suddenly he realises 
that he has attained it, not bit by bit, but as a 
whole, a thing complete in itself. Once possessed, 
it is his forever. But to enter that Holy of Holies, 
he must first pass through the outer courts of Educa¬ 
tion. 









Chapter II 
THE NOVITIATE 


The man who dwells in the house of unreason is 
filled with unending, ever-increasing desires. As in 
the vision of Mirza, he spends his life in the vain 
pursuit of bubbles, and when these seem almost 
within his grasp, when but one more effort is needed, 
the door in the bridge opens beneath his feet and he 
falls into the dark current swirling below. Or he 
forms one of the crowd in Life»s amphitheatre, where 
Fortune scatters the tickets which entitle the 
holders to gifts, and with the rest he crushes and 
squeezes and strains to reach one of the elusive 
prizes drifting just beyond reach of his fingers. 
Perhaps he is one of the “lucky" few, but he is dis¬ 
contented; others have bigger premiums. He has won 
the praetorship, but his neighbour is to be consul; 
he will be procurator of Judea, but that other will 
govern Asia; he has wealth to build a stately mansion 
on the Capitoline Hill, but this other has even his 
bath flooded with light from tall glass windows, and 
the bath itself is of marble and the fittings of 
silver and gold. So the man in the House of Unreason 
forgets how many won no prize at all and thinks only 












- 








. 






. 

. 

■ 

. 

. - 






. 

. 

- 









. , 










of the number who have outstripped him. His anger 
increases, for the prize which seemed offered so 
freely in reality has been sold to him, not given, 
and the price he has had to pay is a heavy one. The 
crowd call him "lucky" and "happy" and look on en¬ 
viously as the stalwart negroes carry his litter 
through the streets, but he himself feels as though he 
were nailed to his height and wonders, were the nails 
withdrawn, if he could climb down in safety, or would 
the first move to descend dash him in pieces far below. 

He has been flattered and courted but now there 
creeps into his mind a doubt of his own deserving. He 
is no longer secure in the sense of his own perfection, 
he perceives that he has many great failings; and with 
this consciousness he is given the key to the gate 
that opens on the highway to Wisdom. For as long as 
he was unaware of his faults, he could not leave the 
House of Unreason. A man who does not know he is 
physically ill, does not summon a doctor or seek a 
cure; no more does the man who is unconscious of a 
spiritual malady. Recognition of his ill-health is 
the first step towards a cure. 

But he does not use the key and open the gate 
until to his discontent with himself there is added 






, 

1 


, 

- 

- 

- 

; 

. 

: .' . • • -" 

‘ 








■ 

. 

. 










- 












(41. 


a passionate love of virtue. Mere affection is not 
enough; he must desire virtue with all his being. 

Then indeed the gate swings open and he steps out 
onto the great road that leads to the mountain peaks 
of Wisdom where dwell God and those men who, having 

A * 

followed that same road and reached those summits, 
are now the equals of God. They will show no jealousy 
towards the new aspirant; on the contrary they will 
welcome him; they will even lean down and stretch out 
their hands to help him on his upward path. Hor is he 
presumptuous in this attempt. In every man dwells a 
soul which came from the divine and strives to return 
whence it came. 

The highway which leads to the peaks is Philosophy, 
the guide he follows is Reason, the highest quality 
in man, his sole good, the one which alone is peculiar 
to him, which, when regulated and completely developed, 
gives him the full happiness of which he is capable. 

And this fully developed reason is called Virtue, and 
is at the same time the moral ideal which is the aim 
and consummation of life. Her is his a solitary 
journey. In the House of Unreason accidents of birth 
and of rank mattered greatly; on this highway he 
finds himself accompanied by rich and poor, noble and 








' 

- 

1 

. . 




• •- 

• •• ■ 




- 




. • 

, 

. 






© . 





. . 










. 


* 













(42. 


plebeian, slave and freeman.^ Even his sister may 

accompany him; for "who has asserted that nature has 

dealt grudgingly with women’s natures and has 

narrowly restricted their virtues, .. they 

have just as much force, just as much capacity.. 

( 2 ) 

for virtuous action". 

But though birth and rank are disregarded in this 
quest, yet if the traveller has come of a well-to-do 
family, he has a certain advantage over hie humbler 
companions. His edueat ion has given him a knowledge 
of the liberal arts. These do not bestow virtue, 
but even as the elementary studies prepared the 
mind for them, so they in turn train and prepare the 
mind for virtue. On the whole, therefore, the 
liberal arts are to be learned and then put aside. 

For the future, the aspirant’s study is to be 
Philosophy - especially Philosophy in her two aspects, 
the one teaching us what must be done on earth, the 

(1) Bulli praeclusa virtus est; omnibus patetf omnes 
admittit, omnes invitat et ingenues et libertinos 
et servos et reges et exules; non eligit domum nec 
censum, nudo homine contenta est. (Sen. Be Benef . 

Ill, xviii, 2). 


(2) Sen. Ad Marc. XVI, 1 



















• 



. 






. ■ 



. 






• - . . 

. 

































• 


. 


' 








. 









. 














■ 

. 






















(43 


other what is done in heaven. This it is which sum¬ 
mons the student to the reverent contemplation of the 
beauty and vastness and ordered motion of the 
universe, lifting him high above the petty details 
of his earthly existence, surmising that there is a 
greater and fairer realm placed by nature beyond 
human sight. Its sister aspect is a devotion to 
virtue through virtue itself, the creator of order in 
the soul, assigning to each person and thing its 
due and proper value, disciplining and controlling 
the impulse towards the objects of desire, correlating 
impulse and action so that life is at one with 
itself. To the help of these two comes a third, the 

( 3 ) 

logical, preventing falsehood from sneaking into 
the place of truth and the three constituting one 
unity which is the passionate pursuit of wisdom, of 
the supreme good of man, of knowledge of things 
human and divine. To Philosophy he is to devote 
himself; she is to be mistress, not accepting tag- 
ends of attention but disposing of his time as she 
sees fit; for other pursuits she leaves only those 
leisure moments of which she has no need. 

(3) Subrepant , Ep. LXXXIX, 9. Seneca frequently 
makes use of some colloquial term. 



































■ 











. 

' 



























( 44 . 


In this study, hooks will "be of much. help. 

Through them the aspirant can enjoy the company and 

receive the instructions and stimulus of the great 

exponents of the happy life in every age. He chooses 

them carefully, not too many, only those by authors 

of approved worth. Then from each day's reading he 

picks one thought to digest thoroughly, one lesson 

that will help in facing life. Yet if the novice can 

find some contemporary philosopher whose 'words and 

actions harmonize, he will find personal intercourse 

with such a man more effective than the greatest 

written work. Indeed, in this first part of the 

journey, when the novice is still unfit to be trusted 

to himself, he will do well to choose some exemplar, 

some Cato or Laelius, on whom to mould himself, whose 

spirit he will consider always present so that every 

action, every thought, will be under observation. A 

guardian is needed lest, by being alone, a man finds 

that he is in the company of a knave. "Let the 

spirit have some one to revere, under whose guidance 

(4) 

it may make even its hidden shrine more holy. 4 ' 

(4) Sen. Sp. XI.9, Compare Seneca's own life-long ad¬ 
miration for his teacher Demetrius, "Demetrius, 
that splendid soul, I carry always with me; others may 
be robed in purple and he half-naked, but I forsake 
them to bestow on him my converse and admiration. M 
(Sen. Ep. LXII, 3) A case of hero-worship that out¬ 
lasted student days. 




















. 






. 














. 


' . ■ 





. 



- 

. 












. 

* ■ 


- 












( 45 . 


Yet, since this is a spiritual, not an actual journey, 
a man’s progress may be hastened by retirement from 
society and the bustling world of politics and 
business. The remembrance of the common Stoic teach¬ 
ings may make the novice hesitate before taking any 
such step. But the practice of the early masters can 
be set off against their preaching, and the benefits 
are easily seen. The man who mixes in a crowd always 
comes home with his character made ?Jors@ by the 
experience. Besides, it is but little gain to win 
freedom from one’s om vices if there is to be a 
constant struggle with those of others. Retirement, 
then, is a step earnestly advised, but a retirement 
that is inconspicuous. There is no need to label 
oneself ’’Philosophic Recluse”, or so ostentatiously to 
bury oneself alive that the public attention is 
attracted. The place, too, must be carefully chosen. 
It is quite true that the happy life can be lived in 
the very Porum, but such a choice is not advised. 

Even as some places are not wholesome for the body, so 
others are not good for the soul. And when a health¬ 
ful spot has been decided upon, stay there, do not 
keep trying one place after the other. Such flitting 












. 


. 










. 


. 






: 








. 


. 












* ; 


. 


. 

' 






. ' 



















(46 


is a sign of an anxious spirit, to which change of 
scene will bring no peace, because it must carry its 
character with it. Let it rid itself of these 
weaknesses and all places will seem tolerable. More¬ 
over, even in transit, new dangers arise, The eyes 
and ears of the novice must unlearn all they 
formerly knew; but on a journey these same forbidden 
objects are likely to present themselves and so to 
rekindle desire. Also, in active life rewards are 
temptingly offered: gold, high rank, power and all 
povjer’s accompaniments. The life of seclusion offers 
no wages. Finally, remedies, whether for soul or for 
body, are more effective if their application is un¬ 
interrupted; this is impossible while the patient is 
always migrating. That runaway body must be brought 
to a standstill. 

In this seclusion Fashion’s standards will be 
replaced by Nature’s. The latter requires little. 
Marbles, silks, imported foods are unnecessary; to 
allay the body’s hunger, bread and water suffice. 

The satisfaction of those natural and necessary desires 
is not expensive; it is luxury that runs up the bill. 

To snow that this is the case, to prove as well that 
lack of wealth is no evil, it is advisable to set 





. 

- 

. 







- 


. 

. 

. • . . 












.. . - 


. 


. 































( 47 , 


aside certain periods in which, to practise poverty. 
During these days eat only coarse black bread, drink 
only water, sleep on a mattress hard and old, wear a 

(5) 

garment made from the cheapest and roughest material. 
Then if riches vanish, the novice will face without 
misgiving what he has often practised. 

As a matter of fact, this is one of his first 
lessons; namely, that poverty, like pain, sorrow, 
death and all the other so-called evils, are really 
not evils at all. Conversely, he also learns that 
riches, good health, beauty, a long life, rank and the 
other things for which the mob pray, are equally not 
goods. There is but one test for an evil; is moral 
baseness part of it? - and but one for a good; does 
Virtue share in its composition? Accordingly, his sole 
aim must be the attainment of the Moral Ideal (quod 
honestum est). To this all his efforts are directed. 

All else are "Indifferentia’', some things being useful 
indeed, but yet not the proper objects of a man’s 

(5) Apparently, rich folk, when bored with their easy 
and luxurious existence, were in the habit of 
playing at poverty. Seneca warns his pupil that the 
test must be real, not a few days of fashionable 
"roughing it". In this fad ancient society would seem 
to have found something of the same satisfaction which 
its modern counterpart derives from slumming. 
















k 

. 

' 



. 








. 




. 




. 








. 












- 

- 






















{ 48 . 


efforts. Whether useful or not, they are decidedly 
not needed for the Blessed Life (Vita Beata); once a 
man has become a Wise Man, their presence or absence 
will not affect his happiness; he will be in a state 
of bliss either way; so far as the virtues are con¬ 
cerned, there is no difference between joy and the un¬ 
flinching endurance of pain; every form of discomfort is 
void of significance; it is swallowed up in virtue. 

Only in the mind does beatitude abide. 

At this point the novice probably gasps. He 

thinks of all the unpleasant, painful things in life 

and voices objections* The first ones are likely to 

concern his family and friends, for he has nowhere been 

told that he must separate himself from these; far 

from that, if he has followed the teachings of the 

earlier Stoics, he is almost certainly a husband and 

father and, as well, a faithful friend. He is 

partially reassured. If these die, even the Sage will 

feel the first keen stab of pain, even he will weep. 

Accordingly, the novice may mourn for the death of 

those dear to him, provided he observes Nature’s 

bounds in so doing. His eyes are to be neither dry nor 

16 ) 

streaming; there are to be no floods of tears, no 

(6) "Tears which ....... spring from a philosophers 

(sapienti viro) eye sometimes because he lets them, 
sometimes because they won’t be denied." (Ep. XCIX, 18) 




















: 

























■ . : - : . ' ' 












■ 


. 

. 

n • j.* 

. 



. 












(49 


noisy lamentations; his own reason will check grief 
in due time. Tears are allowed at all only ‘because a 
man, even a Sage, is a being of flesh and blood, not 
a stone. To demand perfect cheerfulness at the bier 
is sheer inhumanity.^ 

It is the same with bodily as with spiritual pain. 

A man will feel it, but must rise above it. Pain can- 

18 ) 

not make a good man unhappy. The novice protests 
again. Surely a health that has been undisturbed since 
infancy is better than one gained after long effort; 
surely the Wise Man at the banquet, safe and untouched, 
is in possession of a happiness clearer, more serene, 
than that of the Wise Man who, stretched upon the rack, 
defies his enraged tormentors. But the novice is 


(7) "To watch your loved ones on the bier with as 
cheerful an eye as you watched them in life, and 

to be untouched in the first moments of severed in¬ 
timacy, is stark insensibility, not moral greatness.” 
(Sen. Ep. XCIX, 15) This is one of the places where 
Seneca ? s own warm sympathies soften an ideal often con¬ 
demned as over-hard. 

(8) Bonus Vir . Seneca says ( Be Cons t. Sa p . VII, 2) that 
the only good man is the Sage (neminem bonum esse 

nisi sapientem), and although elsewhere he mentions a 
good man of secondary degree, not yet possessed of 
complete wisdom and more commonly met with in life than 
is the Wise Man, yet it is usually safe to read Sapiens 
wherever Seneca Y?rites Bonus Vir. 



















. 
















. . - i 

' 

■ 

- 

. 

. 














( 50 . 


assured that he is mistaken. In all such cases the 
Virtue involved remains the same and, since only the 
presence of Virtue makes the Good, the Good involved 
is also constant. It is only the medium that varies. 

In the one case this may necessitate a stress 
and strain from -which man’s nature recoils, hut that 
is an accident which lacks all moral significance* 

Sven the endurance of pain may not include Virtue; 
there must he a courageous endurance. It may even he 

that “to dine is evil, to he racked a good, if the 

(9 J 

dining degrades and the racking ennobles”. 

To all this the unsatisfied Novice dryly retorts 
that he has not noticed any one paying a vow because 
he has been lengthened by that rack. Seneca admits 
that there are certain things which he would prefer 
to escape, hut if circumstances force them upon him, 
he will pray for the spirit to endure them as he should. 
**I should like to keep torture at arm’s length, hut if 
I must endure it, I shall pray to go through with it 
bravely, like a man of spirit and honour .. 


(9) Sen. Ep. LXXI, 21. ’Quid ergo?’ inquis 'iacere in 
convivio et torqueri paria sunt?* hoc mi rum 
videtur tibi? illud licet magis admireriss iacere ^ in 
convivio malum ^ in eculeo bonum est, si illud 
turpiter, hoc honeste fit.bona ista aut mala non efficit 
materia, sed virtus. Haec ubicumque apparuit, omnia 
eiusdem mensurae ac pretii sunt. 


















’ 

1 

■ 






■ 

■ 








■ 












(51 


The truth is that it’s not the afflictions that are 

( 10 ) 

desirable* but the virtue shown in the bearing of them." 

For this virtue he prays, perhaps not explicitly, but 
in general terms. For example, he prays for a life of 
fine ideals; but such a life consists in actions of 
various kinds, actions which may include even Cato’s 
tearing open of his bandaged wound; accordingly, in 
praying for this life, he prays also "for those things 
without which, at times, life cannot realize fine 
ideals". 

The virtues, again, form an indivisible sisterhood; 
any action in which one is present is sanctioned by all; 
accordingly any noble action must be desirable. To 
consider that only those things are desirable that 
approach by pleasant paths is to make a grave mistake; 
some good things are of stern aspect. Such deserve to 
be greeted, not with welcoming cheers, but with reverent 
silence. “Put on the spirit of a hero and for the 

( 12 ) 

moment step apart from the prejudices of common men. 1 * 

A life that is never shaken, that is without anxiety, is 

. 

■ 

(10) Sen. Ep. LX VI1, 4 ......non incommoda. ... sed virtue... 

(11) Sen. Ep. LXVII, 7 vitam honestam 

(12) Sen. Ep. LXVII, 12 indue magni viri animum. 

. 






















, 





























, 



• 













- 



■ 





. 

. 

. 






. 






















( 52 . 


a dead sea. A man to whom all has come according to his 
desire has had an adverse judgment passed upon him by 
the gods; Fortune, whom only a brave man can conquer, 
has scorned him as a coward. No man knows himself or 
learns what he can do unless he is tested. ‘‘I’m burnt, 
but unbeaten. Well, I think it a thing to desire; why 
not? I don’t mean the burning, but the not being 
beaten. Nothing’s higher and lovelier than virtue, and 
everything wrought by its authority is no less desirable 
than good.” 

Besides, pain is either endurable or brief; it will 
end either itself or its victim. There is no reason 
for thinking the first alternative an evil. All men 
are mortal; subject to that law they came into the 
world; what folly, then, to fear what must happen 
sooner or later, what may be postponed, but not in- 
definitely postponed. Friends and children are 
possessions which may at any moment be withdrawn and 
that without regard to age. The older should die 
first, but the younger may. Death does not follow the 
Censor’s list. Let the Novice remember this while his 

(13) Sen. Ep. LXVT1, 16 ....... nihil est virtute 

praestantius, nihil pulchrius, et bonum est et 
optabile, quicquid exhuius geritur imperio. 

















































. 


















. ■ 

. 


















( 53 . 


friend is still alive; by so doing be will rob Death of 
half its bitterness; at the same time he will grasp 
friendship more greedily, since its length of tenure is 
uncertain. But when Death has come, let the friend's 
memory become a source of pleasure to him, outlasting 
his grief, and let him solace himself for his loss 
with his other friends. He pays a poor compliment to 
them if they cannot console him for the loss of one; 
if he has no others, he has done himself a greater 
injury than has Fortune - she robbed him of one, he has 
robbed himself of all those he might have had. More¬ 
over, the man who was capable of loving only one, 
could not have loved even that one so very warmly. 

In regard to his own end, the Hovice must remember 
that death is either extinction or the door to another 
life. Heither is to be feared. It is not death 
itself, but the thought of death that is frightening. 

Men pray for a long life, though length of days need 
not lead to happiness; quality, not quantity, is 
the important thing. One man may count four score 

(14) Compare with Aristotle’s belief that perfect 

happiness requires a complete lifetime ( Die. Ethics. 
I, vii, 16) “Moreover to be happy takes a complete 
lifetime. For one swallow does not make summer, nor 
does one fine day; and similarly one day or a brief 
period of happiness does not make a man supremely 
blessed and happy." 


















- - . 


. 

' 

- 











. . 
































(54 


years and yet die ■without having lived at all; 

another, dying in early manhood may have enjoyed a 

full and complete life. The Novice, then, is well 

advised to count each day his last, not snatching it 

greedily, as though no more would come, hut quietly 

considering that there is no guarantee that he will 

see another dawn. "The lust for life must he shaken 
(15) 

off.** The Novice must learn that it makes no 

difference when he suffers what he must at some time 
suffer. 

Accordingly, let him familiarize himself with the 
thought of death in order not to he taken unawares. It 
is the one test he cannot escape. All other trials may 
pass him hy; he may practise poverty and find that 
Fortune leaves him his riches until the end; he may 
discipline himself against pain and enjoy perfect health; 
he may steel himself to face the lose of his children 
and he carried to the funeral pyre hy all whom he has 


(15) Sen, Ep. Cl, 15 Cf, Nat. Q uaest. VI, XXXII, IX 
“Let us fix this in our minds and constantly remind 
ourselves, I must die. When? What matter is that to 
you? Death is a law of nature; death is a tribute and 
a duty imposed on mortals; it is the remedy of all ills. 
Whoever now fears it will one day long for it. Giving 
up all else, Lucilius, make this your one meditation, 
not to dread the name of death. By long reflection make 
death an intimate friend, that, if so required, you may 
he able even to go forth to welcome it.” 























. 


, 





- 









- 



«■ 

■ 









' 


' . - 


r r ♦ <• 

, 






( 55 . 


begotten. Only death, is inescapable, and it stamps 
all his words and actions with, an unchangeable seal. 

In the day that he faces death, the truth or falsity 
of his professions is made manifest to all. 

Here the Novice must be on his guard so that he 
may not fall into the opposite error. A man should 
not cling to life; neither should he hate it. It is 
foolish to run from death, but it is quite as foolish 
to run to it from fear of life. There are times when 
a man must anticipate death, times when death is a 
duty; if the good life is no longer possible, then 
depart. Nature has kindly provided many easy exits. 

If circumstances permit, let a man choose the one most 
pleasing. If hard pressed, he must make the opportunity 
for himself and use the first tool he can find. Mankind 
would indeed be in fortune*s grip were it not possible 
to render her powerless so soon as she becomes too 
powerful. But Reason must approve the act. Men have 
been known to quit life in a fit of anger or disgust. 

The decision to die may express nothing splendid or 
brave, but sheer boredom. Even pain is not a sufficient 
reason. To commit suicide because of pain is the act 
of a coward; only if the pain threatens to prevent all 
worthwhile activity of mind and body is the sufferer 




. 


























. 

’ 





. 



■ 




















( 56 . 

to take matters into his own hands. To lay down a 
rule applicable to all is well-nigh impossible. Even 
in instances of men condemned to death each case must 
be judged separately. Socrates was right in waiting; 
Libo^ 16 ^ in committing suicide; only when torture is 
involved does commonsense bid a man choose his own 
death; death is never improved by being prolonged. 

When men become old the bodily condition must be taken 
into account. Death from old age is the easiest, the 
slowest, and the most certain. If old age keeps the 
better part of a man unimpaired, if it leaves him the 
use of his senses, if his mind is sound, then let him 
live on. On the other hand* a long old age brings few 
to death unmarred; once let the spirit*s tenement 
begin to crumble, and a man had better depart at once 
for fear that he lose the power to do so. 

But while body and soul are united, though the 
former is the inferior, though it bears to the soul the 


(16) Libo Drusus (Sen. Ep. LXX, 10; Tac. Ann. II, &7-31) 
By Eirmius Catus, a Senator and his intimate 
friend, Libo was led into various acts, such as consult¬ 
ing astrologers, which, under the law of maiestas, 
might be considered treasonable. Catus then sent in¬ 
formation of these acts to Tiberius, Later, the 
delator Trio impeached Libo before the Senate on a 
charge of seeking to raise the dead. Bailing to secure 
an advocate and despairing of acquittal, Libo finally 
stabbed himself. 






‘ 









. 

























- 






. 

, 

. 










(57 


same relation that, in the universe, matter hears 
to God, yet it is the junior partner and is to he 
treated as such, Man, in fact, can do nothing -without 
it. Its needs of food, drink, shelter, are to he met. 
Uature demands simplicity, hut not the simplicity of 
a hoor; neatness and cleanliness are becoming; an 
unkempt appearance is to he avoided; the inward man 
should he unlike the generality, hut the outward man 
conform. The body's health must not he neglected. 
Overmuch time and energy should not he wasted on 
physical development hut exercises that quickly 
accomplish the desired result are recommended. Even 
amusements that will relax both body and mind have 
their place: the artisan busied with some delicate 
carving must rest his eyes occasionally. Yet the body, 
though necessary, is not important; it is to he 
treated with consideration hut on the clear understand¬ 
ing that at Reason's demand it may he flung to fire 
or torture. It is to he the rampart against Fortune's 
darts behind which the spirit dwells secure. 

On his journey through life the Uovice will receive 
many kindnesses. These it is his duty to return, 
unasked, and with interest. It is true that only the 
Wise Man knows how to return a benefit; a layman will 






, 




















. 




. 

. 































( 58 . 


misjudge time and amount; but that does not excuse the 
Novice from his debt of gratitude. If the kindness is 
followed by an injury, he judges leniently; a benefit 
should have the greater value; even if his debt is 
cancelled by the greatness of the succeeding harm, a 
kindly feeling remains. If he is the benefactor, and 
the man he has helped proves thankless, he must not 
for that reason become ungenerous. It is better that 
he should be disappointed than that the deeds should 
remain undone. Let him choose carefully the recipients 
of his kindness, the time, the quality, and the manner 
of his gifts; "to find one grateful soul it*s worth 
while to experiment on the ungrateful too". Benefi¬ 

cence has no grandeur if she looks for a return, if she 
is, to any degree whatsoever, venal; she makes us no 
promises; on the contrary, she often consists of a 
spontaneous sacrifice. What does a man gain by such an 
act? "Its accomplishment; beyond that, nothing is 
promised you. If by chance any profit comes to you, 
count it an extra.” Such acts are numbered among 

those morally right; these are to be sought for them- 


(17) Sen. Up. LXXXI, 2 

( 18 ) Sen. De Benef . IV, i, 5 























. 

- 




■ 










■ 

' 
















(59 


selves, of one’s own free will. An action which is not 
spontaneous has fallen "below the moral ideal and it is 
this moral ideal which the Bovice must make the lode¬ 
star of his life. By its standard he must judge every 
action and desire, with it his manner of life must 
harmonise; all must "be consistent. In its pursuit he 
must he prepared to face, if necessary, the contempt 
of the ignorant; at its demand the passions must he 
reined; anger must he far from him; it is the child 
either of arrogance or of ignorance;and with anger 
departs its parasite, cruelty, "Above all, bear this 
in mind, that the power of injury is vile and detest¬ 
able and most unnatural for man, loy whose kindness even 

( 19 ) 

fierce beasts are tamed.” Revenge is an inhuman 

word; instead, show mercy; no virtue is more seemly for 
a man. Bor is there any man so assured of his own 
innocence as not to rejoice in its presence. Surely 
to the Bovice seeking calm and quiet for the study of 
philosophy, it is particularly suited. 

Por this retirement there is no set period. Man’s 
life is short, even if he hoards his time; he makes 
it shorter by his carelessness. The hours flee, and 
the best are foremost. Moreover, in youth man learns 


(19) Sen. De Ira II. XXXI, 6 























. 























- 






















( 60 . 


most easily. Then the soul is still pliant and can 
be turned to better things. At that time, too, physical 
vitality is at its height. But the man who has waited 
until youth has gone need not despair. Let him act as 
does a belated starter in a race; make up by speed 
for lost time. In his very age he will find an un¬ 
expected help. Hot only are the passions tired and 
weakened, but the worthlessness of many things, which 
in youth must have been discovered only by reason, 
experience now makes plain to him. Young or old, let 
him make a start; virtue does not come by chance; it is 
attained only by that soul "which after training and 

( 20 ) 

instruction has been perfected by constant practice". 
Until virtue is so attained, the Hovice, no matter how 
close he may be to the goal, cannot class himself 
among the Wise Men, nor can their perfect and assured 
joy be his. He stands on slippery ground, still in the 
zone of uncertainty. But a great distance separates 
him from the uninstructed soul, dazzled and confused by 
the worthless tinsel of the world, thinking a mirage an 
oasis. At the end of the trail, even before he touches 

(20) Sen. Ep. XG, 46s virtue non contingit animo nisi 
institute et edocto et ad summum adsidua 
exercitatione perducto. 






































' 











. 














(61 


wisdom, there may possibly be a space in which he is 

no longer subject to a fall, where, although not yet 

on the dry land, he has already reached the harbour. 

In the meantime let him cling fast to the following rule 

M 3tfot to be beaten by adversity; never to trust 

prosperity; to see fortune’s extravagance steadily and 

see it whole, surmising that whatever she can do, she 
( 21 ) 

will.* 1 ' ' If he finds the road steep and rough, if 
his pace is slower than that of more gifted comrades, 
let him remember that the greater glory belongs to 
the man who has wrought the same fair design in the 
more stubborn material. 


(21) Sen. Ep. LXXVXII, 29. 











(62 


Chapter III 

THE JUST MAH MADE PERFECT 

The Hovice has reached the end of his journey, 
the goal of his desire. His ship lies at anchor in 
the safety of the harbour; before him glitters, in the 
bright sunshine, that fair white city of God which is 
builded without hands. 

"Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow, 

Bor ©Ter wind blows loudly; but it lies 
Deep-meadow’d, happy, fair with orchard lawns 
And bowery hollows crown’d with summer sea." 
The^no longer the Bo vice, the aspirant to Wisdom, 
but the Sage who possesses her in all her beauty and 
power, the Just Man made perfect, the steadfast 
traveller, passes through the gate and enters upon his 
heritage. He has learned to live according to Bature; 
he has mastered life’s law at Philosophy’s feet; he 
has made Virtue his bride and his queen. Bow, a 
rational being fully developed, he knows that everlast¬ 
ing happiness, that joy serene and high, which is not 
hidden from the wise man nor granted unto babes. He 
is beyond Fortune’s reach. She may gather the clouds 
and darken the sky and cause men’s souls to cower with 










. 

. 


. 














' 

. 

. 

•- : ;• , . 

. 







... 






( 63 . 


the shrilling of the winds and the crash of the thunder¬ 
bolt, but the Wise ton moves untroubled within the calm, 
bright city girt with its impregnable walls. 

The Wise Man, however, has two lives. He is, after 
all, a composite being, part body, part soul. For his 
spiritual life he is self-sufficient; for it all he 
needs is a spirit disciplined, sane, unbowed. His soul 
dwells in the city of God; his body lingers in Fortunes 
realm. So long, then, as soul and body are wedded, 
the Wise Man remains subject to bodily sensations. Ho 
degree of moral greatness will prevent his turning 
pale, fainting, feeling pain, God the Creator could 
not remove him from Fortune’s path; He was bound by 
the limitations of His material; therefore He has 
protected him: Fortune has no weapons that can rea,eh 
his soul.^ 1 ^ Threaten the Wise Man with gaol, with 
starvation, with exile; test him with the subtlest, 
most fiendish tortures; let him see his country in 


(1) "’But why*, you ask, ’does God sometimes allow 
evil to befall good men?* Assuredly he does not. 
Evil of every sort he keeps far from them - sin and 
crime, evil counsel and schemes for greed, blind lust 
and avarice intent upon another’s goods. The good man 
himself he protects and delivers: does any one require 
of God that he should also guard the good man’s 
luggage?” (Sen. Be Prov. VI, 1) 

































. 

- 






























( 64 . 


ruins, his friends and children slain; shew him 
death, not yet imminent, yet ever drawing nearer; give 
him time to savour his agonies. To him they are 
terrors of delirium, things to frighten cowards, evil only 
if the soul cringes "before them, if it surrenders 
that freedom for whose sake the unspeakable should be 
defied. They will buffet him; they cannot overthrow 
him. He rises above them, unconquerable. 

If, however, Fortune smiles, if she proffers 
strength of body, rank and wealth and power, the Sage 
need not reject them. These are not blessings, nor 
yet curses; they are the raw material for such and the 
will takes them and turns them to one side or to the 
other. Whatever his lot, the Sage shapes it to some¬ 
thing notable. In his spirit, not his possessions, 
lies his happiness. Therefore the Wise Man’s opinion 
of himself remains the same, whether his guests re¬ 
cline on purple couches and are served to the sound of 
music or he sits, a beggar, at the bridge-head. And 
the answer? He prefers the palace to the bridge-head, 
rank and dignity to a beggar’s status. With wealth 
opens a wider field for the exercise of his virtues, 
an opportunity for liberality, for moderation, for 















, 

' 

. 

; 

. 


































( 65 . 


orderliness.^ If riches have come honourably, if 

they have been acquired without base dealing, without 

harm to another, if their possessor can fling open the 

doors of his house and, without loss, say to all men, 

“Search! If you find anything that is yours, take it", 

( 3 ) 

then he is "a man excellently rich". He gives of 
his wealth generously, yet carefully, choosing those 
who most deserve aid in the realization that he must 
render account for his outlay as well as for his income. 
He does not copy the "pitiful", shrinking from contact 
with those they help, in scorn tossing to them an in¬ 
sulting alms. The Sage gives as a man to his fellow- 
men out of a common store; he gives now openly, now 
secretly, at times hiding his identity even from the 

man he helps; he gives, in short, as he would wish to 
(4) 

receive. v ' 


(2) "For indeed the Wise Man does not deem himself un¬ 
deserving of any of the gifts of Fortune. He does 

not love riches, but he would rather have them; he does 
not admit them to his heart, but to his house, and he 
does not reject the riches he has, but he keeps them 
and wishes them to supply ampler material for exercising 
his virtue." (Sen. De Vita Beata '. XXI, 4). But see Ep. 
LXXXVII, 31-33 for a description of wealth as the ante¬ 
cedent cause of evil, "a source of evils not as itself 
active, but as provoking to action". 

(3) Sen. De Vita Bea ta XXIII, 2. 0 magnum virum, o opti¬ 

me divitem. 

(4) Sic demus, quomodo vellemus accipere (Sen. De 
Benef. II, i, 1} 
















. 








. 


















. 













' 


■ 

. ! v 






















( 66 . 


If Fortune, weary of smiling, strips him of Sals 
possessions, he lets them go without a murmur. He is 
her trustee, guarding the wealth committed to him, 
returning it cheerfully on demand. Those worldly 
blessings which had entered his house had never been 
his; they were sure to go as they had come. If 
Fortune has left him the pittance sufficient to 
furnish porridge and a rough cloak, he lives on con¬ 
tentedly; Diogenes had no more. If she has taken even 
that, death will free him from her grip. Her very 
power makes her powerless. 

Until, however, that point is reached, the Sage 


plays manfully his part in the role assigned to him. 

In co-operation alone lies man * s safety. Separate man 

from his race, isolate him, and he is the weakest of all 

creatures, the prey of beasts, protected by neither 

teeth nor claws. His strength lies in union. It is 

through reason and fellowship that he has become the 

lord of earth and sea. Destroy this fellowship 

(societas) and you break the unity of the human race, 

l 5) 

the concord by which alone life is maintained. ' In 


(5) Ham quo alio tuti sumus, quam quod mutuis iuvamus 

officiis?...... Fac nos singulos, quid sumus? praeda 

animaliurn..... Hominem.. nudum et infirmum societas 

munit. Duas deus res dedit, quae ilium obnoxium v&li- 
dissimum facerent, rationem et societatem..... Societas.... 
fortes nos facit..... Hanc societatem tolle, et unitatern 

generis humani, qua vita sustinetur, scindes.. 

(Sen. De Benef. IV, xviii, 1-4). 























: 






. j . ' "K J 














t 








■ 




a 




. 















(67 


this work the Wise Man must share. Carefully estimating 
his ability so that he may not undertake something 
beyond his strength, he tries to serve his State. If 
Fortune bare him from public office, he performs the 
duties of a private citizen; if these are lost, he 
still has those of a man; if his State becomes too 
corrupt for honourable service, he seeks seclusion. 

This is not desertion of his post: a man’s sphere 
cannot be so limited that it forbids all activity; the 
stubborn silence of a good citizen is of help. 

It may be that Fortune opens the door to public 
life, but that the Wise Man’s temperament unfits him 
for participation therein. If so, he follows Batura and 
turns to contemplation and studious retirement A 6 ^ He 
is not idle. Indeed, he is never busier than when 
occupied with the study of things human and divine. The 


(6) This question of the most suitable life for the 

Wise Man Seneca seems unable to settle satisfactorily. 
Apparently contemporary conditions and the precepts of 
the older Stoics pulled in opposite directions; even an 
appeal to the practices as opposed to the teachings of 
the founders of the sect could not settle the problem: 
if Zeno took no part in public life, his pupils did. So 
over against Seneca’s judgment^kthenodorus seems "to have 
surrendered too quickly to the times, to have retired too 
quickly", (Sen. De Tranq . Animi^ IV, 1) must be set his 
advice to Lucilius, ’’Clamber out into a better life: 
the gods are kind to you. To some....... they dispense 

a gorgeous and grandiose misery." (Sen. Ep. XXII, 12J. 

Is it legitimate to see in the above a reflection of 
Seneca’s own position as the retired minister of Hero? 









- 

' 


. 

. 

. 

. 

* 

: * 














(68 


philosopher, the teacher of mankind, is horn to be 

of help to all men; let him now teach the law of life 

that he has learned* His school days are over. Like 

the bee he has gathered from many sources and blended 

the knowledge so acquired into a new and homogeneous 

whole* Let him, then, stop quoting Zeno and Cleanthes 

and Chrysippus, and from his store of honey bring 

forth something of his own; let him teach as a master, 

speak H as one having authority and not as the Scribes**. 

Gravely, quietly, not straining after the literary 

graces but using them if they come his way, letting 

( 7 ) 

the grandeur of his theme lift his style, v y careless 
of men* s contempt, he discusses the secrets of Batura 
and of God, If he so wills, he is free to depart 
from the path trodden by his masters; with them, he 
is engaged in the search for truth; Wisdom did not die 
with the ancients, nor yet can he himself hope to 


(7) The Stoics did not place a high value on graces of 
style* See (Ep, XXXIII, 1) Seneca’s answer to 
Lucilius 1 request; Desideras his quoque epistulis 
sicut priori bus adscribi aliquas voces nostrorum 
procerum. Bon fuerunt circa flosculos occupati. 

Seneca had little patience with "the teaching pedants 
who find their mission in making philosophy appear 
unintelligible instead of sublime”. (Ep, LXXI, 6 ) 






















' 

- 


' 












■ 


i 

■ 


0 

. 












( 69 . 


learn the final answer; great are the discoveries 
left for future ages.^ 8 ^ 

But whether in retirement or in active life, the 
Wise Man is the master of his passions. These he 
has scourged out-of-doors, he allows them no foot¬ 
hold whereby they may return. They are treacherous 
brutes obeying no rules, recognizing no limits, never 
genuinely tamed, striking like tigers when least 
expected, which grow until they overthrow reason 
and transform the mind into their own likeness, until 
they lead to that disunion of soul from which the 
Sage must be free. Most dangerous of all is Anger, 
the passion which rises like a hurricane, hideous 
and frenzied, devoid of self-control, of decency, of 
ability to distinguish right from wrong, seeking 
revenge even at the cost of its own ruin, the costliest 
plague that has ever afflicted the human race, which 
turns man into a demon bent on punishment and forget¬ 
ful of all ties. Of it even the Wise Man may feel 
the first involuntary prick which lies beyond Wisdom’s 

(8) Ep. XXXIII contains one of the finest justifi¬ 
cations of the spirit of research ever penned: 
"There’ll be no new discoveries if the old ones content 
us. Besides, he who follows another discovers nothing, 
in fact doesn’t even investigate *...... The pioneers 

are our guides, not our governors. Truth’s open to 
everyone, and the claims aren’t all staked yet. A 
great deal of it’s left for explorers to come." 

(Ep• XXXIII 9 10-11) # See also Seneca’s Eaturales 
quaes tiones-, VI, v, 2-3. 









. 

' 

. 

■ 








. 













( 70 . 


control. Therefore it must be crushed at the 
beginning, all symptoms changed into the opposite. 

The Wise Man shuns all incitements to anger; in a 
quarrel he is the better man who withdraws first; 
r, If some one strikes you, step back;"^ 9 * ^ challenge an 
angry man with kindness. There is no "righteous*' 
anger. Even the Wise Man, sinless though he now is, 
once sinned. Therefore let him choose the more human 
way and, without anger, redirect those who have lost 
their path. Undisturbed and unafraid, he does all 
that is becoming to a good man in such a way as to 
do nothing unbecoming to a man. 

But it is when the Wise Man sits on the throne 
of a king or on the tribunal of a magistrate, when to 
him has been entrusted the punishment of offenders, 
that this iron self-control, this serene and passion¬ 
less mind, is most essential. The anger of a private 


(9) Sen. De Ira II, xxxiv, 5. "Does a man get angry? 

Do you on the contrary challenge him with kindness? 
Animosity, if abandoned by one side, forthwith dies; 

it takes two to make a fight. But if anger shall be 
rife on both sides, if the conflict comes, he is the 
better man who first withdraws; the vanquished is the 
one who wins. If some one strikes you, step back." 
"Percussit t@* recede. 11 Surely this is amazing 
advice to receive from a Roman nobleman, from one of 
the masters of the world. 









. 

. 


. 


■ 


' 

, 

* 

. 



. 

: 



. 












(71 


citizen can affect few, that of a king strikes whole 
nations. Anger, then, the judge does not feel* A 
physician of souls, he attempts the cure of natures 
distorted "by vice* As fire is U3ed for the straighten¬ 
ing of twisted wood, so the Wise Judge uses pain of 
body and mind for the correction of men. His treatment 
is the gentlest possible. By words he seeks to amend 
the offender, inflicting punishment only when these 
fail, increasing its severity as the lighter penalties 
are seen to be ineffective. Hot until all attempts 
at reform are clearly useless, not until the evil is 
seen to be incurable, does he pronounce the death 
sentence. Without anger, without hatred, he condemns 
the crime; in a grave and gentle voice he pronounces 
the death penalty and orders the law to be enforced; 
he has made the spirit of the law his own. Throughout 
he has shown mercy, not pity. The Wise Man’s mind must 
be untroubled, superior, fitted for the work of dis¬ 
covering the truth, of weighing justice* Pity would 
blunt and hamper it. Besides, pity involves pardon* 

But it does not become a Y/ise Man to remit a punish¬ 
ment justly bestowed. He has chosen the better way. 
Under Mercy’s guidance he has judged, basing his 






















. 






. 




. 








. 












. 












( 72 . 


decision not on the letter of the law but on the 
spirit of justice. A prisoner so released has not 
deserved harsher treatment; his innocence is 
established, his discharge honourable.^ 10 ^ Whatever 
Pity could justly do, the Wise Man, through Mercy, 
has done. 

But whether public or private, the life of the 
Sage is not solitary. If the choice is left to him, 
he prefers to marry, to take on himself the responsi¬ 
bilities of fatherhood, to have friends, neighbours, 
comrades. For their sake he will even draw back from 
death; H one who thinks neither wife nor friend worth 
the staying a little longer in life, but will die in 
their despite, is a flabby egoist” if he were 

compelled to be solitary he, like Jove, would withdraw 
into himself and be his own company. But he would 
prefer death to such a life. Accordingly he desires 
friends, seeking them not for the sake of profit, but 
for the sake of friendship itself; he wishes some one 
whom he may aid, may comfort, one who will be to him 

(10) The bearing of these remarks on the theory of 

punishment will be shown in Chap. VI. 

(11) Sen. Ep. CIV, 3: delicatus est. 



















. * ■ 






' 




, • 












. . . 

- 









another self; he enters upon friendship as upon a 
glorious adventure; his spell is simple: ”To he 


( 73 . 


loved, love”. Yet some profit comes to him. Self- 
sufficient though he is, the presence of another Wise 
Man benefits him; his friend keeps his virtues active, 
strengthens his confidence, acts as a spur and 
points out opportunities for putting noble ideals into 
practise. Each possesses inward peace, therefore the 
joy of each grows through the sight of the other’s joy. 
Each imparts his discoveries to the other; even the 
Sage is not omniscient in regard to his material life; 
for it he may even need advice. "Moreover, it is in 
harmony with nature’s law to grapple your friends close 
and rejoice in their development as if it were your own.” 
Man is a creature born for fellowship, in whom a 
hatred of solitude, an appetite for society, a taste 
for friendship were planted at birth; friendship is 
strengthened by the observance of that bond which links 
man to man. Because he is a man, the Sage needs 
friends. w Ho one in fact can live the blessed life 
who regards only himself and turns everything to his 
own purposes. You must live for another, if you want 

(12) Sen. Ep. GIX, 15. Seneca adds; ”For if we fail 
in this, then even virtue, whose health depends 
on active feeling, won’t stay with us.” 


(32) 




. 

' 

■ 


. 




















, 

















► 

■ 







( 74 . 


to live for yourself.* 1 

There is no need to go far afield for friends; 

they can he found in a man’s own household, among his 

slaves. Slavery need not capture the whole man; 

though his body is his master’s property, his soul 

may he free. Rank and employment are given by chance; 

a man’s character is his own. Let the Wise Man then 

judge by the latter; let him allow hie slaves to show 

homage, not fear; let him permit them to laugh and 

talk in his presence, treating them as he would wish 

his superiors to treat him; let him, finally, admit 

{ 14 ) 

such as deserve it to his table. 1 He can afford 
to scorn the horror of the macaroni. There is no man 


(13) Sen, Ep. XLVIII, 2 nec potest quisquam beate 
degere, qui ee tanturn intuetur ........ 

(14) A ’’counsel of perfection”. It is not probable 

that Seneca ever dined with his slaves. But con¬ 
trast this attitude with that of Aristotle "no one 
allows a slave any measure of happiness, any more than 
a life of his own”. ( Hicomachean Ethics. X, vi, 8) 

’’Slaves and lower animals are not members of the state, 
because they do not participate in happiness nor in. xt 
purposeful life,” ( Politics, III, IX, 128Ca32)?“ x 'a/view 
which represents a sad deterioration from Xenophon’s 
description of slaves as “fellow-workers". (Xen. 

Memorabilia, II, iii, 3). Contrast Seneca’s teaching 
also with the Christian attitude, of not so long ago, 
when ministers of the church argued that negroes, 
being descendants of Ham, were by divine decree 
condemned to perpetual servitude. 













, 




. 

' 




















» 

. 

. 






















( 75 , 


among them who is free from "bondage to self, from 
slavery to his passions and his lusts; but no humi¬ 
liation is so infamous as voluntary servitude. 

From this servitude the Wise Man has freed him- 
self. He need not pass all his days in tense unyield¬ 
ing resistance to pleasurable ease. It is true that 
the novice must “above all send the pleasures packings 
he must “hold them in special abhorrence'*. J let 
elsewhere a gentler regimen is permitted. That does 
not mean that the Sage may at once plunge headlong into 
a mad whirl of sensual enjoyments. Far from it; he is 
to be the master of his amusements, not they of him. 

For that is all his pleasures are to be: mere amuse¬ 
ments, recreation in its lighter aspect, a necessary 
relaxation from the severe mental toil which, un¬ 
relieved, brings weary dullness in its train. “Socrates 
did not blush to play with little children.”So 
the Sage lessens the tension, and interrupts his tasks, 
setting aside fixed days as holidays, or dividing the 

(15) Sen. Ep. LI, 13. Seneca’s Wise Man is not a logical 
abstraction, but a living type, who has been and 

will be seen, “though perchance not often and after a 
long lapse of years only one" ( Le Const. Sa/bientis. VI1.1) 
This fact helps to explain minor inconsistencies. 

(16) Sen. De Tranq. A nimi , XVII, 4. 




















I 




. 






- 




, 











































, 























. . 


















176 . 


same day into play-time and work-time* His pleasures 
are not intense. On the contrary, they are “calm, 

(17 i 

moderate, almost listless and subdued”, * coming 
unsummoned, received without joy, permitted to mingle 
with life only as jests and games are allowed to 
interrupt serious matters. Still, they are both 
necessary and natural. n The mind must be given re¬ 
laxation; it will arise better and keener after resting. 
As rich fields must not be forced - for their productive¬ 
ness, if they have no rest, will quickly exhaust them - 
so constant labour will break the vigour of the mind, 
but if it is released and relaxed a little while, it 
will recover its powers.Yet even the natural 
pleasure afforded by sport and amusements must be re¬ 
strained; excessive indulgence saps the force and 
energy of the mind; ”for sleep also is necessary for 
refreshment, nevertheless if you prolong it throughout 
the day and night, it will be death” 

Throughout his life the Wise Man acts as if beneath 
the eyes of gods and men. God*a eye, indeed, he can¬ 
not escape; he is a part of Him: M ail the world that 

(17) Sen. Be Vita Beata. XII, 2 


(18; Sen. Be Trane* Animi . XVII, 5 
(19) Sen. Be Tranq* Animi * XVII, 6 












. 




























(77 


contains us is one, and is God: we are his colleagues 
and his members"• Prom God come all noble inspira¬ 
tions, by his aid man rises superior to fortune, in 
each Me dwells, a holy spirit, watcher and guardian. 

In God's nature lies his reason for beneficence; the 
gods neither hurt nor are hurt; highest and loveliest 
of Mature*s works, they inflict no injury. Man has not 
done enough when he has discarded degrading supersti¬ 
tions: he must conceive of God as he ought, as 

"possessing all things, bestowing all things, and 
beneficent to the grateful 1 *. ^ 20 ^ God wants no servants; 
He Himself serves men, ready in all places at their 

call. For His worship rites and sacrifices are un¬ 

necessary. It is sufficient to believe in the gods, to 
present to them the image of their greatness and their 
goodness, to know that to them has been given power 
over the universe, that they are the guardians of the 
human race. **Would you win the gods to your side? Be 
good. He worships them enough who makes them his 
pattern.Yet this does not forbid the Sage to 
offer vows and prayers. Only his prayers are not to be 
requests for those advantages which come only through 

(20) Sen. Ep. XCV, 48 

(21) Sen. Ep. XCV, 50 















































■ 
















. 







• 




. 























(78 


the loss of others, vows which cannot he spoken 
aloud, which must he whispered into some idol’s ear. 

The Wise Man’s prayer can he heard by all; lifting 
clean hands to heaven, he prays for purity of heart, 
for a healthy soul. 

Yet he has much in common with his fellow-men. 
Suppose, for instance, danger threatens: he is per¬ 
mitted to offer his vows to the gods; suppose prodigies 
and omens foretell perils: he may join in expiation 
and sacrifice. Such acts do not conflict with fate; 
they too have been decreed, they too are part of that 
"binding necessity of all events and actions, a 
necessity that no force can break 5 * . n As the water 

of rushing cataracts returns not upon itself nor yet 
lingers, since each succeeding wave drives headlong 
that which went before; so the order of events is 
rolled on by the eternal succession of fate, whose first 
law it is to abide by its decrees. Therefore when 

the soothsayer interprets the omens and bids men offer 
their vows to expiate the wrath of the gods, the 
Stoic too stores in the sacrifice; the peril will be 

(22) Sen. Eat. . Quaes XXXV. 2 

(23) Sen. Eat. Q.uaes t(f'XXXV, 2 








■ 




1 

. 

: 






' 


. 

- 



















(79 . 


averted, - yet the course of fate will. not be altered: 
both offering and aversion have been decreed. And 
fate is God, the ultimate cause, the creator and ruler 
of the universe, who decreed once, who obeys forever, 
a deity changeless, omniscient. "You say that even a 
Wise Man does not change his mind; how much less is 
God a man that he should change? Even the Y/ise Man 
knows what is best under present conditions; to the 
Divine wisdom everything is present. So the Y/ise 

Man, God’s pupil and imitator, his best-beloved, 
renders to him unquestioning and cheerful obedience. 
Could he foresee God’s wishes, he vfould anticipate 
them. As it is, he knows that God has towards him the 
mind of a father, a father who, by hardship and toil, 
moulds his son to His own likeness; whom God loves, He 
disciplines. Since all things come by His decree 
the Y/ise Man endures adversity with joyful heart, bears 
every fate as if it were the fulfilment of his own 
desires God has judged him a worthy instrument, fit 
to show what human nature can endure. He has then no 
cause for complaint. Rather his commander has paid 


(24) Sen. Eat. Quaegt., II, XXXVI, 1 







. - ■ 

' 




































- 






• I, 









(80 


him a compliment. Life is a warfare in which the 
service is hard; the soldier has sworn to endure 
"“burning and bonds and death by the steel”; v J only 
that man is God's peer who, unflinching, endures to 
the end. 

The Sage has ended his warfare; he has attained 
the Vita Beata, the harmonious life gained only in 
one way: "First of all, we must have a sound mind 
and one that is in constant possession of its sanity; 
second, it must be courageous and energetic, and, too, 
capable of the noblest fortitude, ready for every 
emergency, careful of the body and of all that concerns 
it, but without anxiety; lastly, it must be attentive 
to ail the advantages that adorn life, but with over¬ 
much love for none - the user, but not the slave of the 
gifts of Fortune ........... When once we have driven 

away ail that excites or affrights us, there ensues 
unbroken tranquillity and enduring freedom; for when 
pleasures and fears have been banished, then, in place 
of all that is trivial and fragile and harmful just 
because of the evil it works, there comes upon us 
first a boundless joy that is firm and unalterable, 
then peace and harmony of the soul and true greatness 


(25) Sen. Ep. XXXVII, 1 






- 






' 








. 

i 

■ 

. 















■ 


. 





















( 81 . 


coupled with kindliness; for all ferocity is born from 
Yi/eakness. " ^ 

Thus the Wise Man lives until that day when the 

bond between body and soul is dissolved. Then the 

body, that clay tenement in which the spirit dwells 

for a space, meets the fate which Nature has imposed 

upon all matter and is dissolved again into its elementa 

It may be that the soul, too, must meet dissolution. 

Men fear this as they fear the torments of Hell, yet 

the non-existent can know neither pain nor grief. 

( ) 

But if the soul survives' - and it is a spark from 
the Divine - it is to enter where 

"Largior hie campos aether et luirdne vestit 
purpurea, solemque suum, sua sidera norunt." 
Purified from earthly soil and stain, it rises to that 
place whence it descended, where "eternal peace awaits 
it when it has passed from earth 1 s dull motley to the 
vision of all that is pure and bright". Companioned 

(26) Sen. De Yita Beata, III, 3-4. 

(27) "I had a fancy to investigate the immortality of 
the soul - no, on my conscience, I had the will 

to believe, was lending myself a ready convert to the 
views of the gre at optimists with their beautiful half- 
proven p r omises ." fSen. Ep. ClI, 2) 


(28) Sen. Ad. Marciam. XXIV, 5 


















iflp 










■ 














■ 














. 














. 














. 




















( 82 . 


"by the saintly souls of all ages, free and unencumbered, 
it wanders through the boundless spaces of eternity. To 
its gaze lie open the secrets of Mature and of time, 
those of the past and the present and the future, 
until the hour when “stars will clash with stars" and 
flood and fire destroy this earth, the hour when, 
amid the falling universe, the souls of the blest 
likewise go back to those primal elements, out of 
which once more God will create a world. 















i 




■ 



















(83 


Chapter IV 

THE JUST MAH IN GREEK HUMANISM 


In his Nicomachea.n Ethics, Aristotle paints the 
full-length portrait of a good man who is at once a 
contrast and a parallel to Seneca’s hero. Like Seneca’s 
this pattern man believes that in life there exists a 
certain end for the sake of which all a man’s actions 
are performed. This end he calls the Supreme Good 
of Mankind. It must be something proper to its 
possessor and not easily taken from him, a thing 
desired for itself alone, final, perfect and self- 
sufficient, which is able by itself to round out life 
and make it both desirable and complete. Finally, it 
must be within human reach. Such a thing is Happiness 
(euS ) and this, accordingly, he accepts as 
the supreme good. This is not, however, to be confused 
with Pleasure. From a consideration of the function 
of man, he defines Happiness as the soul’s active 
exercise of its faculties, throughout a complete life¬ 
time, in conformity with perfect virtue. In other 
words. Happiness is a form of ’’good life 1 ' or of 
»doing well*’ ( t** S * & o v 7 ~° tt* > * j 


a life of active virtue which is essentially pleasant. 











■ 







' : • . j . - ■ . : . ... *‘••2 .* 

' 




' 

' 
























. .. . . ' , , ■ ' - < 0 ' 














. 


* 














(84 


Virtue, the later Stoic good, he rejects as in¬ 
complete: Happiness, though it involves virtue, yet 
depends not on possessing it but on displaying it. 

To achieve life's supreme good, man must act and act 
rightly, his virtue must be in active exercise: 
n By their fruits ye shall know them.” The trul3^ happy 
and wise man will always act in the noblest manner 
circumstances allow. 

Although this supremely happy man can never be 

(1 ) 

miserable - for that would involve base actions v J - 
yet for perfect happiness he requires a certain amount 
of lasting worldly prosperity. From generosity and 
greatness of soul, he does, indeed, bear severe mis¬ 
fortunes with patience, but if these are prolonged, 
they may lessen and perhaps destroy his happiness. 
Aristotle does not claim for his good man that non¬ 
human impregnability which the Stoics promised; despite 
his stubborn resistance, it is possible for Fortune to 


(1) "True prosperity and adversity do not depend on 

fortune's favours, although . our life does 

require these in addition; but it is the active 
exercise of our faculties in conformity with virtue 
that causes happiness, and the opposite activities its 
opposite Aristotle, Hi comaehean Ethics , I, x, 9 
Hereafter, all references to this work will be given 
in the form, - Aristotle, H.E., I,x,9. 























* ' . 












( 85 . 


overthrow him. If this once happens, he does not 
recover his happiness quickly hut only, if at all, 
after many years spent in winning high distinctions. 

In spite of some uncertainty on the point, it is 
prohahie that Happiness is a prize open to all men 
not morally deformed,if they care to win it at the 
cost of prolonged virtuous effort. Certainly the 
moral virtues(2) are won in this way; these a man does 
not receive at hirth hut acquires hy unremitting 
practice, a discipline continued until the hahit of 
right action in all circumstances has become a settled 
state. He has then developed his natural potentiali¬ 
ties to the point where, with full knowledge of his 
act and of its consequences, he will, for its own sake, 
choose the right course of action. He now becomes a 
good man. 


(2) Aristotle describes human virtue as an excellence of 
the soul. This is divided into two parts - rational 
and irrational - in correspondence with which VicLue 
has two divisions, (1) the Intellectual and (2) the 
Moral virtues. The latter are the ones used in describ¬ 
ing a man’s disposition. In contradistinction to the 
absolute Intellectual virtues, they are considered to be 
a mean between the two extremes of excess and defect. 
Examples of the first group are wisdom ) and 

understanding (a use & i ± )• of the second, liberality 
u/ d tj s ) and temperance 
Aristotle, I, XIII, 5-20) 



















- 

. 
















. 




- 

' 

.. .. • 











( 86 . 


The truly good man, however, is the one who has 

/ 

acquired Greatness of Soul (>/ /*). He is 

the best of men, for greatness of soul brings with it 
greatness in each of the virtues; it is, as it ■were, 
their crown; without them it cannot exist® Con¬ 
sequently, involving as it does moral nobility, it is 
a state difficult to attain, a reward hard to win. 
Calmly aware of his own high worth, the Great-souled 
man concerns himself chiefly with honour and dis¬ 
honour. The latter he despises, knowing that it can 
never rightly attach itself to him. Of the former, 
he accepts with moderate pleasure those great honours 
men of worth proffer, but despises as beneath him the 
trivial ones offered by common people. Towards all 
lesser external goods, he is indifferent, not 
excessively depressed in adversity nor overly elated 
in prosperity. As a matter of fact, though people may 
honour him more highly because of the gifts of fortune, 
these do not constitute a valid title to respects 
that belongs only to the good man, the possessor of 
virtue. 

Since the Great-souled man estimates both himself 
and others at their true worth, he feels a certain 








(87 


( 3 ) 

contempt for men. From this springs his haughty 
attitude towards the great. Towards the middle class, 
however, he bears himself courteously: 11 it is vulgar 
to lord it over humble people; it is like putting 
forth one*s strength against the weak".^^ Ordinary 
objects of ambition do not allure him; he engages 
only in those undertakings that are important and 
distinguished; he holds aloof from assemblies in which 
he cannot be first. Because he wishes to be superior, 
he readily helps others; but he is very reluctant to 
ask aid for himself. If he has received a benefit, 
he returns it with interest, since he desires to 
reverse the roles and to make the original benefactor 
his debtor; he has a good memory for benefits given 
but a bad one for those received. In fact, he finds 
any mention of the latter disagreeable. 

His frankness in speech and action is really 
another aspect of this same contempt for others: he 
cares more for the truth than for public opinion. He 
is never servile; he is little given to admiration; 
he does not bear grudges, preferring to overlook wrongs 


(3) Is this an ancient instance of defence mechanism? 

(4) Aristotle, H.E., IV, iii, 26. 








. 

- 

■ 












. 

. 

* 

. 




. . 









( 


done to him; he neither gives compliments lavishly nor 
cares to receive them. On the other hand, he dislikes 
to hear men belittled. Therefore he avoids gossip, 
indulging in evil speaking only when he deliberately 
intends to offend his enemies. Unavoidable and 
trifling mishaps he ignores. Danger he does not love, 
but for a great cause he will sacrifice even his life. 
His walk is slow, his speech deliberate, as befits 

( 

one “who cares for few things and thinks nothing great”. 

Since he possesses all virtues, he must also be 
temperate in his enjoyment of those bodily pleasures 
man shares with the lower animals, the pleasures of 
touch and of taste. He will likewise be even-tempered, 
becoming angry only with the right people at the 
right time. Above all, he v*ill be just not only in 
that narrow sense which has to do with property rights, 
but also in the ampler meaning which defines justice 
as the good of otherswhich considers it to be by 
itself full and complete virtue as shown in man’s re¬ 
lations to his fellow-men. 

The Great-souled man, then, is rightly judged 
supremely happy, so long as this happiness is measured 


(5) Aristotle, N.E., IV, iii, 34 















. 

. 




. 

* 






. 




. 




' 

■ 




. , 









( 89 . 


by the human scale of bliss. There is a higher life, 
that of Contemplation. This is the life of the gods. 

To it man attains in virtue, not of his humanity, but 
of some divine thing within him.^ This is the 
intellect ( o v&z ) 9 the ruling and best part of man, 
which deals with the highest things that can be known, 
and which is, indeed, most truly man himself. There¬ 
fore Contemplation, being the life of the intellect, 
must be especially man’s own life, the one which is 
proper to his nature and which is best for him. But 
Contemplation is as well the most continuous and the 
most leisured form of activity. Moreover, it is the 
most pleasant, for if Philosophy, which is the pursuit 
of wisdom, contains “pleasures of marvellous purity 
and permanence”,^then Contemplation, being activity 
in accordance with wisdom, must be as much more 
desirable as the enjoyment of knowledge is better than 
its pursuit. Finally, Contemplation is the activity 

(6) In this meeting of the human and the divine there is 
nothing contrary to Greek views. Cf. Pindar, the 

Nemeans, VI, i; "One race there is of men and one of 
gods, but from one mother (earth) draw we both our 
breath........ M 

(7) Aristotle, B.E., X, vii, 3. 









































i 


■ 




. » 




, ' . u 00 

. 




■ 








(90. 

which is most self-sufficient. Other good men, such as 

the Just man, require people towards whom or by whose 

c , / 

aid they may exercise their virtue. The Wise Man (o 
on the contrary, can contemplate by himself. Though 
fellow-students may be an aid, his need of them de¬ 
creases in direct proportion to his increase in wisdom. 

In regard to material goods, the Wise Man, being 
a man, will need the necessaries of life. Once these 
are provided, his paraphernalia will be much less 
extensive- than that required by men whose happiness is 
based on moral virtue. These, in order to perform 
virtuous actions, need a goodly amount of external 
equipment; the Wise Man may find his worldly wealth 
almost a hindrance to contemplation. Yet even the Wise 
Man finds use for riches. Since he is not a recluse but 
a man living in the society of others, he chooses to 
perform the duties of a man, that is, he chooses to 
engage in virtuous activity. Por this he finds wealth 
indispensable. 

But since man is a being ”designed by nature to 
live with others”, ^ the supremely happy man (to/ 

(8) Aristotle, IX, ix, 3s it/kos 6 alrd^-tros 

K *\i fii . The use of the word ttoA iti ko^ 

indicates that to Aristotle a “social being” was a “poli¬ 
tical being” living in a rr c k is . The 7 rok i'tikos 0-5 

was not merely “social” in our sense of the term, but was 
essentially a citizen in a city-state conceived in the 
Greek pattern. 

























■ 

: ■ » ft 


. 


































. 







, 

























■- 






















(91 


in spite of his self-sufficiency, must have friends. To 

deprive him of these is to rob him of a thing essentially 

good and desirable, to leave his happiness in that one 

particular, incomplete. These are friendships based on 

virtue, in which each good man loves the other for what 

he is in himself. Such friendships are of slow growth, 

for they require time and intimacy whereby each may 

show that he is worthy of friendship and of confidence. 

They are rare, because good men are rare; but once 

formed, they endure, for they last as long as the friends 

continue good; n and virtue is a permanent quality**»^ 9 10 ^ 

There are, then, two men, each supremely happy in 

his sphere. Of these two, the one whose life is based 

on moral virtue is happy only in a secondary degree. His 

virtues are purely human. It follows, then, that "the 

life that manifests these virtues, and the happiness that 

( 10 ) 

belongs to it M , must be human too. But the Wise Man, 

who lives that life of contemplation which is most akin 
to the divine activity, who cherishes his intellect, is 
the man most beloved by the gods and therefore is most 
happy. "If then the intellect is something divine in 
comparison with man, so is the life of the intellect 

(9) Aristotle, H.E., VIII, iii, 6 

(10) Aristotle, U.E., X, viii, 3 




















. 

1 











- 




s 

■ 






. 

. 












. 







. . . . , : . ■ 












(92 

divine in comparison with human life, lor ought le 
to obey those who enjoin that a man should have man’s 
thoughts and a mortal the thoughts of mortality, but 
we ought so far as possible to achieve immortality, 
and do all that man may to live in accordance with the 
highest thing in him; for though this be small in 

o 

bulk, in power and value it far surpasses all the rest." 

In a comparison of the Aristotelian and Senecan 

portraits there seems little real difference between 

their paramount ends in life, Seneca preaches a virtue 

which will bring to its wise possessor a joy deep and 

lasting; Aristotle points man to a Happiness which is 

impossible without virtue and Indeed consists essentially 

( 12 } 

of virtue in action; Seneca says "Virtue” ; 

Aristotle, "Active Virtue"; both promise joy, but 
Seneca as a result, Aristotle as the end. As to the 
greater vulnerability of the Aristotelian figure, that is 
after all, more in accordance with life as men see it; 

(11) Aristotle, JT.E. , X, vii, 8. Cf. Pindar, the 
Isthmians, IV, 12, Her® Aristotle is quoting from 

a poet who might be called a standard orthodox theologian 

(12) Seneca’s "virtue" is, however, essentially active. 
See Ep. XGIV, 45; In duas partes virtue dividitur, 

in contemplationem veri et actionem........ ergo si recta 

actio virtuti necessaria es¥ ........ 





































- 

■ 


. 
















































( 93 . 


Aristotle depicts a man standing on a human level; 
Seneca’s ideal is superhuman, passionless, serene, 
dangerously close to insensibility, almost a "magnified, 
non-natural man”. Had Stilbon^ 13 ^ not been a father, 
his ansier would compel universal admiration; hut he 
claimed freedom from loss while his daughters were at 
the mercy of a victorious soldiery. Such cold-blooded 
indifference repels. It is well that Seneca’s natural 
kindness of disposition comes to the rescue with an 

( 14 ) 

insistence on the rights of the legitimate emotions. 

More in the Stoic favour is the difference in 
their respective attitudes towards benefits. Both 
agree that beneficence belongs to moral nobility, but 
Aristotle has his Great-souled man give in order to be 
superior, receive reluctantly in order not to be in¬ 
ferior, remember with pain, and return the benefit with 


(13) Sen. Ep. IX, 18, 19 "Stilbon’s native city was 
taken; he lost his children, he lost his wife; 

from the general holocaust he emerged alone and yet 
serene of spirit. Asked by Demetrius, surname! the 
Stormer, whether he had lost anything, he replied? 1 I 

have all my treasures with me’.. Self is the bound 

he traces about his happiness." 

(14) See Ep. CIV, 3-4. "Concessions must, in fact, be 
made to the legitimate emotions........ A splendid 

spirit will draw back from death for another’s sake,.,... 
But I count it also the extreme of human sympathy to set 
a stricter watch on your old age, whose chief advantage 
lies in lessened concern for its own safety and a more 
adventurous us© of life, if you learn that this is the 
Joy, the help, and the prayer of some one you love.” 



















. 

. 

















' 






■ 




- 




: 

" 







, 













( 94 . 


interest only because by so doing be places the other 
in bis debt. Seneca, on the other band, considers 
an increased return simply merely a due mark of 
gratitude; bis Sage remembers past benefits with, glad¬ 
ness, realizes that often generosity in giving is a 
mark of greatness of fortune rather than of greatness 
of mind, and that frequently the beneficiary has the 

more difficult role; accordingly, he gives M as a man 

(15) 

to his fellow-man out of the common store”. Here 

the Stoic is the more attractive, but, perhaps, it is 
to be feared that Aristotle*s is the truer picture of 
the usual motives behind charity and an open hand. 
Insistence on noble ideals in all benefactors might 
lead to hypocrisy, if the standard is too high, more 
than Tristram might have reason to complain: 

". ....... . Lied, say ye? Hay, but learnt 

The vow that binds too strictly snaps itself - 

. ... ay, being snapt - 

We run more counter to the soul thereof 

Than had we never sworn . ...... n 

Perhaps the most striking difference lies in the change 
of temperature felt in passing from one to the other. 


(15) Sen., De Clem. IX . vi, 2 











. 

' 






. 




■ , , . * 


- . * .. 




. 














( 95 . 


Aristotle, the Greek, describes as his ideal a man 
whose highest activity is contemplation, who is a Wise 
Man and a philosopher, needing for this contemplative 
life only a modicum of worldly goods, but requiring 
much more in his social life as a human being. He 
shapes a man possessing a man’s natural emotions, en¬ 
joying, though temperately, a man’s natural pleasures, 
desirous of friends, a man who finds life a 
pleasant and desirable thing in itself, who, moreover, 
needs a long lifetime if he is to know true happiness. 

In any case, though he may offer his life freely for 
friend or country, he has no intention of cutting it 
short by suicide. As for an afterlife, it is not even 
mentioned. And the whole subject is discussed in the 
most matter-of-fact, unemotional manner possible. 

Then Seneca, the Roman, whose nation prided itself 
on "gravitas constantiaque 11 , betrays a fervor almost 
religious in describing the man who after a long 
struggle has reached a state of perfect bliss, who has 
crushed the passions, controlled the emotions, triumphed 
over pain, learned to offer up freely and cheerfully 
any possessions, animate or inanimate, which Fortune 
can claim and to feel that their removal is no loss, 
that all his true goods are still his. But, since this 


















' 







■ 


■ 














, 

man, like Aristotle, recognizes the bond linking the 
individual members of the human race to each other, 
he also chooses to live a normal life and to enter 
into normal human relationships. If possible, he 
serves his state. Though he feels the philosopher’s 
life, which is the life of meditation and of study, 
to be the highest, he alternates philosophical leisure 
with pragmatic activity. Since he is a man, not a 
logical abstraction, his character and actions show 
certain inconsistencies; for instance, he seems to 
love his family and friends and is not untouched by 
their death; even Cato of Utica is once blamed for 
the failure in discretion shown when he thrust him¬ 
self into the struggle between Caesar and Pompey. 

This Wise Man refuses to admit that fortune’s gifts 
can add to his happiness or subtract from it; they 
can merely be useful. So far is he from finding 
life pleasant in itself that he considers it a ?^ar- 
fare from which Reason may bid him withdraw. Yet in 
this warfare his sufferings are never fortuitous: 

Cod, who regards all good men as a father does his 
sons, orders all things. On God this Wise Man models 
himself, until he becomes God’s peer in all save 




























, 

' 


. ... .. . . 




. t ; '. 















■ 
















. 


























. 











( 97 . 


his mortality. Finally, after death, he may expect 

either a painless extinction or - and here Seneca 

turns poet - a marvellously pleasant life until the 

(16) 

far-distant end of the world. 


(16) This last phrase will remind us that even the 

Stoic immortality has its limitations. It does 
not extend to all eternity; it is conditioned by the 
return of the Great Year of the Universe. 











(98 


Chapter V 
SEKECA, THE MAN 
Ideal and Actual in Conflict 

As a professed Stoic, and as, moreover, the fore¬ 
most philosopher of his day, Seneca -was doubly bound 
to show no glaring discrepancy between his life and 
his ideals. It would be unjust to require perfect 
accords he had admitted that the Sage appeared only 
at long intervals and perhaps but once in an age and 
had, besides, denied his right to that title. In its 
stead he claimed to be merely an aspirant to wisdom, 
content if daily he lessened the symptoms of moral 
"gout"♦ On the other hand, the attack upon him was 
exceedingly vicious, an open charge of gross in¬ 
compatibility between conduct and philosophy. It is 
necessary to make some attempt to estimate the justi¬ 
fication for this, to decide whether Seneca, H who was 
superior in wisdom to all the Romans of his day", ^ 1 ^ 
is to be declared innocent, or guilty in whole or in 
part, or whether after this lapse of time on the evi- 

(1) Dio Cassius, LIX, xix, 7s "Lucius Annaeus Seneca, 
who was superior in wisdom to all the Romans of 
his day and to many others as well." 













. 




* 



















. 






. 













. 






















( 99 . 


dence now available, no final verdict can be given, 
whether the charge must be decreed "not proven*' , and 
the accused, though uncondemned, left under the impu¬ 
tation of guilt. 

Against this man who proclaimed his allegiance 
to the ideal of the pure and fearless Sage, his enemies 
brought the accusation that by most suspicious means 
he had acquired enormous wealth, which he expended on 
luxury and in licentious living; that his avarice had 
helped to cause a rebellion in Britain; that his 
relations with young men were scandalous; that during 
his well-deserved exile for adultery with the princess 
Julia, he had basely flattered the royal family and 
their powerful freedmen; that untaught by past punish¬ 
ment he had been the lover of the empress Agrippina; 
that he had acquiesced in the murder of Britannicus; 
that he had connived at the dissolute and disgraceful 
pleasures of Hero; that, finally, even if his share in 
planning Agrippina’s murder might be doubted, he had 
certainly lent his talents and his name to a futile 
attempt to shield the matricide by a false tale of the 
mother’s suicide following disco very of her plot to 
assassinate her son. 

The charge of misconduct with Agrippina is found 









( 


only in the history of Dio Cassius, in that part now 
lost, of which the contents are known through the 
epitome made by Xiphilinus, a Greek monk of the 11th 
century. It is impossible to tell whether Dio stated 
the charge as a known fact or whether the monk, 
through malice or ignorance, wrote as a fact that 
which Dio had related as gossip. The change, along 
with the blanket accusation, - without corroborative 
details - of being a rake and debauchee, sounds 
suspiciously like the outburst of the venal delator 
Suiilius. As Ramsay points out,^ 2 ^ such charges were 
part of the stock-in-trade of a Roman prosecutor; 
they were certain to be added to any accusation. In 
view, then, of the lack of substantiation, they can 
safely be dismissed as the malicious creations of an 
envious court. 

The charge of adultery with Julia is somewhat 
more serious. Seneca was certainly tried, convicted 
and banished on that indictment. Moreover, there is 
no certain reference to it in his own writings and 
that silence is disturbing. But a condemnation by a 
servile Senate, at the instance of Messalina, whose 

( 2) Ramsay, Trans, of Tac. Ann. Vol. II, pp. 160-1, 
Hote 4. 

















. - 









, : ' . . • ■ - O . . 




. 

. 




. 




' . 











. 








* 






( 101 . 


own amours were the talk of Home, and who just then was 
under the necessity of finding some guilty partner for 
Julia, the young princess she hated and feared, cannot 
he taken as proof of guilt. Except for his personal 
enemies, public opinion seems to have held him innocent. 
Tacitus, too, who obviously enjoyed reporting Suillius' 
attack, speaks of “the wrong (iniuria) inflicted on 
him” while Dio, who in the epitome relates the 
misconduct as a fact, in an earlier book preserved 
intact, reports a ‘’trumped up” charge,In all 
probability, Seneca suffered eight years of undeserved 
exile. 

The associated charge, flattery of Claudius and 
his household, undoubtedly referred to the “Consolatio 
ad Polybium". This lengthy essay, written by Seneca 
during his exile, ostensibly to comfort the freedman 
Polybius for his brother’s death, in reality to secure 
Seneca’s own recall, contains gross praise of princeps 


(3) Tac. Ann. XII, viii, 3. “Seneca ..... infensus 
Claudio dolore iniuriae credebatur. 

(4) Dio Cassius LXI, x, 1. ”It had not been enough for 

him, it seems, to commit adultery with Julia,. 

but he must establish improper relations with Agrippina. 1 ' 

In LX,viii,5, Dio records: "Accordingly, she (i.e,,Mes- 
salina) secured her (Julia’s) banishment by trumping up 
(-rrafcia ks u d <r a <r * ) various charges against her, in¬ 

cluding that of adultery (for which Annaeus Seneca was 
also exiled), and not long afterward even compassed her 
death*” 

II 
























. • ‘ r life 


■ ■ 

■ 






- 












. •; ,: : , ... : 

. . , . ■ ■ 




, . re x 

i 

: . . . . 












( 102 . 


and servant. It represents a humiliating surrender, a 
self-abasement of which, later, Seneca must have been 
bitterly ashamed. Excuses may be sought in 
sophistries or in the disheartening effect of indefinite 
exile combined with the example set by an almost 
universal servility, but the sting remains. When Seneca 
wrote that essay, Fortune conquered the Stoic. There 
is only one palliative i no second attempt is known. 

He humbled himself once, failed, and thenceforth endured 
in silence. 


(5) Dio Cassiu3 (LXI,x,2) records that out of shame he 
afterwards suppressed this book, which is identified 
as the “Ad Polyfrium" . It may be so. At least only the 
major portion has reached us; the beginning is missing. 
Though Dio claims he "constantly” fawned upon Messalina 
and the freedmen, he mentions no other instance. Another 
book has, however, brought down upon Seneca 1 s head the 
censure of the critics. This is the A-pocolocvntosis. a 
satire on Claudius written after that 8mperor f s death and 
deification. "Que notre delicatesse soit choquee du 
procede de Seneque, c’est trop stir: il est peu honorable 
da railler un cadavre; tout faisait, selon nos idees, un 
devoir a l'eerivain de refrener sa verve. ^Mais avons-nous 
le droit de juger d’apres les rbgles du gout et de la 
politesse modernes un Remain du l sr siecle? Qui ne sait 
quelle place les moeurs romaines faisaient k la licence et 
a la satire jusque dans les ceremonies les plus graves?.... 
%u’on se rappelle les plaisanteries du mime Favor, charge, 
selon l 1 usage, aux funerallies de Vespasian de contre¬ 
fair e I’empereur defunt, et l*on avouera que le tact romain, 
moins susceptible qua le nh tre, n’etait nullement offense 
par la facetie de Seneque." (Waltz, Vie de Sen e que, 

Livre II, Chap. V, p. 197). Ho Roman took seriously the 
deification of Claudius, while on the day of his burial, 
when Hero pronounced the customary eulogy, the crowd 
listened in silence until the young prince spoke of the 
dead man’s wisdom and foresight; then a general laugh 
broke out. (See Tac. Arm. XIII, iii, 1-2). 



















. 

- 

. 

' 

. 

' 

, 


. 

. 

■ - 

•: 

. 

. , . 

i 







(103 * 

Seneca’s great wealth was criticized on the ground 
that no Stoic should be rich, but still more on the 
ground that it had been wrongfully acquired. “What 
sort of learning was it, what school of philosophy, that 
had taught Seneca how to amass a sum of three hundred 

(6) 

million sesterces during four years of imperial favour? 

In Rome he lured the childless and their inheritances 

into his toils: his exorbitant usuries were draining 

(?) 

Italy and the provinces.” later came the accusation 
that he had been partly responsible for the great revolt 
in Britain (A.D.61): he had forced, they said, a huge 
loan upon the people, then suddenly had called it in, and 
had used severe methods in collection. He had, too, 
battened upon Hero’s favour; he had accepted rich gifts 
YJhen he ought to have refused them; almost certainly he 
had received estates after the murder of Britannicus. 

As has been seen, Seneca defended the Sage’s right 

. ; 

to riches honourably acquired and wisely used. There 

was, then, no clash between his ideals and the actual 

(6) Assuming the intrinsic value of the sesterce to be 5£, 
and making allowance for the difference in the 

purchasing value of money as between the modern and the 
ancient world in the ratio of 10:1, we my treat this as 
the equivalent in modern terms of $150,000,000.00. This 
is a respectable sum, even in our modern days of high 
finance. 

(7) Tac. Ann. XIII, xlii, 6-7 









' i 1 

. 

... 

. 

. 

- 


- 


' 

. 

. . 








( 104 . 


possession of wealth. In its use he practised the 

( 8 ) 

beneficence he preached; his generosity was proverbial. 

For this wealth an ample base had been provided by his 
father. Probably he did receive many legacies; he had 
the gift of making friends and these would naturally 
remember him in their wills. Many, too, who were not 
friends but who saw in him a person to be courted, would 
follow the custom of the day and name him as heir or 
joint-heir. In all this there was nothing inevitably 
sinister. The charge of usury may possibly be true. 
Seneca’s property and interests were widely scattered. 
Roman capitalists had a most unsavory reputation for 
their heartless exploitation of the provincials; Seneca 
probably shared his brother Mela’s business ability; 
interest rates were high; most of the transactions, if 
not all, would be handled by agents, thereby keeping 
Seneca himself from personal contact with the people 
involved; modern ‘’big business" can show many examples 
of men personally kind and sympathetic who, under such 
circumstances, show themselves curiously hard. There 
is, too, that tale of Seneca’s loan to the British, a 

(8) Cf. Juvenal, Sat. V, 11. 108-110. 

Bemo petit, modicis quae mittebantur amicis 
a Seneca, quae Piso bonus, quae Cotta solebat 
largiri; . . 




























. 

. 

. 


■ 

. 


. 


. : 

. 








» -* • • ♦ "r • 










( 105 . 


tale so definite that it can hardly he without some 
basis in fact. It is told, though, only by Dio Cassius. 
If the charge be true, it is strange that Tacitus, 
with several pages devoted to the British uprising, 
does not mention it. Possibly some rumour he judged 
not worth repeating grew into a legend by Dio’s time. 

Had a guilty conscience in this matter troubled Seneca, 
he could hardly have written so vigorous a justification 
as his ’’Vita Beata”, that pagan "Apologia pro Vita Sua” . 
Without doubt he was defending himself when he wrote: 
tt The philosopher shall own ample wealth, but it will 
have been wrested from no man, nor will it be stained 
with another’s blood - wealth acquired without harm to 

any man, without base dealing.; it will make no 

(9 ) 

man groan except the spiteful." Had Seneca written 
this and at the same time shown himself a Shylock in his 
business relations, he would have delivered himself, 
bound, into his enemies’ hands; he must have been over¬ 
whelmed by ridicule. But Seneca was much too wise in 
his generation for any such folly. It is, therefore, 
reasonably safe to assume that no flagrant discrepancy 
between theory and practice existed. The charge cannot 

(9) Sen., De Vita Beata, XXIII, 1. 
















. 















. 









































. 










( 106 . 


be entirely dismissed; it is, however, not proven. 

In an age when poverty-stricken Senators felt no 
shame in accepting from the Princeps the income necessary 
to support their rank, Seneca could have refused 
Hero's gifts only at the cost of mortally offending 
that young tyrant. Besides, though unofficial Prime 
Minister, his position carried with it no fixed salary; 
in one respect, these gifts took its place. Had they 
been smaller, had the circumstances under which they 
were given been different, probably few complaints 
would have been heard. The majority were inspired by 
envy; they wanted what Seneca had. A few win modern 
sympathy: it was not becoming to a Stoic to accej^t 

gifts after Britannicus had died at table from poison 
administered by Hero's orders. 

A much graver accusation of moral weakness is 
brought against Seneca by those who accuse him of con¬ 
niving at Hero's crimes, of making himself, as it were, 
an accessory after the fact. This he did, they claim, 
by writing for Hero the false messages which went to 
the Senate after the murders of Britannicus and of 

(10) Por a vigorous and convincing defence of Seneca, 
together with a verdict of "not guilty" on this 
point, see "The Professor's Deadly Vengeance" , by Prof. 

W. H. Alexander, University of Toronto Quarterly, 

Jan. 1955, pp. 239-258. 






. 















. 






. 






. 




. 


- 


. 




. ; ’ •„ -1, _ . ... ■ I ' i; : 

. 


. 


. 














1107 . 


Agrippina. Tine first death Seneca probably approved. 

As a statesman, he could hardly do otherwise* Agrip¬ 
pina, in a fine frenzy, had called the unfortunate son 
of Claudius the rightful heir, had stigmatized Hero as 
an "adopted interloper", and finally had threatened 
to carry off her step-son to the legions and appeal to 
arias. Coming from another woman, such a threat might 
have been disregarded; coming from Agrippina, it was 
serious. She was not only capable of attempting to 
carry it out, but as daughter of Germanieus, her 
popularity might make it successful* If civil war was 
to be avoided and its threat removed from the future, 
Brit&nnieus must die. Undoubtedly Seneca felt as did 

( 11 ) 

most mens "There could be no partners in an Empire." 

But if he considered the assassination necessary for 
the public peace, he would not have been troubled in 

conscience by writing a misleading report to the Senate, 

( 12 ) 

on the details of his death. 

(11) Tac. Ann. XIII. xvii, 2. 

(12) In regard to Agrippina’s threats, Ramsay ( Trans, of 
Tac. Ann. , Vol. II, p. 130, note 4) says: "What¬ 
ever may be thought of Hero’s act of matricide, it must 
be acknowledged that politically Agrippina had placed 
both Britannicus and herself beyond the reach of pardon. 
She, in fact, staked her motherhood on the one side 
against undisguised treason upon the other." Of this 
murder ( Trans, of Tac, Ann. , Yol. II, p. 134, note 1) 

he writes: "According to the narrative of Tac. the 















- 


' 






. 








. 


. 


. 




- 




.. .. :■ . ' 




■ 








1 






























\ JLUO. 


The death of Agrippina was a very different matter. 
Four years had elapsed, a time during which the Empress 
apparently had learned discretion. Meanwhile Kero, having 
become infatuated with Foppaea, wished to divorce his 


(12} Continued. 

resolution to make away with Britannicus seems to have 
been immediately brought about by the aggressive attitude 

of Agrippina,.. in a paroxysm of rage Agrippina 

turned upon her son with a torrent of reproaches, 
acknowledged the murder of Claudius, and openly threatened 
to summon the legions round the standard of the rightful 
heir. Such a threat was too dangerous to be ignored; 
and Agrippina must bear the blame of having been the 
immediate cause of the death of the luckless prince...... 

That Seneca approved of the deed, that he even advised 
it, as a matter of political necessity, is highly 
probable; that he could have entertained no horror of it 
is certain, for in his treatise »De dementia”, published 
only ten months afterwards, he lauds Hero to the skies as 
a very paragon of clemency: his clemency is far greater 
than that of Augustus, being ’unstained with one drop 
of blood’.” This is probably a reference to Be Clem. , I, 
xi, 2s "True mercy, Caesar, is this which you display, 
which arises from no regret for violence, that bears 
no stain and never shed a compatriot’s blood.(civilem 
sanguinem). See also Be Clem. I,xi,3 and I,i,5. 

In the following sketch of Agrippina’s death, 1 have 
tried to use outlines on which all three ancient 
historians agree. Of these three - Tacitus, Suetonius, 

Bio Cassius - the first (born, as scholars commonly agree, 
in 54 or 55 A.B.) is our most reliable and impartial 
source of information. Accordingly, on disputed points, 

I have chosen to follow 1 his narrative. Even with 
Tacitus, however, it is perhaps well to remember that 
he wrote in a regime hostile to the early Caesars, in 
which the flattery most acceptable to the reigning house 
was a blackening of all things and persons Heronian. 

For Agrippina’s threats, see Tac. Ann. , XIII, xiv, 


3-6. 













. , 

. . '3 rtc 



















. 
















. • ' . - . . : 










. 




- 

- 

■ ... - : . . •. ' . 

. . 

' 








(109 


wife and marry his mistress. To this desire Agrippina 
was unalterably opposed. Thereupon Poppa.ea urged Hero 
to the murder of his mother. This was difficult: an 
open attempt was impossible; one by poison would be 
frustrated through the devotion of her servants. At 
length a ship, so constructed that part of it would 
collapse when out at sea, was built and placed under 
the command of Anicetus, the commander of the fleet at 
Misenum and a bitter enemy of Agrippina. Hero next went 
to Baiae for the Quinquatria (Festival of MinervaJ. 

Here, by a pretence of renewed love, he persuaded his 
mother to come, greeted her affectionately on her 
arrival, and invited her to a dinner at his villa. For 
the return trip to her own house she embarked, with two 
friends, on the prepared ship. Her friends perished; 
but the failure of the mechanism and the confusion of 
the sailors allowed Agrippina, who was a powerful 
swimmer, to escape. When she reached her villa she sent 
a©r freedman, Agerinus, to tell Hero that she had 
escaped from a serious accident". Hero, meanwhile, 
terrified by a report of failure, summoned Burma and 
Seneca, laid the situation before them, and asked help. 
?or a long time they kept silence. Then Seneca looked 



























. 


■ 

. 

: 












( 110 . 


at Burrus and asked, “Should the soldiers be ordered 

to kill her?" Burrus* replj' was in the negative: the 

Praetorians would refuse to harm Germanicus* daughter; 

(1 o J 

"let Anicetus carry through what he had promised". 

At once Anicetus asked leave to complete the crime; 
Agerinus, just then announced, was imprisoned on a 
false charge of the attempted assassination of Hero, - 
and the sailors set out for Agrippina’s villa. Entering 
it, they found and stabbed her. That night Hero passed 
in terror, but on the following day, at Burrus’ in¬ 
stigation , the officers congratulated him on his escape 
from, his mother’s plot. At the same time the towns of 
Campania offered sacrifices of joy and of gratitude. 
Hero, driven by a guilty conscience, moved to Heapolis, 
whence he sent a message to the Senate. In this he 
informed them that an armed assassin, one Agerinus, his 
mother’s freedman, had been captured in his villa, 
and that Agrippina, self-convicted, had committed 
suicide. Many old charges were added; Agrippina’s death 
was styled a public blessing; even the details of the 
shipwreck were published as further evidence of the 
gods* care for the young prince. For this speech the 

(13) Tac. Arm, XIV, vii, 4-5, For Agrippina’s message 
see Tac, Ann. , XIV, vi, 1, 




































' 






. 

. 













. 























( 111 . 


public condemned Seneca. Nevertheless the Senate 
showed eager servility in proposing thanksgivings; only 
Thrasea, the outspoken Stoic, had the courage to 
withdraw. When, later, Nero re-entered the city, all 
Rome, en fete, poured forth to welcome him. 

Certain parts of this story are troublesome; they 
refuse to dovetail smoothly. Nor instance, there is 
Agrippina’s scanty attendance - only two persons - 
on board the fatal ship; the Roman aristocracy travelled 
with a numerous retinue; Agrippina had already been 
warned of the plot and had been sufficiently impressed 
to ride to the dinner in a litter; in spite of Nero’s 
caresses and attentions during the meal and at parting, 
it seems scarcely credible that the suspicions of a 
woman well versed in crime and intrigue could be so 
thoroughly lulled that they were not reawakened by the 
removal of her attendants, coupled with embarkation on 
a boat commanded by her old enemy Anicetus.Then 
there is the dramatic night scene (of which Dio knows 
nothing) when Burrus and Seneca are summoned. Only the 
four men were present; none of them would be likely to 

(14) See Hochart. Etudes sur la Vie de Senbq ue. Etude II, 
Chap. III. This chapter is a sceptical discussion 
of Agrippina’s night voyage and shipwreck. 








' 

.. ■ .-■■■ ■•=. ■ f 

■ 













(112 


tell what passed at that interview; credence would be 
much easier if Tacitus wrote less vividly but named his 
informants more frequently. If he did so, his picture 
would be less suggestive of a powerful imagination 
telling what ought to have happened, but would carry 
more conviction. 

Finally, Seneca’s message in Hero’s name is in¬ 
credible. As Tacitus reports it, no one could fail to 
see its falsity. But that letter was meant to win 
belief; Hero was worried about the public reaction; 
Seneca, who was at least intelligent, would not insult 
the understanding of Senate and people by a contradictory 
message; his dispatch would be a coherent whole, it 
must also harmonize with the Prineeps > behaviour. How 
at that time Hero, whose official announcement claimed 
he had barely escaped assassination at his mother’s 
orders, was in public portraying the rble of a dutiful 
son overwhelmed with grief. With this role, the one 
extant sentence of the speech agrees % ’’Salvum me esse 
adhuc nec credo, nec gaudeo. 0 ^^ There is, however, a 
discrepancy between this line and rble, and the reported 
List of Agrippina’s crimes. Perhaps there is some truth 


(15) Quintilian, Institutio Pratoria. VIII, v, 18. 










' 

. 

' 










T 












■ 




■ 

. 


. 







. 






. 

■ 






' 

















(113 


in tlie suggestion that this attack in reality came, not 

from Seneca’s speech, hut from the Senate’s own dehate 

( 16 ) 

on the unfortunate affair. Into such a niche it 

would fit very admirably. The idea that the official 

account cannot have been transparently false grows 

stronger on reading a fragment of a letter to Eero 

from Gaul. This is one of the official messages of 

condolence: H Rogant te, Caesar, GalXiae tuae^ut feli- 

(17) 

citatem tuam fortiter feras.” It is, of course, open 

to a charge of flatter^ proffered in spite of un¬ 
belief, But at such- a distance, omission of the servile 
act was less dangerous; quiet acquiescence would 
suffice. Probably the Gauls believed Seneca’s dispatch. 

But his success in deceiving the public does not 
lessen Seneca’s responsibility. If, indeed, the mid¬ 
night summons represents a flight of the imagination and 
he knew nothing of the crime until all was over, he 
might plead the uselessness of all protest so far as 
Agrippina herself was concerned, as well as the disorder 
that would ensue were he to quit his post, proclaim 

(16) See Hochart, ’ ’Vie de Senbaue”. Etude II, Ch. IV. 
This chapter is a vigorous attempt to demonstrate 

Seneca’s innocence by proving the correctness of the 
official statement. 

(17) Quint. Inst. Or. VIII, v, 15. 













■ 




‘ O' ' 

' 

* 

■ 

, 










. 


. 














. 














: 








( 114 . 


the truth, and brand the head of the state a matricide. 

If, on the contrary, the minister did consent to the 

completion of the crime, he must be included in the 

list of murderers. Possibly Tacitus^ 18 ^ was right 

in suggesting that Seneca and Burrus felt hero 1 s safety 

depended on Agrippina's death. They had knov/n her and 

her actions in the past; they had reason to fear the 

vengeance she now might seek; they did not realize that 

she had finally admitted defeat, that the message brought 

by her freedman meant forgiveness and future peace; 

even had they known, perhaps they might not have trusted 

her. But there is no suggestion that they felt personal 
( 191 

fears Tacitus' ' depicts Hero half-dead with terror? 

seeking some means whereby to save himself; it is not so 
with his two counsellors. Their fears would seem to 
have been for their prince and, in him, for the goodly 
structure of ordered government which they had built. 

To save the situation they sacrificed their principles 
and followed expediency. "De ce jour pourtant ils furent 
perdus. Jusqu 1 alors I'univers avait eu foi en euxs 

(18) Tac. Ann . XIY, vii, 3; "Possibly they thought it 
had come to this that his (Hero's) life depended up¬ 
on his being beforehand with Agrippina." 

(19) Tac, Ann. XIV, vii, 2s "Half-dead with terror, 
he kept repeating.,..,,,." 

















■ 


. 










' 








. 







, 
















( 115 . 


ils personnifiaent aux yeux de tous la justice, le 
devoir, la vertu; ils sexnblaient £tre la conscience du 
prince, Ce fut finis ils apparurent comme capables de 
toutes les faiblesses, on cessa de les venerer comme 
les bon genies de l f Empire, on osa critiquer leurs 
actes, Heron, aussi fier que surpris de les avoir fait 
capitalsr, n*eut plus pour eux les memes egards. Au 
lieu de leur obeir, desonnais il se servit d*eux; au lieu 

de les eraindre, il les dupa. Leur puissance declina 

\ ( 2Q) 

peu a peu ............. y 

But, before this happier period is left, some con¬ 
sideration of their constructive work is due to Seneca 
and Burrus; it is but fair to point out the achievements 
as well as the defects of their administration. During 
the five years from 54 to 59 A.D., the two friends, 
soldier and philosopher, had worked in unison. Hero 
they kept in the forefront; to him ail public acclama¬ 
tions were addressed; in his name all acts and reforms 
sere carried out. Themselves they kept in the back¬ 
ground, out of sight behind the curtain, whence un¬ 
officially they conducted the affairs of the State, 

They signalized their rise to power by checking the 


(20) Waltz: La Vie de Se neque^ Livre IV, Chap. II, p.371 














.. 


















. 


. 










. 

, . 

- 








. 


















( 116 . 


series of deaths Agrippina had inaugurated; then, 
steadily, they wrested from her the power she had 
acquired during the reign of Claudius. In Eero’s first 
speech to the Senate, Seneca sketched the policy 
actually followed during his regime; in it he promised 
open courts, control of the army, an incorruptible 
royal household, and the preservation of the Senate’s 
ancient privileges. In short, Rome was to expect a 
second Augustus. 

The Senate had not long enjoyed its newly recovered 
freedom of action and sense of responsibility when the 
Parthian storm-cloud rose in the East. Rome was 
terrified. But the prompt and vigorous measures taken 
by Burrus and Seneca showed the quality of Eero’s 
counsellors and guides. The ablest general Rome 
possessed, kept in idleness by Claudius, was put in 
command of the war zone. The result was an honourable 
triumph for Rome, the formal submission of the Parthian 
king to his Roman suzerain, and such rejoicing as that 
generation had not seen. 

Since the treasury was in a chaotic condition, 
Seneca and Burrus replaced the junior magistrates then 
in charge by older men with more experience of affairs. 
In provincial matters they busied themselves with 










■ 

. 















. - . 

, 

. 











( 117 . 


securing the appointment of able and upright governors, 
with protection of the provincials from Roman extortion, 
and with emphasizing the still novel doctrine that the 
Queen City had certain duties towards her subjects as 
well as the subjects towards her. Twenty years after 
Fero’s death, thousands of Parthians and provincials 
were to arise in support of an imposter calling himself 
by that prince’s name. 

During these five years there grew in Roma and Italy 
a feeling of security and confidence long unknown. The 
tt Quinquennium Feronis” well deserved the favourable 
judgment of the Emperor Trajan; it was the fairest 

( 21 ) 

period of the Empire. Rome owed that breathing space 
to Seneca and Burras. They had, indeed, some reason 
to feel that if they deserted their post, the state must 
suffer. 


(21) Cf. favourable judgment of St. Paul in his Epistle 
to the Homans, XIII, 3-6, ’’For rulers are not a 
terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then 
not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and 
thou shalt have praise of the same: 

"For he is the minister of God to thee for good. 

But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he 
beareth not the sword in vain: for he is the minister of 
God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that death evil. 

’’Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for 
wrath, but also for conscience’ sake, 

’’For for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they 
are God’s ministers, attending continually upon this 
very thing.” 









■ 


















' 

























■ 








(118 


In the subsequent period their critics discovered 
another flaw, very serious to the Romans, less so, 
perhaps, to moderns: they did not absent themselves 
from Hero’s display of his prowess as charioteer and 
as singer. Dio,^*^ indeed, declares they underwent 
the humiliation of acting as prompters and cheer¬ 
leaders; Tacitus is content to describe Burrus as 
present, »distressed, but yet applauding”.^ 3 ) Only 
Thrasea absented himself, a grave offence in Hero’s 
eyes. It was not a fit environment for a philosopher. 
Evidently Seneca thought so; his enemies accused him 
to Hero of opposition to the latter's pastimes; ”He 
openly condemned the prince’s favourite recreations, 

depreciating his dexterity as a charioteer, and de- 

(24) 

riding his performances when he sang.” Despite 

Dio’s tale, it would appear that Seneca was not notice¬ 
ably servile in this matter. 

Perhaps Hero found the philosopher less yielding 
than his critics aver. At least, when the end came, 
he felt himself able to remind the prince that the 
latter had "more often found him too free than too 

(22) Dio Cassius, LXI, xx, 3 

(23) Tac. Ann., XIY, xv, 7 

(24) Tac. Ann. , XIV, lii, 4 










( 119 . 


servile in his utterances' 1 .^ 5 ^ His interference and 
shrewd reminder during an attack of superstitious panic 
saved many lives;when Hero's pillage of the temples 
began, he sought permission to withdraw; when Thrasea 
had received an affront which was "an augury of impending- 
death" , Seneca dared offer sarcastic congratulations to 


(25) Tac. Ann .. XV, Ixi, 3. In regard to this claim of 
Seneca’s, Ramsay (T rans, of Tac. Ann. . Vol. II, 

p. 297, Note 2 ) remarks; "However much Seneca may be 
censured for being gradually led on to conniving at, or 
assisting in, some of Nero’s excesses, no language of 

inordinate flattery Is attributed to him.Addressing 

Nero in the De Clem, ii, 2, he says; ’non ut blandum 
tuis auribus: nec enim hie mihi mos est.’ It mu st b e 
rememb ered, howe ve r, tha t the sub tlest fo rm of flat tery 
is to affect" Its opposite /" In~HTe Nafu rales Quaes t xones . 
too/there are four curious bits of "flattery; 

1. A prosaic line of Nero’s is quoted with the flatter¬ 
ing introduction; "ut ait Nero Caesar disertissime (N.Q., 

9 v, 6. 

2. Refers to Nero "ut aliarum virtutum ita veritatis 
in primis amantissimus (N.Q,., VI, viii, 3). 

3. A comet, appearing in Nero’s reign, "cometis detraxit 
infamiam" (N.Q., VII, xvii, 2). 

4. Nero’s principals is "laetissimus" (N.q., VII,xxi,3] 

On these pieces of flattery, Geikie (Trans, of Nat. Quaest., 
Bk. IV, p. 330, Notes) remarks; "The old courtier, so 
long habituated to the language of flattery, was perhaps 
hardly conscious that he was here making use of it, or 

he may naturally have reflected that at a time when the 
emperor had ceased to bear him any good will, the absence 
of X the customary adulation might cause as much offence as 
if a direct insult were intended." 

(26) Dio Cassius, LXI, xviii, 2-3. "When some portents 
took place at this time (A.D.59), the seers 

declared that they meant destruction for him and they 
advised him to divert the evil upon others. He would 
accordingly have put numerous persons out of the way 
immediately had not Seneca said to him; ’No matter how 
many you may slay, you cannot kill your successor’." 


























' 




■ 




' 








■ 

: 






- 

' 


. 

■ 


; . 























. 

- 






























( 120 . 


the tyrant for a boasted reconciliation. For once 

Tacitus ranks him with his own ideal, his knight 

:! without fear and without reproach' 1 : "Thus grew alike 

(27) 

the glory and the dangers of these illustrious men." 

When, in the same year in which Burrus died (62 A.D.), 

Seneca realized that his usefulness to the state was 

over, he followed the rule he had laid down for the 

Wise Man, and sought leave to withdraw into private life. 

At the same time he offered his wealth to the Prince. 

(28) 

Both request and offer were refused. Thereupon 

Seneca, undeceived, dismissed his suite and held no more 

v . I.. | \ < 

crowded levees but passed studious days at home cor¬ 
responding with Lucilius, then procurator of Sicily, and 
busied with his investigation of natural philosophy. 

The end, with its high courage and the love of husband 
and wife, all know. 

Any estimation of the morality of Seneca f s acts and 


(27) Tac. Ann ., XV, xxiii, 6 

(28) There is a possibility that the offer was later 
accepted. Tacitus( Ann. XV, Ixiv, 6) says that 

Seneca’s will had been made in the days of his great 
wealth. "Ita codicillis praescripserat cum etiam turn 
praedives et praepotens supremis suis consuleret. u 
Dio (LXII, xxv, 3) tells us that Seneca had bestowed upon 
Hero “his entire property, ostensibly to help to pay for 
the buildings he was constructing“. The most probable 
time for such a gift would be after the great fire at 
Rome, when Hero re-built the city and erected for him¬ 
self his famous "Golden House". 












‘ 

* 



% 


. 

- 


' 








' 








' 

. 




i 


, 

. 

. 








( 121 . 


of their harmony with his professed ideals must 
distinguish between those of the private citizen and 
those performed in an official capacity. The attacks of 
his contemporaries and of their immediate successors 
are aimed especially at his private life. In his 
administration they censured both his weakness in help¬ 
ing to cover Kero’s crimes and his policy in regard to 
the young Prineeps* thirst for pleasures - a policy 
based on the decision that these pleasures, even though 
unseemly, were the lesser of two evils, and on his vain 
hope that by granting Kero his sweetmeats the young 
tiger might be kept from wishing a dish of blood fatal 
to the state. For the major part of his public acts and 
measures, there seems to have been general praise; 
n il y a du moins la figure d’un administrateur avise, 

juste, bienfaisant, qu’entourent la reconnaissance et 

(29) 

l f admiration de la foole." v To seek to discredit the 

statesman was reserved for moderns. It may be, as 
Professor Waltz suggests,that these desired to pose 


(29) 

Waltz* 

Vie 

de 

Seneque, 

Intro., 

p. 10 

(30) 

Waltz* 

Vie 

de 

Seneque, 

Intro., 

p, 12; n Peut-etre 


se sont-ils laisse quslquefois entrainer au desir 
d’etre meilleurs juges de 1 1 antiqui te que les anciens, et 
certains d’entre eux ont-ile trop obei a des preoccupa¬ 
tions que n’inspirait pas uniquement le pur culte de 
l 1 histo ire.* 







. 

. 

. 

. 

. 

■ 

■ 

. 

. 

. 




■ 

■ 

























( 122 . 


as better judges of antiquity than the ancients them¬ 
selves; in their defence might be urged the fact that 
they have been able to see the results as the ancients 
could not: for moderns the rug has been woven, the 
pattern is complete. But it is possible that this 
change in judgment reflects changed political theories. 

To the Homans, Seneca was the man who attempted to 
restore the golden age of the idolized, and idealized, 
Augustus; to moderns he is Hero’s minister, of whose 
regime the chief result was the riveting of Caesarism 
and despotism upon the Homan world. Men trained in 
democratic theories could see little good in such govern¬ 
ment. Perhaps the flaws recently noted in the edifice of 
democracy, together with modern examples of non-democratic 
states, may cause critics to view Seneca more leniently; 
perhaps his aristocratic theory of government may 
appear less worthy of condemnation, more suited to time 
and people. The Roman mob did not want self-government; 
trouble and responsibility irked it. Even the Senate, 
a.s a body, lacked independence. For this it was not 
altogether to blame: Hero had the military power. As 
for Hero himself, he was not the material from which 
Plato’s ideal ruler might be formed; Seneca, unfortunate 
butor, had been given a pupil quite unteachable, one, 




. 

■ 

. 

. 

- 

... ... • • , ; < -• .I’-:' \ 






. 


. 







moreover, with, his vicious propensities already waken¬ 
ing in the hot-house atmosphere of the court. Wisdom 
after the event is easy; Seneca had to decide in the 
midst of the hurly-hurly of current events. It is 
possible, too, that the contemporary complaints about 
his policy of indulgence arose partly because senatorial 
feelings had been hurt by the protection afforded 
provincials against their rapacious Homan rulers. The 
feature in his regime which appeals to moderns, at 
least theoretically, would be the one most repellent 
to Roman pride. 

As has been argued already, the reception of the 

official account of Agrippina f s death may have been 

much more favourable than Tacitus reports. If so, then 

Seneca achieved his immediate purpose, the continuance 

of the public peace® Had the Senate and people been 

officially informed that their young Princeps was a 

matricide, civil war must have resulted. An admission 

that the Augusta had been summarily slain without a 

trial, even if accompanied by a claim that she perished 
{31) 

justly,' ' must likewise have excited a dangerous 

(31) Prof* Waltz ( Vie de Seneque, Livre IV, Chap. I, 

p. 367) prefers this method of meeting the crisis 
to the one chosen by Seneca; M Mieux eut valu proelamer 
resolument, ati nom de l’inter&t politique, la legitimite 








. 

. 


















- 

- 

' 

■ 


. 




. 


- 

. 







( 124 . 


uproar and. probably would have led to the same result, 
namely, war. To the legal-minded Roman an execution, 
and especially the execution of a mother, must be pre¬ 
ceded by a trial; otherwise it ranked as murder. A 
report of suicide, following discovery of her attempted 
crime, was the only possible expedient. 

As in the death of Britannicus, Seneca obviously 
justified himself to his own conscience by the plea of 
'’public necessity". Agrippina’s death may, indeed, have 
brought a sense of relief. With the popular idolatry 
of her father Germanicus added to an imperious disposition 
which recalls the Glytemnestra of Aeschylus, her continued 
existence was a potential danger. Even Tacitus^would 
seem to have regarded her as capable of the murder of 
her eon. There has been grave misuse of the doctrine 
that it is expedient "that one man should die for the 
people and that the whole nation perish not". Yet the 

(31 Continued) 

du meurtre. Cette these, soutenable si I’on avait pris 
soin de donner au meurtre les apparences d’un acte de 
justice et de defense socials, et non eelles d’un 
mauvais coup perpetre par des brigands, eut cause meins 
d’indignation." It must be admitted, too., that accord¬ 
ing to Suetonius (Claudius, XXIX, 1), Julia had been put 
to death without opportunity for defence; Crimine 
in certo nec defensione ulla data; but the two cases are 
not"parallel, For a publicly confessed execution some 
legal cloak was commonly sought. 

32) Tac. Ann ., XIV, vii, 3. See note (18) 








' 

E - 

* • ' ' .......... . 5 







(125 


conduct of governments in all ages and in all countries 
would suggest that this was the policy they followed. 
If, to-day, impending riots and war involving much loss 
of life and suffering could he averted hy the sacrifice 
of one life, if, even, this result was not certain hut 
only prohahle, there is little doubt as to the course 
that would he taken, and, possibly, even though that 
person was highljr placed. Seneca has not been the only 
man responsible for a nation’s well-being whom con¬ 
siderations of the larger safety have led to the com¬ 
mission or the condonation of acts which, in a private 
citizen, must have been condemned. In private life, 
men are often confused by the conflicting claims of 
duty; in public life, this difficulty in securing clear 
vision as to the correct course of action is enhanced 
by the increased complexity of the claims. It is hard 
to determine where the first loyalty shall be given. 

If, in making his decision, a man has set aside selfish 
hopes and fears, he is open to blame for mistakes due 
to lack of foresight, but he cannot fairly receive 
severe moral condemnation. 

In conclusion, it is pertinent to note that 
Professor Waltz' ' draw/s our attention to the fact that 

(33) Waltz, Vie de Senecue, Livre III, Chap. I, p. 243 
and Chap. VII, pp. 344-5. 





















' 



' 













■ 








. 




' 

. 




■ 









■ 























( 126 . 


the spirit animating Seneca’s government was resurrected 
by those Antonines who governed the Roman State during 
the period Gibbon has judged the happiest in the history 
of mankind. 

















(127 


CHAPTER VI 

Enduring Values iri the Stoic Ideal 

Certain aspects of the Senecan ideal Have their 
value for men of today. Then, as well as now, the 
problem of crime and its restriction was important. 
Certain modern ideas on this subject have been set 
forth in a recent article.^ In this are listed three 
reasons for the punishment of criminals; the deterrent 
effect on others, the punishment of the criminal and 
his reformation. The deterrent theory, however, has 
not proved efficacious in practice: its effects are 
imponderable, it necessarily falls short of complete 
success, and, because of the resultant unwillingness 
of juries to convict, when carried to extremes it tends 
to destroy itself. An attempt to base the punishment 
on the degree of moral guilt involved has likewise 
proved unsatisfactory; crime and immorality are 
different things; it is quite possible to commit a crime 
and yet do nothing immoral; courts of law are not well 
adapted to the deciding of moral issues. The theory of 
reformation has been hampered by two problems, - 

(1) The Theory of Punishment , by Terence Sheard, 

University of Toronto Quarterly, October, 1934, 
pp. 92 - 102. 



















. 




' 




. 

• • 




\ - i 








. 





(128 


(1) incurable offenders and (2) the uncertainty prevail¬ 
ing as to the best methods to be adopted in the case of 
those for -whom there still seems to be hope* So far 
psychiatrists have failed to convince the public that 
criminals should be entrusted to them. The real need is 
for a coherent philosophy of criminal punishment based 
upon facts scientifically ascertained. In this 
philosophy the question of punishment would be only one 
element in the larger problem, of producing a social 
condition unfavourable to crime. All criminals cannot 
be caught; therefore the effort should be directed 
towards making crime itself unattractive. In such a 
system, providing the type of penalty were left open, 
punishment as a deterrent might be retained. It would 
be kept in perspective, regarded, not as a cure-all, 

but as one aid in forming the desired environment. 

Beside this modern statement we may set Seneca’s 

theory of punishment for comparison. He, too, says that 

the law has three aims: ’’either to reform the man that 

is punished, or by punishing him to make the rest better, 

or by removing bad men to let the rest live in greater 
( o) 

security.’ 1 The necessity of safe-guarding society by 

(2) Sen. Da Clem. I, xxii, 1. See description of the 
Wise Man as judge. Chap. Ill, pp. 70-72. 













- 


































' 


. 



. 


















. . . 


. 






-■ 













( 129 . 


the incarceration or death of criminals, although not 

mentioned in the article summarized above, is widely 

accepted today. Seneca, it is to be noted, retains 

the deterrent theory and for this reason elsewhere 

l 3 ) 

advocates the public execution of the condemned. ' 

This is now discredited. Otherwise his principles are 

modern, stressing the theory of reformation which has 

not yet won general acceptance in practice. The type 

of penalty, too, is not fixed and rigid, but varied 

to suit the needs of the case. Correction is necessary, 

but is to be applied with discretion. Men sin through 

error, their natures have become distorted by vice, 

their judge is their physician, whose duty it is to heal 
(4) 

human nature. Accordingly, a cure is first sought 
by means of a mild reproof, given in private. If this 
is ineffective, a harsher rebuke is administered. If 
words fail to bring an offender to his senses, the 
judge turns to punishment, using at first that which is 
light and not irrevocable. Should this fail, the 

(3) Sen. De Ir a. I, vi, 4 

(4) *’It becomes a guardian of the law.... to heal 

human nature....... to the end that he may persuade 

a man to do what he ought to do, and win over his heart 
to a desire for the honourable and the just, and implant 
in his mind hatred of vice and esteem of virtue. tt 
(Sen. De Ira I, vi, 3} 











. 

























- - 




















. . 

■ ' * _ 1 ■ • : ■ ' ' ■, : 

. 

...... • - 





. 









( 


criminal is sentenced to some penalty that he can feel, 
to gaol, exile, or public disgrace. Only when the case 
is clearly hopeless, when the man is an old and hardened 
offender to whom the crime itself is a sufficient 
pretext for its commission, does Seneca advise the death 
penalty; "sometimes the truest form of pity is to kill". 
But pity is rejected in favour of mercy. Pity looks to 
the plight, not to the cause of it; mercy is ruled by 
reason; it is the stopping short of the penalty which 
might justlj'- be enforced. A man’s punishment looks not 
to the past but to the future. As a doctor does not 
prescribe the same treatment for all diseases, nor even 
for all forms of the same disease, so a judge, who is 


(5) Sen. De Ira, I, xvi, 3. Cf. “The Case for Capital 
PunisKment*", by Sir Arnold Wilson, M.P., in "The 
Spectator", Feb. 1, 1935, pp. 156-7: “My reasons are 
threefold. Firstly, to the vast majority of men, death 
is looked on as the just penalty of murder: to many 
guilty men it is quite literally ’expiation* and release. 
Secondly, I believe that for the better protection of 
society the power of the courts to sentence men to death 
should be retained, however rarely the sentence be 
carried out. Vengeance should never be our aim, and in 
the worst cases, in which alone the death sentence 
should be carried out, we can seldom hope for reform. 

But society must protect itself from men who are judged 
not fit to live. Sane or insane, if incurable, they are 
better dead. Thirdly, I believe alternative forms of 
punishment to be worse for society, for the guilty man, 
sind for his captors, than the death sentence." (p. 156) 









. 

■ 




. . • 








' 






... 





- 

. 








Un¬ 


called on to cure the "body politic” seeks the proper 

treatment for each man's malady. Should two crimes be 

committed, but one in a moment of weakness and one as a 

result of long planning, the second, though the less 

serious, receives the heavier punishment. For the same 

reason, two men guilty of the like crime, receive 

different punishments. Often the guilty man is set- 

free unpunished: "if regret for the act warrants fair 

hope, if he discerns that the sin does not issue from. 

the inmost soul of the man, but, so to speak, is only 

skin-deep, he will grant him impunity, seeing that it 

( 6 ) 

will injure neither the recipient nor the giver. 

In an age when it is possible to claim that there are 
good grounds for fearing an increasing disposition to 
inflict physical suffering,it is interesting to read 
Seneca's statement: "You will more easily reform the 
culprits themselves by the lighter form of punishment; 

(6) Sen. De Ira , I, xix, 5 

(7j "Cruelty in Politics”, by C. E. M. Joad, Feb. 22,1935, 
^Everyman", pp. 460-461: "There are unfortunately 
good grounds for supposing that there is in the world 
today, if not an increase of physical suffering, at least 

an increasing disposition to inflict it.The inflicticn 

of pain has once more become an instrument of politics...... 

There is a recrudescence of the medieval view that state¬ 
ments extorted by the infliction of gross physical agony 
are trustworthy."(p. 460j Compare this with Seneca’s 
"Cruelty is an evil thing, befitting least of all a man. 1 
( De Clem ,, I, xxv, 1) 








. 


















' 




I't 

■ 

. 















































. 































' 



























( 132 . 


for he will live more guardedly who has something 
left to lose. Bo one is sparing of a ruined reputa¬ 
tion; it "brings a sort of exemption from punishment 
to have no room left for punishment. The morals of 
the state, moreover, are better mended by the sparing 
use of punitive measures; for sin becomes familiar from 
the multitude of those who sin, and the official stigma 
is less weighty if its force is weakened by the very 

number that it condemns, and severity.loses its 

potency by repeated application. Good morals are 
established in the state and vice is wiped out if a 
prince is patient with vice, not as if he approved of 
it, but as if unwillingly and with great pain he had 

resort to chastisement.». The punishment which a 

kindly man decrees seems all the more severe. You 
will notice, besides, that the sins repeatedly punished 
are the sins repeatedly committed...... In that state 

in which men are rarely punished a sympathy for up¬ 
rightness is formed....... Let a state think itself 

blameless, and it will be so; its anger against those 
who depart from the general sobriety will be greater 
if it sees that they are few. Believe me, it is 
dangerous to show a state in how great a majority evil 























' 








. 


- 
































. 


. 












































(133 


men are. 1 *This man, it is to be remembered, dictated 
the policies of Rome for at least five years; he can 
hardly be called an arm-chair theorist. 

Seneca’s ideas on punishment probably grew out of 
his belief in the essential unity of the human race. 

In his eyes, man cannot stand alone; union is necessary; 
the world must be viewed as a home common to all; on 
kindness and concord human life is founded. All men 
are brothers, citizens of the greater commonwealth, for 
whom injury of each other is a crime; man’s person should 
be inviolate to his fellow-man. War, than v/hich nothing 
is more deadly, is plain insanity: H acts of Senate 
and decrees of the people sanction outrage, and the 
state commands what’s forbidden to the citizen. 8 9 * * * * 14 It is 
the ’’butchery of whole nations, the crime magnificent”. y 
It stands opposed to human fellowship, which, like the 


(8) Sen. De Clem . I, xxii-xxiii. This whole passage 
forms an admirable comment on the futility of the 

English criminal code in the 18th century, when the 
penalty of death was the usual punishment for the theft 
of property worth five shillings or over. 

(9) Sen. Ep. XCV, 30: Homieidia compescimus et singulas 

caedes: qui d bella et o ccisarum gentium gloriosum. 

scelu s? lion avarITia7 non crude!i l as““modum novit. Et 

ista quamdiu furtim et a singulis fiunt, minus noxia 
minusque monstruosa sunt: ex s enatus consultis plebisque 

scit is saeva exercentur e t publ1c e"Tube n t ur vetata 

priviTIm. 


























i, 

„ , • 












( 134 . 


stonework of an arch., would collapse but for the 
mutual interlocking of its parts.^ 10 ^ 

In close connection with Seneca^ hurnanitarianism 
is his insistence on the necessity of crushing the 
passions, especially the passion of anger. "For who 
that surrenders to anger and rage does not straightway 
cast behind him all sense of shame? Who that storms in 
wild fury and assails another does not cast aside what¬ 
ever he had in him that commands respect? Who that is 
enraged maintains the full number or the order of his 


(10) "Where would the empire be today had not a sound 
foresight united the victors and the vanquished 
into one?" (Sen. Be Ira , II, xxxiv, 4). A curious com¬ 
parison with this doctrine of the brotherhood of man is 
to be found in an article entitled: "Great Britain and 
Coloured Races", by M. A. Thomas, The Contemporary Re¬ 
view, Feb. 1935, pp. 227-233: "Those without colour- 
prejudice feelings and personally acquainted with Africa, 
India, America, as well as these British Isles, know 
that every race has its high-minded and efficient 


workers........ But in Great Britain ?;e have made a 

T fetish’........ of our own version of the dominant race 

theory..... The point is that from spots everywhere 


where men set themselves up in absolute authority over 
other members of the human race, a deadly ’ju-ju* influ¬ 
ence creeps out like miasma over the world....... 

By reason of priority of example in India and 
Africa, Great Britain cannot escape responsibility for 
its part in the deadly fact that freedom of speech, 
freedom of the press and freedom of constitutional action 
are now endangered the world over....,,. Surely, to 
ensure liberty in any real sense, we have to gain it and 
maintain it by sifting with patient insight all shades of 
opinion, no matter what the source, and drawing the 
finest essence of all the views make this the basis for 
government alike in our dependencies and here in Great 
Britain." ( pp . 232-233). 

































■ 















- 













0 



. 






• 








, 

• 
















‘ 

. 











' ■ 










* .... 











( 135 . 


duties? Who restrains his tongue? Who controls any 
part of his body? Who is able to rule the self that 
he has set loose?”Those who have been witnesses 
of the loss of personal dignity caused by an un¬ 
governable rage, or who have seen the ruin anger can 
bring in its train? are not likely to dispute Seneca’s 
dictum. The point, however, must not be laboured. 
Stoicism is only one of many in its teaching that 
”He that ruleth his spirit is greater than he that 
taketh a city. w 

The training necessary for self-control is to 
begin in childhood. This, the proper period for educa¬ 
tion, calls for the greatest attention, since the 
mind, still tender, is then easily trained; "it will be 

of the utmost profit, I say, to give children sound 

( 12 ) 

training from the very beginning." Here Seneca 

and modern pedagogy meet. They meet again in the 
principles underlying education. A child’s spirit must 
not be broken, yet insolence and anger cannot be 
allowed. Because of this, guidance is difficult; the 
same things give rise to both results; if the child is 
not to turn aside to either extreme, spur and curb will 

(11) Sen. Be Ira , III, vi, 2. 

(12) Sen. De Ira , II, xxi, 1. 























■ 

. 

. 

















' 


. 






































113 6 . 


both be needed. He must not be Humiliated, He must 

not be forced to beg submissively nor allowed to find 

begging profitable; “rather let His own desert and 

His past conduct and good promise of it in tHe future 
( 13 ) 

be rewarded.”' In struggles witH His playmates He 

must not get angry nor wisH to Hurt His opponents. 

He may be encouraged for praiseworthy actions, but He 

must not be allowed to form too High an opinion of 

Himself. He needs relaxation but not pampering; over- 

indulgence and licence spoil a child's disposition: 

they make Him hot-tempered and unable to endure rebuffs. 

A child should never be flattered; He should hear the 

truth, be respectful, be reproved for wrongdoing, be 

refused requests made when angry; “when He is quiet 

(14) 

let Him be offered what was refused when he wept." 

That he may not become angry because someone is 
counted Hie equal, let Him from the first be treated 
as the equal of many; let his food be simple, His 
clothes inexpensive, His style of living like that of 
his companions. His teachers should be chosen judiciously: 
{t It will work to the advantage of children to give them 

(13) Sen. He Ira , II, xxi, 4. 


(14) Sen. He Ira , II, xxi, 8. 















. 






. 




. - 


















■ 


































( 137 . 


teachers and tutors of a quiet disposition. Every 
young thing attaches itself to what is nearest and 
grows to be like it; the character of their nurses 
and tutors is presently reproduced in that of the 
young men. There was a boy who had been brought up 
in the house of Plato, and when he had returned to his 
parents and saw his father in a blustering rage, his 
comment was: ’I never saw this sort of thing at 
Plato’s’. I doubt not that he was quicker to copy 
his father than he was to copy Plato 1 . 

There is, too, Seneca’s insistence that man has a 
duty to his fellow-men. The question of a life of 
retirement as opposed to a life passed amid political 
activity may be left unsettled, but there is no 
dubiousness, no lack of clarity in the assertion that 
neither life can be for self alone. Po man without 
thought for others can know the Vita Beata. The 
problem is, rather, which type of life enables the 
individual to render the best service to the group in 
which fate has placed him. Each must settle the 
question for himself. As guides to this decision, only 
general rules can be given. The young man on the 


(15) Sen. Be Ira , II, xxi, 9-10. 















. . 


- 




. 













' 

. 




. 


■ 






: 
















( 138 . 


threshold of his career must consider carefully, first, 
the condition of state and times, next, his ora 
temperament and capacity. Seneca wisely advised a 
careful estimate of a man’s physical and mental powers, 
of his psychological 11 type”, and of the demands which 
his proposed career would make upon him: He stresses, 
in fact, the need for care in this matter? The doer 
must always he stronger than his task; loads too heavy 
will crush their hearer; men common^ over-estimate 
their ability, attempting more than their fortune, 
their body, their modesty or pride or unbridled temper 
will permit them to carry through to a successful con¬ 
clusion. ’’You must turn towards that course to which 
the bent of your genius shall direct you........ Inborn 

tendencies answer ill to compulsion, and where nature 

(16) 

opposes labour is in vain.” And he always comes 

back to the aims with which a man enters upon either 
course of life, he always insists that a man must have 
the set purpose of making himself useful to his country¬ 
men and to mankind in general* ”Just as to seek wealth 

(16) Sen. De Tranq. Anim i., VII, 2i Considerandum est 
utrum natura tua agendis rebus an otiose studio 
contemplationique aptior sit, et eo inclinandum, quo 
te vis ingenii feret....,.; male enim respondent 
coacta ingenia, reluctante natura inritus labor est. 





























■ l 


, 








. 

' 






















. 









without any love of the virtues and without the culti¬ 
vation of character, and to display an interest in hare 
work only is by no means to be commended - for all 
these must be combined and go hand in hand - so when 
virtue is banished to leisure without action it is an 
imperfect and spiritless good, that never brings what 
it has learned into the open. Who will deny that Virtue 
ought to test her progress by open deed, and should 
not only consider what ought to be done, but also at 

times apply her hand and bring into reality what she 

f 1 7 ) 

has conceived? nV J 

Perhaps the lesson most needed today is contained 
in Seneca f s insistence that a man must discipline him¬ 
self until at need he can withdraw temporarily from 


(1?) Sen. Pe Otio , VI, 2-3. Of. Milton, Areopagitica . 

t} I cannot praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue 
unexercised and unbreathed, that never sallies out and 
seeks her adversary, but slinks out of the race, where 
that immortal garland is to be run for, not without 
dust and heat. 11 

Huxley has a different view of the teachings of 
Stoicism: "Many of the Stoical philosophers recommended 

their disciples to take an active share in public 
affairs; and in the Roman world, for several centuries 
the best public men were strongly inclined to Stoicism. 


nevertheless, the logical tendenc; 

f of Stoicism seems 

ferine" to be fuITilTed only "in sue! 

a men as DiOj 

genes and 

Epictetus. 1 * (Huxley, T. H., ^Evolution and Eti 

aicb*', 


pVlT¥r™R'ote 18). Seneca’s retort certainly would be: 
w And with what thought does the Wise Man retire into 
leisure? In the knowledge that there also he will be 
doing something that will benefit posterity. Our school 

















. 








- 












.... . . 

1 




. 

■ 




















( 140 . 


the crowded confusion of the world into his own soul 

(18) 

and there find rest and re-creation. With this 

goes the need for unity and harmony in the soul, the 
uselessness of restless travel in search of content¬ 
ment, whilst a man is at odds with himself, and the 
promise of the lasting serene joy which accompanies 


C17) Continued. 

at any rate is ready to say that both Zeno and Chrysippus 
accomplished greater things than if they had led armies, 
held public office, and framed laws. The laws they 
framed were not for one state only, but for the whole 
human race. Why, therefore, should such leisure as this 
not be fitting for the good man, who by means of it may 
govern the ages to come, and speak, not to the ears of 
the few, but to the ears of all men of all nations, 
both those who now are and those who shall be?” ( Pe Otic , 
VI, 4). It is thus made clear that even that occasional 
type of Stoic which Huxley has in mind goes into re¬ 
tirement with no selfish viewpoint but with the idea of 
developing his service to mankind in that particular v/ay. 


(18) M .........Prom hatred of their laborious ill- 

success men have taken refuge in leisure and in. 
solitary studies, which are unendurable to a mind that 
is intent upon public affairs, desirous of action and 
naturally restless, because assuredly it has too few 
resources within itself; when, therefore, the 
pleasures have been withdrawn which business itself 
affords to those who are busily engaged, the mind can¬ 
not endure home, solitude, and the walls of a room, 
and sees with dislike that it has been left to itself.” 
( De Tranq. Animi ., II, 9). Seneca’s words would 
describe many men and women today. 














. 

























i 





















' 

' 








. * , 










• 





















(141 


peace of mind. He does not promise a gentle voyage 
through life to such a man; he insists instead that 
the good pilot steers his ship unfalteringly on its 
right course even though the rigging hang in tatters 
and shipwreck is imminent. But he makes this threat 
of storm and strife itself a clarion call: testing is 
essential if a man is to learn his own worth, the 
gods have passed an adverse judgment on those to whom 
all things come according to their wish and desire. 

The same things are fashioned to honour and to dis¬ 
honour; not suffering, hut its noble endurance, wins 
admiration; life is a drama of which the perfection 
depends not on its length hut on the quality of the 
acting. And the attainment of moral perfection rests 
not with Fortune, not even with some capricious Deity 
who long ago sentenced these to heaven and those to 

hell, hut it lies with a man’s own self, with his 

(19) 

will and his unfaltering determination. The 


(19) Seneca names all high inspirations as God’s 

gift, hut no man is excluded and man’s salva¬ 
tion rests with himself. Much, however, of the Stoic 
doctrine passed over into Christianity through St, 
Paul’s Epistles. Only passing mention need he made 
of the resemblances between Seneca and the Christian 
saint and of the spurious correspondence to which this 
spiritual kinship gave rise. 











































' 


. 

■ 






































( 142 . 


teaching of the high dignity of man in virtue of his 
humanity is needed to help counterbalance over¬ 
insistence on humility and worthlessness, on man’s 
natural state as "a humble worm of the dust”, himself 
helpless, never certain of being granted the strength 
to rise above the mud and grime. The latter con¬ 
viction leads all too easily to discouragement and 
despair. The Stoics at least removed the gate that 
barred the road; man and woman, the responsibility 
rests on them, and on them alone. Hor did Seneca fear 
the reception his message would receive: H a generous 

soul’s best quality is its responsiveness to a noble 

( 20 ) 

call. H 

The Stoic ideal, however, has not yet entirely 
passed into limbo. Compare, for instance, Seneca’s 
teachings and the address of Professor Sumner to 
American students: “Discipline in manners and morals 
does not belong to the specific matter of education, 
but it follows of itself on true education. The 
educated man must work by himself without any over¬ 
seer over him. He finds his compulsion in himself 
and it holds him tc his task longer and closer than 
any external compulsion. 


(20) Sen. Kp. XXXIX, 2. 











( 






















. 

- 











( 143 . 


"This responsibility to self we call honour, and 
it is one of the highest fruits of discipline when 
discipline, having wrought through intellect, has 

reached character.. True honour can grow in men 

only by the long practice of conduct which is good 
and noble under motives which are pure....... Honour 

is a tribunal within one’s self whose code is simply 

the best truth one knows... To feel one’s self 

condemned by that tribunal is to feel at discord with 
one’s self and to sustain a wound which rankles longer 

and stings more deeply than any wound in the body. 

I have said some things about lack of discipline in 
thought and discussion, but that is nothing compared 
with the lack of discipline in conduct which you see in 
a man who has never known what honour is, whose whole 
moral constitution is so formless and flabby that it 
can perform none of its functions, and who is con¬ 
tinually seeking some special plea, or sophist vy 9 or 

deceptive device for paying homage to the right while 

(2l) 

he does the wrong.” Surely this is Stoicism in a 

modern dress. So long as these ideals can be held up 

(21) Selected Essays of William Graham Sumner, 

Edited by A. G. Keller and M. R. Davie, 1924, 

Hew Haven, Yale University Press. 























. 

... . 81 . . ' 3 . 4 

. 

. 

- 








. 








. .. - 


... ..'.i . 




' 






. 










for imitation by young men, Seneca, being dead, yet 
speaketh. 

It is difficult to evaluate the influence of any 
one moral code upon its successors. The syncretism 
which arises in the passage of time blends and fuses 
code with code until the separate colours, once so 
vivid, no longer stand out sharply but form part of a 
composite whole. This is particularly true of 
Stoicism, Yet Tarsus was one of the great centres 
of the school, and its influence on the apostle to 
the Gentiles was indisputably strong. As a result the 
Pauline theology and ethics have carried down the 
stream, of time much that is almost purely Stoic to 
those Western nations whose official religion is 
Christianity, yet so subtl}^ blended with the latter 
that the effort to discriminate belongs to the very 
finest researches of the Higher Criticism. Under such 
circumstances I would be reluctant even to attempt 
to suggest all the values this philosophy possesses 
for us of the modern world. The narrow range dis¬ 
cussed in this chapter represents only those aspects 
which to me appeared particularly striking; no claim 




















. 













' 








. 










. 













( 145 . 


is made that they constitute the most important 
legacy to us of that great system of thought 'which, 
if it taught men how to die, never lost sight of the 
necessity of teaching them likewise how to live. 










(146 


BOOKS CONSULTED 
PRD/IARY SOURCES 

Seneca: Ad Lucilium Epiatularum Moralium qu ae Super - 
sunt, Otto Hense, 1914, Teubner. 

De Beneficiis, Libri VI I; De Clementia , 
Libri II , Carolus Hosius, 1914, Teubner. 
Dialog o rum, Libri XII. Emil Hermes, 1905, 
Teubner. 

Naturalium Quaestionum, Libr i VIII. Alfred 
Gercke, 1907, Teubner. 

Seneca: Moral Essays , Translated by John W. Basore, 
Yol. I, 1928; Vol. II, 1932; London, Loeb 
Classical Library. 

Aristotle: Tbe Mcomaebean Ethics . Translated by 

H. Rackham, 1926, London, Loeb Classical 
Library. 

Cicero: De P in ibus Bonorum et Maiorum . Translated 
by H. Rackham, 1914, London, Loeb Classical 
Library. 

De Officiis . Translated by Y/alter Miller, 
1913, London, Loeb Classical Library. 

Dio Cassius; Dio *s Roman Hist ory, Translated by 

Ernest Cary, Vol. VII, 1924; Yol. VIII, 1925; 
London, Loeb Classical Library. 





























■ 


. 


. 




: 

. 

. 

!. j : V , . . . . 





. 

: .... ... . . , ..... - . i • 




■_ 



■- 


«*• • • 

















Suetonius: The Lives of thLe Caesars; The Lives of 

Illustrious Me n. Translated by J. C. 

Rolfe, Vol. I, 1920 (reprint); Vol. II, 

1914; London, Loeb Classical Library. 

Tacitus: Annales . Carolus Halm, Vol. I, 1905, 

Teubner, 

Passages quoted in the thesis have been taken 
either from the above Loeb editions or from the folio-w¬ 
ing translations printed without accompanying original 
text. In numbering the passages referring to Seneca’s 
works, the Teubner text has been used. 

Barker, E. Phillips: Seneca’s Letters to Lucilius . 

Vol. I and II, 1932, Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Clarke, Johns Physical Science in the Age of Hero , 
being a translation of the Quaestiones 
Baturales of Seneca, with notes on the 
treatise by Sir Archibald Geikie, 1910, 
London, Macmillan Company. 

Rams ay, George Gilbert: The Annals of Tacitus . Vol. I, 
1904; Vol. II, 1909; London, John Murray. 























Secondary Sources 


Arnold, E. Vernon: Roman Stoici sm , 1911, Cambridge 
University Press. 

Baring-Gould, S: The Tragedy of t h e Ca esars. 1907. 

(6th Edition), London, Methuen and Company. 

Bevan, Edwyn: Stoics and Sceptics . 1913, Oxford, 
Clarendon Press. 

Bury, J. B: The S tudents Roman Empi r e: A History of 
the Roman Empire fr om its Fou ndation to the 
Death o f Marcus Aur elius . (Bo date), Lew York, 
American Book Company, 

Davidson, William L: The Stoic Creed . 1907, Edinburgh, 

T. and T. Clark. 

Dill, Samue1s Roman Society from B e ro to Marcus Aurelius . 
1905 (2nd Edition), London, Macmillan Company. 

Duff, J. Wight: A Lit era ry Hi st ory of Rome in the 

Silver Age . 1930 (2nd Impression), London, 
Ernest Benn Limited. 

Prank, Tenney: Asp ects of Soci a l Behavior in Ancient 
Rome . Martin Classical Lectures, Vol. II, 

1932; Cambridge, U.S.A., Harvard University 
Press. 

Guromere, Richard Mott: Sen e ca the Philosopher and his 
Modern Messag e, In the Our Debt to Greece and 
Rome Series, 1922, Boston, Marshall Jones Co. 







































Ho chart, P: Etudes sur la Vie de Seneque . 1885, Paris, 
Ernest Leraux, Editeur. 

Rostovtzeff, Ms The Social and Economic History of the 
Homan Emp ire, 1926, Oxford, Clarendon 
Press. 

Waltz, Rene; Vie de Sene que. 1909, Paris, Librairie 
Academique, Perrin et C le , Libraires 
Editears. 

Wenley, R. Ms Stoicism and its influence . In the 

Our Debt to Greece and Rome Series, London, 
George G. Harrap & Co., Limited. 

Zeller, E; Stoics, Epicureans and Scepti cs. English 
translation by Rev. 0. J. Reichel, 1892 
(Hew and revised edition), London, Longmans, 
Green and Company. 
































B29743 




