For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 










For Reference 


NOT TO BE TAKEN FROM THIS ROOM 


0.x UBMS 

31HMROTM1$ 











,. . < 






THE WORLD VIEW OF SECOND ISAIAH 

A dissertation 

submitted to the B. D. Committee of the 
Senate of the University of Alberta 
in candidacy for the degree of 
Bachelor of Divinity 

by 

E. A® Canteion, B.A. 


University of Alberta 
April 1945 







CONTENTS 


Chapter Page 

I The Prophets and Monotheism 1 


II 

The Book and Its Problems 

15 

III 

Background and Occasion of the 
Message 

21 

IV 

The World 

View 

25 

V 

The World 

View and Israel 

30 

VI 

Proofs of 

the World View 

48 

VII 

The World 

View and the Nations 

55 

VIII 

The World 

View and the Individual 

62 

IX 

Conclusion 

71 



Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2018 with funding from 
University of Alberta Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worldviewofseconOOhart 


Chapter I 


THE PROPHETS AHD MONOTHEISM 









Chapter I 


THE PROPHETS AND MONOTHEISM 

Dr, I, M. P. Smith has stated, "The true prophets 
were diligent students of their own times. They were not 
lacking in appreciation of the past, hut they did not allow 
the past to annihilate the present. They realized that 
Yahweh had spoken to the men of former ages, great creative 
truths; but they were equally certain that he had still 
more truth to make known to his children* They held them¬ 
selves in readiness to receive it, and they believed them¬ 
selves commissioned to proclaim it."(l) 

With this statement in mind, our consideration of the 
development of monotheism must begin with E. We find in 
the Covenant Code moral teaching that was on a par with that 
taught by many of the writing prophets; often surpassing 
others. The lextalionis was a revelation when the reader 
considers the context and background from which the teaching 
emerged. Tradition cried for unlimited vengeance along 
with Lemek: 

"Adah and Zillah listen to me, 

0 wives of Lemek hear what I say: 

The man who wounds me , him I slay, 

I slay a boy for a blow: 

If Cain be avenged seven times, 

Then seventy and seven times Lemek;"(2) 


(1) The Prophet and His Problems, p. 80. 

(2) Gen* 4:23-24. 

















. 








. . . 
















. 




- 


. ; . 














- 2 - 


E was a student of the need of his age* No man could have 
formulated and set down these laws without such consideratio 
for his fellow man* 


f ?If you lend money to any poor man of my people, 
you must not treat him as his creditor, nor 
must you exact interest from him."(l) 

"If you come across your enemy’s ox or ass 
wandering, you must he sure to take it back to 
him; if you see the ass of a man who hates you 
lying helpless under its load, you must not 
leave it all to him, you must help him to 
release the animal."(2) 

"For six years you may sow your land and gather 
in your crops, but every seventh year you must 
let the land alone, to lie fallow, so that the 
poor people may pick up something; anything 
they leave the wild animals can eat."(5) 

"For six days you shall labour, but on the 
seventh day you shall desist from work, that 
your ox and your ass may rest, and that the 
sons born to your female slaves and also the 
aliens in your employment may get refreshed."(4) 


His emphasis on the whole was moral even with regard 
to the reason for obedience to Yahweh’s law regarding the 
Sabbath day. In the estimation of E, Yahweh was the God 
among many foreign gods. Jacob commanded his household to 
worship Yahweh with the same thought of him in mind when 
he said: 


(1) Ex* 22:25 

(2) Ex. 23:4*5 


(3) Ex. 23:10-11 

(4) Ex. 23:12 







* 




. 

■ 





















. 










- 

, 






' 






' 

. 












„ 

■ 







- 3 - 


"Put away your foreign gods, wash yourselves 
clean, and change your clothing; let us move 
up to Bethel where I shall make an altar to 
the God who answered me in the hour of my 
distress and accompanied me on my journey."(1) 

The God to whom Jacob declared his allegiance was a God 

above the ordinary run of gods. He held supremacy over 

other tribal deities. This attitude fully recognized the 

existence of other gods than Yahweh. The tendency of the 

day was to place Yahweh on the same plane as foreign and 

Canaanite Baals and thus to minimize his place in the 

estimation of the people. No such inference could be made 

from the teaching of the Covenant Code. 

"Then he took the scroll of the compact and 
read it aloud to the people, who said, ♦What¬ 
ever the Eternal has ordered, that will we do 
obediently."(2) 

Amos and Micah, on the other hand, brought a message 
from Yahweh to a nation which was being exposed to foreign 
influences. The foreign policies of Ahab and Omri had 
encouraged the worship of other gods, especially those of 
Tyre, and had challenged the greatness of Yahweh in the • 
Hebrew mind, nmos came with a vision of the enlarged scope 
of Yahweh’s activity. Undoubtedly, he had visited the 


(1) Gen. 35:2-3 

(2) Ex. 24:7. 




' 

. 











* 




* 














. 





















. 





















- 4 - 


prominent cities of the land. He could not have made so 
scathing an attack on the civilization of his period had he 
not been a keen student of the tendencies of the time* 
Damascus, Philistia, Tyre, Edom and Moab all came under the 
impending judgment and punishment. Nor was Judah and 
Israel an exception. Yahweh demanded morality, not ritual, 
and all who were guilty regardless of nationality, kith or 
kin, could find the heavy hand of Yahweh’s justice upon 
them. 


"Your sacred festivals? I hate them, scorn them; 
Your sacrifices? I will not smell their smoke; 
you offer me your gifts? I will not take them; 
you offer fatted cattle? I will not look at them. 
No more of your hymns for me I 
I will not listen to your lutes* 

No, let justice well up like fresh water, 
let honesty roll in full tide."(l) 


With the realization that all men had sinned there 
came to Amos an international conception of Yahweh* It was 
a natural inference from the conviction that Yahweh was a 
moral God. Undoubtedly, Amos developed the broader point of 
view from the implications of a philosophy of life which 
demanded morality at the heart of the universe. But because 
the emphasis of his message weighed heavily on the moral, 
he did not grasp the true greatness of monotheism, although 


(1) Amos 5:El-24 













. 





















. 

. 






■ 


« 

















* 


. 













' 


























-5- 


this insight was inherent in his thought. Amos realized 
that Yahweh demanded moral action, hut he did not see that 
the foundation for this action lay in belief in ^ahweh 
alone ruling the whole world. It was only implied* 


Ho sea directed his attack with much the same strategy 
as Amos. He denounced the worship of other gods, and the 
immorality attached to the worship of the baalim. 


"My people ask a piece of wood to guide them, 
a pole gives them their oracles! 

For a harlot-spirit has led them astray, 

they have left their God for a faithless way; 

they sacrifice on mountain heights, 

and offer incense on the hills, 

below the oak, the terebinth, the poplar-- 

so pleasant is their shade. 

Thus your daughters play the harlot, 
matrons commit adultery."(1) 


Yahweh was not just a fertility god like the Baals. 
He was still the God who led them out of Egypt and who 
demanded moral and righteous living. 


" No fidelity, no kindness , 
no knowledge of God Tn the land ; 
nothing but perjury, lying, and murder, 
stealing, debauchery, burglary- 
bloodshed on bloodshed! 

Hence the land is woebegone, 
its denizens all droop; 
even the beasts and birds 

and the very fish within the sea are perishing."(2) 


(1) Hosea 4:12-13. 


(2) Hosea 4:1-3 











4 ■ 




l l 




, 




. 






' 




. 







I 

■ 
















-6- 


He was their God of the desert-trek. Those were the years 
of their honeymoon with Yahweh; years with a relationship of 
love and understanding. And a return to the "good old days ,f 
was the continual hope of the prophet* 

Policies with other nations were of no avail for 
Yahweh could wipe them out like a wild animal on the loose, 
despite the protection of others. 


"When Ephraim noticed his decay, 
and Judah his disease, 

Ephraim turned to Assyria, 

Judah to the great Monarch. 

But he cannot heal you , 
your disease he cannof cure ; 
for I am like a lion to Epkraim, 
like a young lion to Judah, 

I tear, I go my way, 

and none can rescue my prey."(l) 


The real problem lay in the heart of the people. They 
could not escape the inevitable unless they turned to 
Yahweh. 


" Come back to your God , 0 Israel, 
for your faults have made you fall. 

Take words, as you come back to the Eternal, 
saying to him: 

'All our iniquities forgive, 

and grant us now thy favour; 

let us bring thee flocks of the fold-- 

for in thee the forlorn finds pity. 1 2 "(2) 


(1) ' Hosea 5:13-14. 

(2) Hosea 14:1-2. 












-7- 


Hosea stressed the proper relationship between God and his 
people. This relationship was one of love and obedience to 
moral demands. In this alone was their hope for the future. 
Only Yahweh could serve them. And once again monotheism 
became inherent in a prophet’s teaching, but the emphasis 
of Hosea’s thought shielded its implications. Again the 
great truths of this insight lay dormant. 

Isaiah’s message came in the midst of further inter¬ 
national complications. He had a strict "hands off" policy 
so far as any of the foreign powers were concerned. 


"But the Eternal said to Isaiah, ’Go out, with 
your son Shear-yashub, to meet Ahaz at the top 
of the conduit from the upper reservoir, on the 
road to Fuller’s Field, Tell him, he must be 
calm, never quail, never be afraid of these two 
fag-ends of flickering torches, of Rezin and the 
son of Remaliah with their blazing fury."(1) 

Yet the greatest power in the world was not Assyria or 

Egypt or any earthly nation, but the power of Yahweh. 

"So the Eternal’s anger blazes against his people, 
he stretches out his arm against them, 
striking them till the mountains tremble, 
and corpses lie like dung upon the streets, 

And yet his wrath is not abated, 

his arm is stretched out still to strike."(2) 

The nations are no more than puppets In the hands of their 

master. 


(1) Isaiah 7:3-4. 


(2) Isaiah 5:25 











- 8 - 


"He signals to a foreign power, whistling for 
them irom the end of the earth; swiftly they 
come, speedily, none tired, none tripping, not 
a belt slack, not a suoe-string broken, arrows 
sharpened, bows all bent, horses 1 2 3 hoofs as hard 
as flint, chariot wheels like whirlwinds."(1) 

The actions of all worldly powers rested with the Will of 

Yahweh. 

"Woe betide this Assyria I 
He is my club in anger , 
the rod I wield in wrath ; 

I speed him against an impious nation, 
a people with whom I am wroth, 
bidding him plunder and spoil them, 
trample them down like mud in the street."(2) 

Even the internal troubles of individual nations outside of 

Israel and Judah could be attributed to Yahweh’s action. 

"I will spur on Egypt against Egypt, 

every man to fight his neighbour, fight his fellow, 

city against city, province against province."(3) 

Yahweh controls the natural forces upon which foreign people 

depend for their livelihood and material power. 

"The Nile shall be dried up, 

the river-bed shall be drained and bare, 

its branches shrivel and stink, 

the canals of Egypt dry up, 

reeds and rushes wither, 

the meadow grass all moulders, 

the green growth by the Nile is parched, 

it droops and disappears. 

The fishermen shall be woebegone, 
all who cast hooks in the Nile, 
all who spread nets in the stream; 


(1) Isaiah 5:26-28 

(2) Isaiah 10:5-6. 

(3) Isaiah 19:2. 

























c 





•* 

, 

, 






* 




. 























« 




. 

. 








- : 
- 

- 














- 9 - 


dressers of flax shall be at their wits* end, 
the weavers shall be daunted, 
and all the workers downcast*"(1) 

In the words of Buchanan Gray: 

"On one occasion Isaiah had been allowed to see 
Yahweh; but not every day, nor, so far as we 
know, ever again after the first occasion, did 
Isaiah see Yahweh as he bad seen Him then; yet 
what he had once seen he must have known to be 
always there, though by no means there alone; 
the power that ruled the world was Yahweh and 
Yahweh dwelt in Jerusalem--unseen, unheard, 
unrecognized even misunderstood, and the might 
of His quiet working utterly unsuspected by those 
whose ears were heavy and whose eyes closed, and 
whose heart was without misunderstanding; and 
dwelling there he was working out His plan, which 
would prove to be to the confusion and destruction 
of those who, regardless'of it and reckless of 
what was not seen, formed plans of their own, 
associating themselves with and trusting in 
flesh and not spirit, in what was human and not 
in what was divine."(2) 

Yahweh controlled the world. He was the only true and 
righteous God. He had revealed himself to Israel and 
guided her. The proper relationship with Him was a right 
attitude of mind and a complete trust in Yahweh following 
obedience to His Will. He did not need sinning Israel to 
manifest his glory. His glory filled the world. But his 
chosen one was Israel. He wanted to be the "Holy One of 
Israel", using Isaiah's favorite phrase--an ethical and 
moral God progressively revealing himself to the people 
of his choice* 


(1) Isaiah 19:5-10* 

(2) I.C.C. lxxxvii-viii 








. 

■ 

















- 10 - 


Here was monotheism in its purest form thus far. 

Yahweh was no longer confined nationally. Yet in the mind 

of Isaiah Yahweh’s primary concern was that He be brought 

into proper relationship with the people of Israel and not 

with the people of the world. 

"A remnant, a mere remnant of Jacob, shall 
come back to the Mighty God; for though your 
folk, 0 Israel, are like the sea-sands in 
number, only a remnant of them shall return; 
destruction is decreed, a flood of retribution 
for the Lord of hosts will carry out doom 
fixed and final over all the world."(1) 


In the estimation of Dr. Albright, the writers of 

Deuteronomy have reached pure monotheism. 

"The Deuteronominist avoids the inconsistency 
into which J and E sometimes fell by the use 
of pre-Mosaic or crude early Israelite matter. 

To him Yahweh is the sole God in heaven and ' 

earth, who must be wor sfalppe d as a s p 1rit 

without any visible foxmT tf \Z) 

Other scholars disagree. Kittel, in referring to the 

Deuteronomic code says: 

"There is no reason to believe that these and 
similar laws in their simplest form originated 
much later than the Mosaic period. We are 
justified, then, in believing that the book 
found in King Josiah f s time was a code of laws 
similar in many respects to the Book of the 
Covenant; also that it was near in point of 
time, but Intended for a different part of the 
country, probably for Judah."(5) 


(1) Isaiah 10:21-23. 

(2) From the Stone Age to Christianity, p. 244 

(3) Great Men and Movements in Israel, p. 323. 







































■ 
















- 11 - 


On the one hand it is impossible to agree with Dr. 

Albright. If Deuteronomy teaches monotheism then it 

naturally follows that all nations are equal in the sight 

] of Yahweh. rsut Deuteronomy states: 

"You are sons to the Sternal your God: you must 
not gash yourselves nor shave your foreheads for 
the dead; for you are a people sacred to the 
Eternal your God , and the Eternal has "chosen 

you to be his prized~~pQssessioi7^~out of all 

nations on the face of the earth."Tl) " ~ 


The Jewish creed has been sighted as the one great argument 
for monotheism, 

t n x n j T) ’ u'J tJv i) )»r J.y ->ui > smlij 

and has been translated by Jewish rabbles thus: 

"Hear, 0 Israel, Yahweh is our God, Yahweh is one.’ 1 2 3 4 5 
Driver says: 

f, The verse is a great declaration of monotheism." 

(in the sense both that there Is only one God, 
and also that the God who exists is truly one). (3) 

However, Dr. Moffatt translates the verse: 

"Listen Israel, the Eternal, the Sternal alone, 
is our God.”(4) 

And Dr. Meek in the American Translation renders the passage 

"Listen 0 Israel; the Lord is our God, the Lord 
alone."(5) 


(1) Deut. 14:1-2. 

(2) Deut. 6:4. 

(3) I.C.C. Deut. p. 90. 

(4) Moffatt f s Trnaslation, Deut. 6:4. 

(5) American Translation, Deut. 6:4. 

































. 


■ 










, 


















, 



. 

' v 

. 











. . 

In 

- 

. 






» 



. 

... 

■ 









- 12 - 


Hence, this , passage does not teach monotheism* It goes no 
further than the former prophets we have studied. 


On the other hand, to say with Kittel that it is a 

mere revived Covenant Code does not explain all the facts. 

Deuteronomy teaches individual responsibility to Yahweh. 

"Fathers shall not be put to death for their 
children, nor children for their fathers; 
everyone shall be put to death for hisown sin."(l) 

This insight cannot be found in the Covenant Code. It is 

something new even to the prophets. 


The final conclusion that must be drawn from D is 

that of Pfeiffer, who states: 

"There is no trace of monotheism in Deuteronomy 
outside of Chap. 4 (which is post-exilic)(2) 


The relationship between Yahweh and the individual 

became much closer in the teaching and experience of 

Jeremiah. As a mere lad he shrank from the task of a 

prophet. But the strength of Yahweh within him was more 

than a match for his lack of confidence. 

"Say not, you are too young; to whomsoever I 
send you shall you go, and whatever I command 


(1) Deut. 24:16. 

(2) Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 235. 


I 



























' 










. 








, 

. • 


* 














* 







- 13 - 


you, shall you speak. Be not afraid at the 

sight of them, for I am with you to succour you."(l) 

Any anger that motivated him was not personal anger in his 

estimation, hut righteous indignation on behalf of iahweh. 

He was Yahweh’s prophet. To oppose him was to oppose 

Yahweh himself. He thought of Yahweh from the international 

i point of view. 

"0 thou Eternal, my strength, my stronghold, my 
refuge in the hour of trouble, nations shall come 
from the ends of the earth to thee saying, f All 
the traditions our fathers inherited were lies, 
vain and profitless. f ”(£) 

Nor was Yahweh confined to the temple at Jerusalem. 

” Amend your inner life and doings, that I may 

dwell among you in the temple here. I) o' not 
rely on false phrases like, ’This is the Eternal’s 
own temple, his very own temple, his very own temple”. 
(3) 

It was possible for Yahweh to have compassion upon a 

foreign people and reveal Himself to them if they obeyed. 

”As for all my evil neighbors, who lay hands 
upon the heritage which I made over to my people 
Israel, I will tear them from theif land, ’ says 
the Eternal, ’and I will tear the house of Judah 
from their hands. But after I have torn them up 
I will relent and have pity on them, and put them 
back, every man of them on his own property and 
on his land. Then, if they are careful to learn 
the ways of my people and how to swear by my name, 
saying ’As the Eternal lives.” (just as once they 
taught my people here to swear by Baal), they 
shall be built up among my people; but if any of 
them will not listen, then I will tear up that 
nation, uprooting it,” says the Eternal.”(4) 


(1) Jeremiah 1:7-8. 
i (2) Jeremiah 16:19. 


(3) Jeremiah 7:4* 

(4) Jeremiah 12:14-17 

















. . 

- 













. 




. 






























• 














■ 

* 

' 















- 14 - 


But in the final analysis Yahweh was concerned with Israel 
and Judah. 

"Have you not noticed what this people are 
saying? They say that the Eternal has cast 
off his two chosen families; they say he no 
longer counts it a nation at all* What the 
Eternal says is this: f As surely as I 
created the day and night and fixed the 
frame of heaven and earth, so surely will I 
never cast off the race of my servant David, or 
fail to choose descendants of his to rule the 
race of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for I will 
restore their fortunes, in pity for them.'"(I) 

The only step made toward pure monotheism was the close 
relationship Yahweh wished to have with His people individ¬ 
ually and collectively. The individual relationship, 
especially, was an implication of pure monotheism which 
undoubtedly influenced Second Isaiah greatly. 

"No, this is the compact I make with Israel 
in the end; I will put my law within their 
hearts ; and 1 will be a God to them and they 
to me a people."(2) 


Such a teaching as this prepared the people for 
exile. It opened an entirely new life of prayer and 
meditation which would challenge a truly religious people. 
Yahweh was not confined to the temple. He was with them 
wherever they went although it might mean exile. What a 
blessing this thought must have been to the Second Isaiah. 
It was the seed-bed from which came his glorious belief 
in a purely monotheistic point of view. 

(1) Jeremiah 53:24-26. (2) Jeremiah 31:33. 

















. 

. 

















, 

- 








' 










- 







. 




' 



- 



. 








Chapter II 


THE BOOK AMD ITS PROBLEMS 











Chapter II 


THE BOOK AND ITS PROBLEMS 

Scholars in the past have found difficulty in re¬ 
conciling the various views with regard to the hook it self« 
Many have claimed the whole book, (1-66), was written by , 
Isaiah, the son of Amoz. C. C. Torrey has divided the book 
into two parts, 1-33; 36-39 and 34-35; 40-66. Others have 
attempted to separate the Servant passages 42:1-4, 49:1-5, 
50:4-9, 52:13-53:12 from the greater part of the writing. 
However, sound scholarship of the present dar supports the 
view of the essential unity of chapters 40-55 with the 
possible addition of chapter 35 which has been misplaced in 
the process of editing. Separation of the Servant passages 
leaves nothing but a descriptive shell and no sound 
conception of salvation, which in the end was the purpose of 
the writer. It is quite apparent that many scholars have 
come to the Book looking for difficulties and have found 
problems that were not there. To accept the Book (40-55) as 
it stands seems to be as good a working hypothesis as any 
other advanced and such a theory is backed by the actual 
chronological order of the manuscript. What more concrete 
evidence could we ask? For, until there is definite proof 
that the Book is not a unit, then it must be assumed that the 
manuscript is valid as we have it today. 










. 

- 

. 




■ 

- 


£ 





- , 

- 

. 








C- 

■ 



- 

. 














. 













- 16 - 


Again almost every conceivable hypothesis has been 
advanced in an attempt to determine who was the Servant of 
Yahweh. The various theories fall into two classes: I 

(a) The Servant as an individual, i 

(b) The Servant as Israel. ' 

Some scholars have said the Servant was a past or contem¬ 
porary character like Moses or even the Second Isaiah himseli 
Others have thought the Servant was a contemporary of the 
author. Again, the theory has been advanced that the Messial 
was the Servant of Yahweh and have applied the person of 
Jesus Christ as the proper interpretation. George Adam Smitl 
in the Expositor’s Bible conceived of the Servant as Israel 
with the exception of the last passage which applied to 
Jesus Christ. 

The great stumbling block to the hypothesis that the 

Servant was Israel throughout the four passages, has been the 

translation of 49:6. The Authorized Version reads: 

f ’And he said, ’It is a light thing that thou 
shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes 
of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of 
Israel: I will also give thee for a light to 
the Gentiles that thou mayest be my salvation 
unto the end of the earth.’” 

This translation makes the Servant some person or persons 
Dther than Israel. And modern scholars have pointed to out¬ 
standing translations that support them in their contentions. 










. 








































* 

. 















- 17 - 


Dr. Moffatt renders the passages thus: 

"The Eternal says, ’This too slight a service 
to set the clans of Jacob up again and restore 
Israel’s survivors. I will appoint you to bring 
light to the nations, that my salvation may 
reach the world’s end.”’ 

However, the proper translation reads: 

"It is too lightly esteemed a service, he says, 
for .you, being my servant, only to have me rise 
up the tribes of Jacob, and only to have me 
restore the preserved of Israel, so I will make 
you a light to the nations in order that my 
saving power may reach out to the ends of the 
earth." 

In this rendering, Israel alone, could be the Servant, and 
the translation is supported by American scholars. Dr. 
Gordon in the American Translation of the Bible has inter¬ 
preted the passage thus: 

"Ee says, ’It is too slight a thing for you 
being my servant, that I should but raise up 
the tribes of Jacob, and restore the survivors 
of Israel; so I will make you a light of the 
nations, that my salvation may reach to the end 
of the earth.’" 

Nevertheless, Dr. Moffatt has been entirely convinced by the 
theory that the Servant was Israel. To such an extent, in 
fact, that he has added the word J.YIUT wherever there 
might be doubt. In chapter 53 :£ there is no J .vi aT 
in the Hebrew text. Yet, Dr. Moffatt ieib obliged to add it 
in his translation. 

"Why Israel of old grew like a sapling, like a 
shoot springing from dry soil; he had no beauty 
to attract our eyes, no charm to make us choose 
him." 

































. 

























. 








; 

















• 


, 



, 





. 









- 18 - 


Final ly it is necessary to maintain a certain approach 
to the Book as a whole if the student is to discover the core 
of truth behind the colorful imagery. The Second Isaiah | 
was a great poet. Behind all his thought was a tremendous 
depth of experience., only those who have had the privilege 
of conversing with a Jewish scholar of conviction can 
appreciate how buoyant and exciting the new discovery was# 

We of the Western world are all too prosaic in our approach 
to the Bible as a whole, but our sin is the greater with our 
characteristic attitude to this prophet. We cannot compress 
his imagery and statements into neat scientific language, 
nor push his words to the last ounce of meaning. We are 
compelled to return constantly to the context and ask our¬ 
selves what is the truth. For to accept that he was a poet 
does not mean to infer that he was not a messenger of truth# 

Ee was a great thinker; probably the greatest theologian of 

■ 

pld Testament times. Many scholars today rank him among the 
highest. G. C. Torrey writes, ”he is supreme and unrivaled 
among the great poets of the world”. Dr. Pfieffer states, 
"the Second Isaiah is the Milton of Hebrew poetry. ’ Paradise 
Regained’ could well be the title of Isaiah 40-55”. 

“The Poet’s intense enthusiasm, forceful Oriental 
imagination, and burning passion lift him above the world of 
reality to the realm of fantastic dreams. He creates this 

















* 






. 














' 

. 






































* 

. 

* 






. 





















- 19 - 


Utopia by means of imaginative flashes and not like some of 
the later apocalyptic writers, according to careful 
architectural plans and elevations, nor, like the authors of 
the Priestly document, according to the juristic corollaries 
of theological principles. It is vain that one looks for 
logical sequence and arrangement in his poems, much less for 
a unified structure, such as Dante’s amazing architectural 
arrangement of the visible world. His book is an incoherent 
succession of ecstatic shouts, his thoughts are poured out 
glowing and fluid, like molten metal before it has hardened 
into a definite shape. Consequently, the dilemma posed by 
critics - is the work a unit or an anthology of separate 
poems? - is meaningless. In his rushing flow of words, in 
his passionate outbursts, a few identical great thoughts and 
hopes reappear constantly without national order, like stars 
©hinging intermittently through clouds carried onward by 
the wind."(1) 

Dr. Pfieffer believes that a good deal of the charact¬ 
eristic style is due to the influence of the writer of Job. 
Whether the Second Isaiah influenced Job, or Job the Second 
Isaiah, depends on the dating of Job. Pfieffer states that 
the most probable date for Job was in the time of Jeremiah. 
To speculate as to the date is nothing but intellectual 


(1) Introduction to the Old festament, 


P- 


465 


































. 













- 





. 




' 

. . 






















-20 


gymnastics in this situation, because we have no facts 
behind the theory. -However, the progression or otherwise, 
of thought might give us a clue as to the dating of Job 
with regard to the Second Isaiah. i he date of the Second 
Isaiah, with other scholars, he has set at 540-520. 

Pfeiffer, again, states that "Monotheism and Israel’s 
prophetic, -- nay atoning — mission to mankind are the two 
cornerstones which the Second Isaiah provided as the basis 
of three universal religions of salvation destined to spring 
eventually from his teaching, Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam.” The question, then, that follows is this. Which 
conception would come first in the progression of thought -- 
monotheism or the problem of suffering in the face of a 
doctrine that God prospered the righteous and punished the 
Wicked? Surely the latter problem would come in the wake of 
a pre-established monotheism. If this is accepted, then any 
relationship between Job and the Second Isaiah was the 


result of the influence of the latter on the former writer. 
If we place Job in the fifth century, we are in a good 
company of scholars. G. F. Moore, S. R. Driver, G. B. 
Gray, M. Buttenwieser, and A. S. Peake and others all date 
Tob around 400 B.C. 
























Si* 












, 
























' 








. 










Chapter III 


BACKGROUND AND OCCASION OF THE MESSAGE 















Chapter III 


BACKGROUND AND OCCASION OF TEE MESSAGES 

In dealing with the background of the Second Isaiah it 
is necessary to consider the teaching and the work of 
Jeremiah, his great predecessor. Jeremiah’s public ministry 
had covered four dramatic decades (626-586)* He had been 
closer to the pulse of his nation than any other of his 
contemporaries. The prophet had witnessed the invasion of 
the Scythian hordes, and the early totterings of the once 
powerful Assyrian nation after the death of its last great 
sovereign, Ashurbanipal (625). Nineveh, the great stronghold 
of Assyria, had fallen in his day (612). The Medes had 
liquidated the remainder of the Assyrian army at Earan (609). 
When Pharaoh Necho of Egypt attempted to come to the resuce 

of the Assyrians and had crossed Palestine on hiis way, 

j 

Josiah attempted to intervene and was defeated and slain at 

Megiddo. Finally, Necho himself was crushingly defeated at 

| 

the battle of Carchemish and Nebachadnezzar, the crown prince 
of Babylon, was left in full control (605). Palestine had 
become a part of the Neo-Babylonian empire. 

All this panorama of events was the background of 
Jeremiah’s prophetic life. From the beginning to the end he 
remained true to his convictions. Ee prophesied the 










' 




■ 




















. 


' 


- 


. 










* 


~ 













































- 22 - 


captivity of the Jewish people ana an exile of seventy yearsc 
When invited to go into captivity and comparative ease, he 
had decided to remain with the "poor figs" in Jerusalem* 


And yet, in the midst of all these discouraging 
circumstances, Jeremiah was hopeful of a new day. He 
considered the people of the exile as the "good figs"* They 
showed some promise; 

"I will look to their welfare, I will bring them 
hack to this land. I will build them up instead 
of pulling them down, I will plant them instead 
of pulling them up; I will give them a heart to 
understand that I am the Eternal, and they shall 
be my people. I will be a God to them, when they 
return to me with all their heart." (1) 

All this heritage had come to the Second Isaiah. The life 
and work of Jeremiah had greatly influenced him. Character¬ 
istic phrases of Jeremiah’s thought constantly cropped up 

*■ 

in his message. At the outset he used one of Jeremiah’s 
favorite thoughts* 

"Speak to the heart of Jerusalem and call to 
her, that her time of service is ended that 
her guilt is paid in full, that she has 
received of the Lord’s hand double for all 
her sins."(2) 

His moral and religious ideas were either developments of 
Jeremiah’s or inspired by the former prophet. 


(1) Jeremiah 24:6-7. 

(2) Isaiah 40:2 (American Translation) 



































- 






< 

* 



























. 

* 

, 

, 

. 



' 




■ 













- 23 - 


According to Jeremiah the situation of the people in 
exile allowed relative freedom and prosperity. But the 
people of the Second Isaiah*s time were homesick for their 
old land. The triumph of Batylon during Jeremiah* s day was 
considered the Will cf Yahweh in the eyes of that prophet. 

It could, however, he misconstrued when the exiles saw the 
wealth, luxury and apparent prosperity of the gods of 
Babylon. Yahweh prospered the righteous and punished the 
wicked. But the righjeous were exiles and Yahweh seemed to 
have fled to the uttermost parts of the earth in the face of 
Bel and Nebo • 

The Second Isaiah saw light through the clouds that 
surrounded their present situation. He had watched closely 
the growth of the Persian empire and the extension of power 
under the leadership of Cyrus the Great. All of Israel* s 
despair had been built up on the continued strength of the 
Babylonian empire. How the tables were turning, and a new 
day dawned. Still there was a great task to be done. How 
were the Jewish people to be awakened from their slumbers of 

hopelessness? What new conception would arouse their 

t-ht 

spirits and put A faith anew in God? 

**Faced with a dejected mental attitude, the 
Second Isaiah was spurred to action. Being a 
thinker and a poet, rather than a prophet, he 






































■ 

. 





























* 



























composed a book. His spiritual epic not only- 
inflamed the faith of Israel, but surpassed all 
other writings of the Old Testament, not 
excepting the Books of Job and Daniel, in its 
influence on mankind. Beaching the highest level 
of Old Testament religion, he passed on the 
tordh to Christianity and to the world. By 
not only dispelling the doubts of his contem¬ 
poraries, but by formulating religions and 
theological principles of universal validity, 
he endowed his words with permanent significance 
(i) 


(1) Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 471. 


s 

j 

j 

j 












Chapter IV 


HE WORLD VIEW 














Chapter IV 


THE WORLD VIEW 


The Second Isaiah’s conception of Reality was -fessr 

Monotheisms* x he words of his God, "I am an everlasting God, 

the maker of the world from end to end" provided a guiding 

principle for life. This was the Ultimate. Herein lay his 

World View, •‘•he end of man became the Majesty of God. 

Emphasis was removed from the finite ego, man, to the 

infinite Ego, God. Indeed man appeared worthless apart from 

the Ultimate Reality of life. 

"Hark, there is one calling, ’Cry! 1 I ask, 

’What shall I cry? 1 This: that all men are 
grass, and all their glory like a flower in 
the field; grass withers and flowers fade, 
because the breath of the Eternal blows upon 
them; grass withers and flowers fade, but 
our God’s promise stands forevermore."(1) 

. 

Even the language of his day seemed to lack the 
breadth of meaning which he intended to convey by the 
presentation of the new World View. Words like 0 > W 

which had a stereotyped, common-place significance took on a 

jnew connotation through his literary style so that a more 

■ 

adequate medium of thought might be provided. Consideration 
of this word 0 n W indicates it was used eight times 


(1) Isaiah 40:6-8. 









-• 

* 

, 

” e 

- 




' 

, 











- 



- 26 - 

without suggested changes in reading, in chapters 40-55. 
Jeremiah used the term in a specific sense. 


"The day of havoc strips from Tyre and Sidon 
any support still left them; for the Sternal 
will make havoc of all left upon the coast 
( \Y )". (1) 

P used the form in Genesis referring to those who 

lived next to the sea. 

"The descendants of the lonians were Elisha, 

Tartessus, Cyprus and Rhodes, from whom the 
seaboard ( *’ ,y ) nations spread."(2) 

Second Isaiah brings new content into the word, giving it 

a breadth of meaning that cannot be found in earlier writings 

The translation of the Authorized Version lost somewhat this 

new connotation when they used the word "isles". For 

example: 

"Behold the nations are as a drop in a bucket, 
and are counted as the small dust of the 
balance; behold, he taketh up the isles 
( 0",V ) as a very little thing."(3) 

Far greater justice is done to the translation and the 

parallelism by Dr. Moffatt. 


(1) Jeremiah 47:4. 

(2) Genesis 10:5. 

(3) Isaiah 40:15. 






- 

. 

- 

« 

























t 










- 27 - 

"Why the nations are a mere drop in the bucket, 
no more to him than dust upon a balance I He 
lifts lands ( Q 7 7 .V ) like a straw. "(1) 

The key to the true meaning of the word results from strict 

observance of the parallelism. In one of the passages the 

following varied translations are given: 

"Listen, 0 Isles ( 0 T ’,Y ) unto me; and 

hearken ye people, from afar. "(2) 

"Listen, you waste-lands ( 0** X ), to me; 

hearken you people afar!"(3) 

"Listen, to me, shores afar ( O 7 7 X ), 
distant races, hearken!"(4) 

The words used parallelly are Q 7 'X on the one hand, 
and pini/J O'AX i on the other. The only 

adequate translation for the latter phrase is "distant people 
or races". But this is hardly parallel with either "isles" 
or "coast-lands". Dr. Moffatt has given a very adequate 
translation and has done justice to both the parallelism and 
the significance of the use of U ' * V . Professor 

Peake has translated: 

"Hearken ye far lands to me, and listen ye 
distant people."(5) 

rndeea one Second Isaiah was so imbued with the new scope of 
his experience of Yahweh he undoubtedly found tremendous 


(1) Isaiah 40:15. ' 

(2) Isaiah 49:1 (A.V.). 

(3) Isaiah 49:1 (American). 

(4) Isaiah 49:1 (Moffatt). 

(5) The Problem of Suffering in the Old Testament, p. 45. 





























■ e 








! 




. 

* 
















- 28 - 


difficulty in adequately expressing his feelings with the 
old terms which were bound and limited by past usage. 
Accordingly, it would be wise to concentrate on the 
possibility of new connotations, watching the parallelism 
which he used, rather than doggedly maintaining literality. 


Nor, according to the prophet's World View, was there 
any hope of man outside of God*s will regardless of power 
or pelf. 

"Be brings nobles down to nothing, he ruins 
rulers of the world -- scarcely planted, 
scarcely rooted in the earth, at a puff from 
him they wither, the storm sweeps them off 
like straw."(1) 

But when man became reconciled to God, and became willing 

to accept God's will all things were possible. 

"Young men may faint and weary, the strong youths 
may give way, but those who wait for the Eternal 
renew their strength, they put out wings like 
eagles, they run and never weary, they walk and 
never faint."(2) 


All this message of high hope and boundless possi¬ 
bility for the future sprang from the Second Isaiah's con¬ 
ception of Yahweh. The transcendent glory and majesty of 
God had come down as a heritage. There was nothing new or 
phenomenal regarding this truth. But with it came the tre¬ 
mendous insight that the majestic glory of Yahweh alone was 

(1) Isaiah 40:23-24. 

(2) Isaiah 40:30-31. 




























5 
t 

. 










■ 






- 











« 



■ - ? 







29 - 


supreme over all the earth, he was no longer just a God 
of the Israelite nation living in the temple of Jerusalem 
hut he was the God of the world without question or equal 




i 












Chapter 7 


THE WORLD 7IEW AND ISRAEL 








Chapter V 


THE WORLD VIEW AND ISRAEL 

The immediate practical question which arose in the 
prophet’s mind was the reconciliation of the World View with 
the teaching of the former prophets and religious leaders, 
namely, that Israel was the chosen people of Yahweh. At the 
outset he re-emphasized the teaching that Israel was the 
chosen of God# 

The Second Isaiah admitted that Yahweh had poured out 

His anger upon Israel. They had been disobedient to the law 

and the prophets who had gone before them. She had now 

received double for her sins. According to God’s character 

and purposes a new day was dawning. Israel was His chosen 

people from the beginning# 

’’But, 0 Israel my servant 
0 my chosen Jacob, 

0 race of Abraham my friend, 
whom I fetched from afar 
and called from earth’s far end , 
to whom I said, ’You are my servant, 

I have not rejected, I have chosen you*’”(l) 

He went even further. He reconciled the present 
circumstances of his people w T ith the doctrine of the chosen 
people of Yahweh. He believed the reconciliation could come 

Isaiah 41:8-9; 
















































* 







* 








4 







* ' • 

c • . . 




























. - 














- 31 - 

ahout only by faith in the eternal purpose of God which in 
burn involved an acceptance of the World View. 


"Fear not, for I am with you, 

I am your God, be not dismayed; 

I will strengthen, I will support you, 

I will uphold you with my trusty hand."(l) 


Yahweh was powerful enough to bring about what He 

willed. Ho one needed to fear the visible and material 

Forces about them. ihese were but products of material gods. 

"Then whom can you compare with God? 

What can you put beside him? 

A metal image! — that the workman casts, 
and the goldsmith gilds.”(2) 


Yahweh’s presence was everywhere evident. 

"lift your eyes, look up; 
who made these stars? 

he who marshals them in order, summoning each one 
by name. 

For fear of him, so mighty and so strong, not one 
fails to appear."(3) 

Moreover, He was loving, too. 

"The Eternal recalls you like a wife broken¬ 
hearted by neglect; 

*But a young wife 1 2 3 , your God asks, f how can 
she be thrown aside? 


(1) Isaiah 41:10. 

(2) Isaiah 40:18-19. 

(3) Isaiah 40:26. 






















-32- 

I did forsake you for awhile, but I will take 
you back right tenderly; 

I did turn from you in a rush of wrath, but with 
a lasting love i pity you, 
says the Eternal your redeemer*(1) 

All these characteristics would become manifest to Israel, 

He had promised to show forth his strong arm of might, his 

ever-abiding power, and love through the mouths of the 

prophets aforetime. If He did not act, then His claim f I am 

the Eternal your God, and there is none beside me 1 was a 

farce. From the first He had foreordained the progression 

of Truth in the minds of all peoples through the work of His 

Servant Israel, and He would carry it out. 

The prophet was convinced that iahweh had laid plans 
from the foundation of the world which involved the 
choosing of Israel for a special task. I‘he place of Israel 
according to the Tforld View was foreordained just as the 
^birth of Isaac in the past had been God’s will. Isaac’s 
birth uouia not be explained without the hand of Yahweh, nor 
could the doctrine of the chosen peorle of Yahweh have 
jmeaning without true Monotheism. 

The phrase ( | V) J 23 ) "f rom. the womb” is 

jfound in but two places outside of the writings of the 

- 

Second Isaiah. Hosea used the phrase only once, 

(1) Isaiah 54:6-8. 











, . 

, 

• • 


' t : 

■ 












■ 

' 


















- 






























. 


■ 







. 













- 33 - 


”Sphriam’s glory, ’tis gone like a bird -- no 
births, no mothers, no conception anymore! 

Even though they beget children, I will slay 
the darlings of their womb ( ).”(1) 

This use, however, had no special implication in this 

context, although it came earlier than the works of Second 

Isaiah. 


The only other place the term appears is in the 


Psalms. 

”1 have leant on thee from my birth, ’twas thou 
didst take me from my mother’s womb ( ^ vj, £> ).”(2) 

Buttenwieser in discussing this use writes: 

’’The phrase ’from the time of my birth’, or 
’from the moment I left my mother’s womb’, is 
found as a figure for the infancy and origin of 
the nation in prophetic literature.”(3) 

A further reference is made to the use in this psalm: 

”It is significant to note that he (the author) 
borrowed the two first figures ' U X ] 17J2 
0 Till] as well as ] o Jl A of the 

parallel lines in Psalm 71:5 from Deutero 
Isaiah.”(4) 

We are left, then, with the connotation that the Second 
Isaiah gave to the word if we are to gain an adequate 


(1) Eosea 9:11. 

(2) Psalm 71:6. 

(3) The Psalms, p. 572. 

(4) The Psalms, pp. 591-2. 










. 

. 

. 


. 















* 







- 34 - 


interpretation of its meaning. Undoubtedly he intended to 
make reference to the birth of Isaac as told in Genesis and 
the attendant promise: 

"Those who bless you, I will bless, and anyone 
who curses you, I will curse, till all the nations 
of the world seek bliss such as yours."(1) 

The portion "till all the nations of the world seek bliss 

such as yours" appears five times in the Old Testament: 

Genesis 12:3, 18:18, 26:4, 28:14, 22:19. In the passages 

12:3, 18:18 and 28:14 , the niphal was used 

which could be translated either reflexively or passively. 

The King lames translators chose to give this rendering: 

"And in thee shall all the families of the earth 
be blessed." 

However, scholars found that in two instances, Genesis 22:18 
and 26:4, the hithpael was used ( 7 3 1 JJ S) 71 ? ), which can 

be translated only as the passive. Sound scholarship, thus, 
'demanded that the hithpael rule the cases of doubt, and Dr. 

Moffatt has translated accordingly even though the passage 

. 

icould be rendered reflexively. 


It was likely that the Second Isaiah went back to this 
passage when using the phrase "from the womb". He found 
niphal and gave the passage exegesis suited to his theory of 
the place of Israel in the salvation of the world. Israel 


ITT Genesis 12:3 
















' 




’ 








■ 






. 

. 







































- 35 - 


ha d come from the very heart of Yahweh according to His will 

and had been born to that end that they might be the means 

whereby the nations of the world would be blessed and 

achieve his planned salvation, For salvation was eternally 

ordained by Yahweh in the plan of the universe. 

"Look up to the skies above, look down upon the 
earth; for the skies like smoke shall vanish, and 
the earth wear out like a robe; the world itself 
shall crumble, and its dwellers die like gnats; 
but my deliverance endures for ever, my triumph 
knows no end."(l) 

As we have seen, the new World View was the Second 

Isaiah*s abiding conviction. It had affected every phase of 

his thinking. x he motive behind Yahweh 1 s plan of salvation 

according to Exekiel had been selfishness. 

"This word from the Eternal further came to me: 

’Son of man, when the Israelites lived in their 
own land, they polluted it with their practices; 
to me their practices were as loathsome as a 
woman’s menstruous discharge; so I vented my fury 
upon them for drenching my land with bloodshed and 
polluting it with their idols; I scattered them 
among the nations till they were dispersed over the 
world; I punished them for their practices. But it 
lowered my sacred honour to have them scattered thus 
among the nations; for people sneered, ’These are 
the Eternal’s people, and yet they are driven out 
of the land!’ How 1 had some concern for my 
sacred honour thus lowered by thedispersion of 

the Israelites, So tell the Israelites that this 

is what the Lord the Eternal has to sayL It is 


(1) Isaiah 51:6. 




























- 36 - 


not for your sakes, 0 Israel, that l take action , 

but for the sake of my own sacred honour which 

has been lowered by your dispersion among the 

nations."(l) ' 

V/as this the motive of Yahweh in the eyes of the Second 
Isaiah? Although his heritage answered "yes", his World 
View emphatically denied this relationship between God and 
man. Nevertheless, there are scholars today who stace that 
the Second Isaiah made no advance in this respect. Dr. 
Pfeiffer writes: 

"Jehovah cannot permit the heathen to destroy his 
people lest their gods be deemed superior to him¬ 
self and lest he be discredited in the eyes of 
the nations. How could the sole God in existence 
allow his glory to be given to another and his 
praise to the heathen gods, who are nothing but 
graven images? But at present, while Israel is 
taken away for nought, the foreign rulers f howl f 
and Jehovah T s name is blasphemed. Therefore, for 
his own sake, for his own honor, Jehovah must 
rescue his people."(B) 

To substantiate his claims, the author sights the 
following passages: 

"For long I have said not a word, I have restrained 
myself, but now will I break out, like a woman in 
labour, panting and gasping; mountains and hills 
I will lay waste, drying up all their herbage, 
rivers I will turn to dry land, pools of water 
will I empty; and I will bring the blind upon 
their way, guiding them by paths they never knew, 

I will turn darkness into light before them, and 
the rough places into a plain. This will I do, 

I promise, I will not leave it undone. Shame 
shall cover all who trust in carved idols, who 

TD Ezek. 36:16-23. 

(2) Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 473. 

















* 



- 






- .. 






. 

■ 

. 

. 

: 








■ 




•<L 

A ■ ’ • 

. 




















- 37 - 


say to metal images, ’you'are our gods.’"(l) 

,T Yet it is I who (for my own sake) blot out 

your ill deeds, I put your sins out of my mind. "(2) 

"For my own honour I defer my anger, I gain praise 
for my pity, sparing you; I purged you, nothing 
came of it, testing you in the furnace all in 
vain. 11 (3) 

The first passage has been very aptly entitled by 
the American Translators, "The Intervention of the Lord". 

But is the intervention for the sake of Yahweh? Neither 
the context nor the text substantiates this view. Yahweh 
Is attacking idolatry on two counts. In the first place 
idols are impotent to help the people. Secondly such 
worship blinds men and degrades them morally and spiritually, 
Ihe motive for action is that new light is to be shed. "I 
will turn darkness into light before them, and the rough 
places into a plain." Schleiermacher once wrote, "He who 
Degins by loving Christianity better than Truth, will 
proceed by loving his own sect or church better than Christ¬ 
ianity, and end in loving himself better than all". 

Yahweh is in the unique position, according to the Second 
Isaiah, that He and the Truth are one. Can it be termed 
selfishness then, if Yahweh says, "I do this for the sake of 

(1) Isaiah 42:14-17. 

(2) Isaiah 43:25. 

(3) Isaiah 48:9-10. 
























, : 

. 












•• 




. 






. 


















- 38 - 


.ny own honor”? Could Yahweh have such a World View and love 
limself more than that for which he stood in the world? 

The second and third passages are considered to he 
Interpolations by Dr. Moffatt and he has placed them in 
louble brackets, what are the reasons for this conclusion? 
The basis of the whole of the Second Isaiah’s philosophy 
rests on the belief that Israel and the peoples of the world 
are precious in the sight of Yahweh. Tt He feeds his flock 
Like a shepherd and gathers them in his arms. Into the 
weary he puts power, and adds new strength to the weak. Fear 
aot I will help you, fear not puny Jacob, petty Israel, I 
will help you, your Champion is the Majestic One of Israel. 
When poor, forlorn people vainly seek for water with tongues 
that are parched by thirst, 1 the Eternal will answer them. 
3an a woman forget her infant, forget to pity her bate? 

Yet even were a mother to forget, never will I forget you. 
Shout for joy, 0 heavens, rejoice 0 earth. 0 hills burst 
into songJ For the Eternal has consoled his people and 
pitied his forlorn folk!” All these passages point to one 
principle alone, the eternal love Yahweh has for Israel 
md for the nations if they will repent and turn to him. 

Et is impossible to reconcile these words with the diamet¬ 
rically opposite view expressed in the two passages quoted 







« 

, 














. 


, 

, 






' 

. 

. 

I 
i 











-39- 

by Dr. Peiffer. The preponderance of evidence throughout 
the text rests with an attitude of love. This principle 
is the basis of the scheme of salvation. Hence, Dr. Moffatt 
has concluded that interpolations have been made in the 
light of later theological views. And he has consistently 
maintained this attitude with many similar phrases and 
passages, for example: 

"Knowing you were obstinate, stiff-necked as 
iron with a brazen brow."(l) 

"Knowing how faithless you are, utterly, how you 
have been rebellious from your birth."(2) 

"But you who kindle strife, who set the world 
ablaze, begone to your flames all of you, to the 
firebrands you have lighted! This is your fate 
from me, to lie in torments."(3) 

"She has none to guide her, none of all her 
children; none to take her by the hand, of all 
the sons she reared."(4) 

In the New Testament, Jesus said, "I am the Way, the 
Truth, and the Life." We say that he was speaking of the 
Will and the plan of Bod, his Father. Just so Yahweh was 
attempting to poiht the way to Truth through the mediation 
of his Servant Israel. Being identified with Truth, Yahweh 
could have said without inconsistency or selfishness, but 

Jl) Isaiah 48:4. 

(2) Isaiah 48:8. 

(3) Isaiah 50:11. 

(4) Isaiah 51:18. 









. 


* 





. 



* 


- 

' 








. 








. 







, 


. 







. 










* 

■ 

, 










- 40 - 


with the fall spirit of love and fatherly pity the words of 
Marc Connelly: 

”Dat’s about enough. I’s stood all I kin from 
you. I tried to make dis a good earth. I 
helped Adam, I helped Noah, I helped Moses, an 1 
I helped David* What’s de grain dat drew out 
of de seed? Sin! Nothin 1 but sin throughout 
de whole world. I f ve given you ev’y chance. I 
sent you warriors and prophets. I’ve given you 
laws and commandments, an’ you betrayed my trust. 
Ev’ything I’ve given you, you’ve defiled. Ev’y 
time I’ve fo ’given you, you’ve mocked me. ^n’ 
now de High Priest of Israel tris to triffle wid 
my name. Listen, you chillun of darkness, yo’ 

Lawd is tired. I’m tired of de struggle to make 
you worthy of de breath I gave you. I put you 
in bondage ag’in to dure you an’ you' worse dan 
you was amongst de flesh pots of Egypt. So I 
renounce you. Listen to the words of you’ Lawd 
God Jehovah, for dey Is de last words you’ ever 
hear from me. I repent of dese people dat I 
have made and I will deliver dem no more.”(1) 

Dr. Pfeiffer has stated that the role of Israel 
according to the new World View presented the prophet with 
three major problems: 

”If Jehovah’s ability and willingness to help human 
beings In their distress is admitted, then, the 
future of Israel is no longer in doubt, provided 
that Jehovah’s abiding loyalty to his people can 
be demonstrated convincingly. This is, however, 
the crucial point. At the time several objections 
were probably raised by disgruntled Jews against 
tne nope of Jehovah’s triumphant intervention in 
behalf of Israel. The unhappy situation of the 
Jews, particularly in Judea, seemed to indicate 
that Jehovah was either indifferent or hostile 
to the Jews. In the second place, the new notion 


(1) The Green Pastures, p. 155. 
















































. 


■ 


. 
























- 41 - 


that Jehovah was the Creator and the God of all 
the nations was'not easily reconciled with the 
old notion that Jehovah was partial to Israel, 

And in the third place, one could wonder, if 
Israel was sufficiently free from wickedness to 
be worthy of being exalted by Jehovah, the God 
of justice, to a position of power and glory.”(1) 


Again, however, the prophet alluded to the teaching 

of their fathers. Just as Isaac had received the promise 

from Yahweh on account of the life of Abraham, Yahweh*s 

servant, accordingly, the world would receive the salvation 

of Yahweh by means of his servant Israel. 

"He then made his way up to Beersheba, and that 
very night the Eternal appeared to him, saying, 

*1 am the God of your Father Abraham: fear not, 

I am with you and I will bless you and multiply 
your descendants, for the sake of my servant 
Abraham.*”(2) 

Moreover, the term "servant”, according to the 
prophet necessitated a new conception in the minds of the 
Jewish people if they were to fully realize their true 
destiny. This new role of servant had been ordained by 
Yahweh in his plan for the world, and would become 
progressively known to them once Yahweh*s people became 
convinced that He alone was God. 


It would be well to trace, at this juncture, the 
development of the significance of the term "servant”. 

(1) Introduction to the Old Testament, p, 472. 

(2) Genesis 26:23-24. 










. 








. 




. 

















- 42 - 

The first use of the word in Biblical literature is found 
in the J Document. 

"A curse on Canaan I 

May he be a slave and thrall to his brothersJ”(1) 

The meaning conveyed was that of deepest serfdom; the 
lowest state any people could attain. The Authorized 
Version translated the phrase "a servant of servants". And 
the American Translators have retained somewhat the same 


form by rendering it "the meanest of slaves". 

The word, however, was also used as a position of 
privilege especially in connection with the practice of 
hospitality. ^‘his shade of meaning was applied to the 
relationship between ^ahweh and his people collectively and 
as individuals. 

"Bray sirs, if I have found favor with you, do 


not pass by 3 

rour servant; since you have come 

to your humb] 

Le servant, have a little water 


brought to wash your feet ; then lie down under 

the tree till I fetch a bite of food to refresh 
you; after that you can go on." (2) 


"Moses said to the Sternal, f But Lord,I am no 
speaker, I have never been, and I am not now, 
not even since thou hast spoken to thy servant. " {3) 


In Second Isaiah we find T J. H used twenty-one times, 
three of which Moffatt considers as editorial additions. 


(1) Genesis 9:25. 

(2) Genesis 18:3-5. 

(3) Exodus 4:10. 






















1 













■ 











* 




, - ' 





















- 43 - 


It denoted a very special relationship to Yahweh. The 
association between God and man was a new development of 
thought. Yahweh had willed that Israel would be his 
servant in the divine plan, heretofore the position of a 
servant of Yahweh was the desire of man toward the divine. 
But in Second Isaiah the relationship became the Will of 
Yahweh for jpankind. 

"Here is my servant whom I uphold, my chosen 
one, my heart’s delight, 

I have endowed him with my spirit to carry 

true religion to the nations." (1) 

Yahweh was Lord of all, the Mage Stic one of the universe. 

•it was according to His will that He should become manifest 

to man. ^his "breaking through" to the nations of the 

earth was done through the action of a people whom he had 

chosen from the beginning of history. Truly Yahweh had 

promised of old that Israel was called apart from the 

nations of the world. The compact in D had reiterated 

their chosen place in the eyes of God. 

"For you are a people sacred to the Eternal 
your God; the Eternal has chosen you to be his 
prized possession out of all the nations on the 
face of the earth. "(2) 

The prophets of a century before had considered Israel 
as "sons to the Eternal". However, according to the World 
View of this prophet, Israel was not chosen with a view' 


(1) Isaiah 42:1. 

(2) Deut. 14:2. 








. 

' 









. 


. 

. ■. 




. 




. 








■ 


■ 







- 












- 44 - 

to mere exaltation as Ezekiel thought. Israel was chosen 
as Yahweh's servant -- the medium of the world f s salvation. 
i‘he phrase ”my servant” and ”my chosen” were used in 
parallel• 

"But, 0 Israel my servant, 

0 my chosen Jacob, 

0 race of Abraham my fi*iend.”(l) 

"But now, my servant Jacob, 
my chosen Israel, listen.”(2) 

The chosen people was the servant, and in this role would 

be exalted. They had a mission to the nations and were 

witnesses of His glory. 

” x cu are my trusty witnesses, the servants I 
have chosen to own me, to believe me, to see 
that I am ever the same.”(3) 

”The Eternal now says, f Tis too slight a service 
to set the clans of Jacob up again, and restore 
Israel's survivors; I now appoint you to bring 
light to the nations, that my salvation may 
reach the world's end.”(4) 


What did the task involve? It was a quiet missionaary 
venture. No trumpets would blow. No armies would march. 
Nothing spectacular would come to pass. But the leaven of 
the spirit of Yahweh would silently but surely begin to^the 
world at large. 

IT) Isaiah 41:8. * — ~~ 

(2) Isaiah 44:1. 

(3) Isaiah 43:10. 

(4) Isaiah 49:6. 














‘ 










. 

. 



















, 











- 45 - 


"Ke shall not he loud ,and noisy, he shall not 
shout in public; 

he shall not crush a broken reed, nor quench a 
wick that dimly burns; 

loyally shall he set forth true religion, he 
shall not be broken or grow dim, 

till he has settled true religion upon earth, 
till far lands long for instruction 
from him*”(1) 

Accordingly a new working of the spirit of God which would 
demand a new relationship to Yahweh. 

"Yet think not of the far past, dwell not on the 
deeds of old; 

here is a new deed of mine springing to light -- 

have you no eyes to see it? 

I open a road through the desert, and rivers in 
a dry place, 

till the very wild beasts drink to my honour, 
jackals and ostriches!"(2) 

Y'hat new relationship resulted from the depth of the 
conviction within the souls of the people that Yahweh 
stood alone, no god beside him. 1 2 hen all things were 
possible, furthermore, the task of the servant of Yahweh 
demanded a faith in the unalterable decree which had been 
set forth in their earliest writings when a son had been 
promised to Sarah.- And a son had been born to her "after 
the custom of women had ceased with Sarah". The later 
prophets conceived of the plan of Yahweh being carried out 
despite the obstacles provided by natural law. lust so, 


(1) Isaiah 42:2-4. 

(2) Isaiah 43:19-20 









- 










. 









, 








- 




















- 46 - 


the Second Isaiah felt that Israel was called to this new 

task regardless of its apparent impracticability. Such a 

faith was an anchor in the storms of change. 

The Sternal called me from my birth, singled me 
out from my mother* s womb. 

He put an edge upoh my words, and covered me 
safe with his hand; 

he made me a polished arrow, and stored me in 
his quiver, telling me, *You are my 
servant by whom I will gain honour.* 

So I gained honour in the Eternal’s eyes, and my 
God was my strength. 

Finally, the task required patience in the face of suffering 

and humility. 1 his quality of humbleness in the final 

servant-passage has influenced many scholars in infer that 

the servant referred to is no longer Israel but an 

individual. Hr. Albright states: 

**The servant is the people of Israel, which suffers 
poignantly in exile and affliction; he is also the 
precious individual who atones for the sins of the 
many by his uncomplaining agony; he is finally the 
coming Saviour of Israel.**(1) 

However, it is admittedly possible that a nation could 
fulfill all three functions. After all, the purpose of the 
Book was to convince the Israelites of their place in the 
plans of lahweh. Why, then, defeat its purpose by attempt¬ 
ing to satisfy conceptions which we in a post-era would 
like to read into the content and meaning? No one would 
wisely deny that Jesus Christ did in a very remarkable way 


(1) From the Stone Age to Christianity, p. 255 . 












- 








. 






















* 








' 

\ 













. 




























- 47 - 

fulfill the task of the Servant as layed down by the 
Second Isaiah. But the prophet was not predicting five 
centuries ahead. Salvation was imminent. Cyrus was on the 
march. And the hope of the world was soon to be accom¬ 
plished. 

f, ^ike sheep we had. all gone astray, we had each 
taken his own way, and the Eternal 
laid on him the guilt of all of us. 

He was ill-treated, yet he bore it humbly, he 

never would complain, dumb as a sheep 
led to the slaughter, dumb as a ewe 
before the shearers. 

‘I'hey did away with him unjustly; and who heeded 
how he fell, torn from the land of 
the living, struck down for sins of ours? 

They laid him in a felon’s grave, and buried him with 
criminals, though he was guilty of no 
violence, nor had he uttered a false word. 

But the Eternal chose to vindicate his servant, res¬ 
cuing his life from anguish; he let him 
prosper to the full, in a posterity with 
life prolonged. 

Yes many shall hold rby servant blameless, since ’twas 
their guilt he bore. 

therefore shall he win victory, he shall succeed 

triumphantly, since he has shed his life¬ 
blood, and let himself be numbered among 
rebels, bearing the great world’s sins, 
and interposing for rebellious men/’(1) 


(1) Isaiah 53:6-12. 











Chapter VI 


PROOFS OF THE WORLD VIEW 













Chapter VI 


PROOFS OF THE WORLD VIEW 

The presentation of the World View would necessitate 
the setting forth of concrete evidences in the minds of 
the Gentile and lew alike. Foreign powers had their own 
gods. Bel was enthroned in Babylon, and had the power of 
that nation attributed to its guidance and leadership. The 
Moabites stood bowed before iCemosh. Bagon ruled in 
Philistia. By what right, then, did this prophet claim 
that Yahweh was the sole Ruler of the heavens anci the 
Earth. 

lithe first place the prophet pointed to history* 

Who would have dreamed that the power of Babylon could ever 
be overthrown? Which of their gods would choose a military 
leader from a foreign nation as the weapon in his right 
hand? Yahweh had prophesied great and wondrous things 
through the mouths of his prophets in the past. At this 
very moment an agent of his was on the move with his armies 
bringing to pass the inevitable plan of Yahweh and the 
downfall of Babylon with the release of Israel* 

"Who roused up from the east the man whom victory 
attends, 

Who lets him have nations as a gift and lays kings 
low before him? 

His sword drives them like dust, his bow like 























. 




. 















. 


. 





















































- 49 - 


chaff before the wind; 

He chases them, and passes forward safely, swiftly 
with feet that never touch the ground. 

Who brought this about, who did it? 

T Twas he who summons the generations from the 
beginning. 

1 Twas I the Sternal, I who am the first and at the 
last the same."(1) 

The Gentiles could not jump to the conclusion that Cyrus 

was a mere puppet in YahweMs hands. No, a Gentile leader, 

for the first time in history became elevated to the 

position of a friend to a heretofore Jewish God. 

fr Who says of Cyrus, f Ee is my friend, he executes 
my purpo se . 1 * 3 " (2 ) 

The relationship was not one of subservience and fawning 

obedience. Yahweh had welcomed Cyrus, and Yahweh alone gave 

him the victory that all people might knov/ He had called 

him to execute his purpose. 

"Thus the Sternal, the true God, hails Cyrus, whom 
he consecrates — whose right hand 1 have grasped, 
to terrify nations, to open doors before Him, to 
keep gates from being closed. I myself will go 
before you, levelling the mountains, I will 
shatter doors of bronze, and cut through iron 
bars; I will give you hidden treasurers, secret 
hoards; for f tis I the Eternal who call you by 
name, I the God of Israel. For the sake of my 
servant Jacob and of my chosen Israel I called 
you by your name; you know me not, but I delight 
in you. 1 am the Eternal; there is no one else, 
no God beside me. Kings I disarm, but you I arm, 
that, east and west, men may confess I the Sternal 
stand alone -- no god besides me — I form the 
light and make the darkness, I bring bliss and 
calamity; I the Eternal, the true God, I do it all". (3) 


(1) Isaiah 41:2-4. 

(2 ) Isaiah 44:28. 

(3) Isaiah 45:1-7. 









■ 

. 

, 







■ 


t 






- 







. 














. 















C ' < 







( 

. 




_ 








- 50 - 


,tij ave your gods a plan of redemption that parallels this,” 
asks the prophet? Could your idols have produced such a 
world plan of salvation? Have Bel, Dagon and Kemosh 
predicted these things? 

"Gather, all of you, and listen: which of your 
idols ever predicted this, that my friend Cyrus 
should work out my will on Babylon and the 
chaldaean line? I foretold it, f twas I called 
him, 'twas I brought him, I have prospered him. 

From the first I made no secret of it; ever 
since it began, I have been in it. It is the 
word of the Eternal your deliverer, the Majestic 
of Israel: I am the Eternal your God, training 
you for your good, leading you by the right way."(l) 

"From east to west all will eventually know that 
Jehovah is the only true God. fhe ends of earth 
should look unto God and be saved. To him will 
the pagans turn in confusion: individuals, kings 
and nations, (Sing unto Jehovah a new song, his 
praise from the end of the earth V "(2) 


Secondly, the Second Isaiah challenged the Gentiles 
from a theological point of view. What were idols to 
compare. They had been commanded to bring their arguments 
and debate their position. But how could the created 
thing measure up to the Creator! "Who measures the water 
in the hollow of his hand; who ruled the skies off with a 
span?" Or, "who held the dust of the earth inside a 
measure?" An idol? What utter folly! The inanimate thing 
had no existence beside Yahweh. Paganism and its false 
TD Isaiah 48:14-17. 

(2) Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 477. 































- 51 - 


gods depended on soothsayers, hut Yahweh confounded their 

diviners and sages. They looked to magic but they would 

find their women widowed and childless in spite of all 

their spells. The schemes of Yahweh could never be 

thwarted. He alone was supreme. If the Gentiles did not 

turn to God dire consequences would follow. 

"Therefore shall evil assail you, that you know no 
spells to avert, and mischief shall befall you, 
you cannot ward from you, and a sudden crash of 
ruin, you know not how to evade."(1) 


But the final basis of proof lay in the realm of 

prediction. Surely the God who could postulate future 

events, and who has foretold the past, was the One who had 

made the plan for the universe from the beginning. And 

Yahweh could substantiate his claim. 

"Let us hear what happened in the past, that we may 
ponder it, or show me what is yet to be that we 
may watch how it turns out: yes, let us hear what 
is coming, that we may be sure you are gods."(2) 

"Now, who predicted uus beforehand, who foretold 
it that we might hail it true? No one predicted 
it, no one announced it, not a word ever fell from 
you. f Twas I who first sent word of it to Sion, 
f twas I who sent the good news to ^Jerusalem. As 
for your idols, I see no one, not a prophet in 
their midst, to answer my inquiries! They are all 
an empty nothing, all they do is utterly inane, 
their metal images are futile and vain."(3) 


(1) Isaiah 47:11. 

(2) Isaiah 41:22-23 

(3) Isaiah 21:26-29 











- 











- 52 - 


Finally, the prophet was convinced that the plan of 

salvation was so wonderful that it lay beyond the most 

vague comprehension of other religious minds of the world. 

The Chosen people of this Cod, Yahweh, were being reduced 

to nothingness that the spirit of their Cod might abound 

among the nations of the earth. As the nations looked upon 

Israel, a despised nation, rejected, enslaved, and hated, 

a flash of insight would come to them that she was not 

suffering for her own wrong-doing. She claimed loyalty to 

the only true Cod, the Creator of the Universe. Even in 

her depth of sin, outside nations were the greater sinners. 

They had cast their pearls before idols. Lo, Israel was 

suffering for the nations of the world. Her suffering was 
th-e ir 

fhe means of. redemption. All peoples would stand wide¬ 
mouthed in astonishment and wonderment. And then shall 
they bow down in humble thankfulness before Yahweh and his 
Triumphant Servant, for all nations will have seen the 
saving-power of God through Israel’s vicarious suffering. 

ft A message from the Eternal, from Israel’s 
deliverer, Israel’s Majesty, to one scorned 
openly, whom nations loath, whom tyrants hold 
in thrall; kings shall start up at the sight of 
you, kings and princes shall do homage, since 
the Eternal aids you loyally, and Israel’s 
Majesty has chosen you.”(l) 


(1) Isaiah 49:7-8. 

















- 
















- 



















« 







< 

" 




. 





















- 53 - 


Coming out of a day of savagery, and intolerance, an age 
whem might was right, the breadth of view is almost 
incomprehensible. Transfer it to our day. Here was a 
message which said that the negroes of our Western Civil¬ 
ization would be the means of whit e-man ! s salvation. That 
the Ethiopians could be the saving power for the Eastern 
world. Thousands would laugh such a message to scorn even 
in our day of a supposedly Christian civilization. How 
much more baffling, then, for the foreign peoples of the 
Second Isaiah's time l What was stranger still was the fact 
that the plan of salvation demanded suffering and humiliatio: 
on the part of his servant in the days ahead. 

"I let them lash me back, and pluck my beard out ; 

I never hid my face from shame and insult. 

r i T be Lord, the Eternal, he will help me; so I 

am not confounded, I set my face like a flint, 
knowing I shall not be put to shame. He who 
will vindicate me is at hand; who dare oppose 
me? Side by side let us stand. Who dares to 
charge me? Let him draw near, 'The Lord, the 
Eternal, he will help me; who then can worst 
me? They shall all go to pieces like a robe 
consumed by moths."(1) 

"They will then confess that this Servant of 
Jehovah, loathsome of aspect and despised, a 
man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, was 
not divinely accursed, but was wounded for 
their transgressions and crushed for their 
iniquities, healing them with his stripes. 

Hehovah loaded him with the iniquity of all 
Gentiles; he was cut off from the land of the 
living and buried with the wicked although he 
was innocent. But because he bore the sins of 
many and .made intercession for the transgressors, 
Jehovah will somehow vindicate him and reward him 


(1) Isaiah 50:6-9. 













' 











» 





























- 

















- 54 - 

for his vicarious self-sacrifice."(1) 


(l) Introduction to the Old Testament, p. 478. 
















Chapter 71I 


TEE WORLD VIEW AND THE NATIONS 














Chapter VII 


THE WORLD VIEW AND THE NATIONS 


The purpose of the role of the suffering Servant and 

the effect of the World View found expression in a verse 

which Dr. Moffatt has translated: 

"I the Eternal have called you of set purpose, I 
have taken you hy the hand, 1 have formed you for 
the rescuing of the nations . 7 r TT~)' ~~~ 

The text actually reads: 

* 

~j i >3 pIDXl fT J ^,Vip T$?JT 

o* 7 yi 0 3 | j. A ,Y 1 ~fl?X 1 

Taken literally: 

I, Yahweh have called thee in righteousness, I 
have firmly grasped thy hand, and i have watched 
over thee, and I have given thee as a pledge to 
people and a light to nations. " ~™“ 

There is no suffix ♦’my". The phrases, "the people" and 

"the nations" are parallel. x hey are on an equal basis. 

The American translators substantiate this change. 

"I the lord have called you in righteousness, and 
have grasped you by the hand; I have Kept you, 
andhave made you a pledge to the people, a light 
to the nations." 


We have tended to narrow the scope of the Second 
Isaiah’s attitude toward nations other than Israel by 


IU Isaiah 42:6 













. 



■ 










. 














- 

. 














- 56 - 


pointing to some passages which seem to discredit a clear 

universalism. Peake writes: 

"Paul’s deduction of universalism from the unity of 
God, that if u od is one, He must be the God of 
Gentile as well as lew, was not indeed foreign to 
this prophet T s thought. But he had not grasped all 
that was involved in it, that there is no respect 
of nations with G 0 d, that He can have no favourite 
people. Hence his doctrine that Egypt, Ethiopia, 
and Seba, were to be given as a ransom for Israel, 
that their labours and merchandise should become its 
possession, that the nations should bring back the 
exiles, that kings should be their nursing fathers 
and queens their nursing mothers, that they should 
bow down to Israel with their faces to the earth, 
and lick the dust of its feet."(l) 

Nevertheless, the fact that the prophet had stated an 

unqualified universalism in the passage considered at the 

beginning of this chapter indicated he had truly grasped 

e 

the view, otherwise it would never have emerged from the 
national background. With this in mind how could other 
statements regarding the nations be reconciled* 


In the first place, all nations were only mere drops 
in a bucket, as insignificant as the dust that the gold¬ 
smith would blow off his balance in comparison to the glory 
of Hahweh. Lands were like chaff that the "wind driveth 
away". Wealth, power, and grandeur were nothing to compare. 
Yet Yahweh desired all people to know "true religion". 

What would defeat His purpose? x he prophet answered 

TT) The Problem of Suffering in the Old Testament, pp. 38." 





























. 










.. 


' 







t 

• 


















, 

' 




< 




. 

- 






























- 57 - 


"idolatry". He was firmly convinced that those who clung 
to their idols were opposing Yahweh, and ipso facto the 
plan for the world from the beginning of time. Idolatry 
had to go, as in our day the democratic nations believe 
that Nazism and Japanese aggression have to be suppressed 
in order to preserve liberty. The statement, "all who are 
enraged at you shall be defeated and confounded, those who 
quarrel with you shall vanish into nothing" was not an 
attitude toward nations themselves but the ultimate outcome 
if they persisted in their evil ways and attitudes, as 
Jesus would have said in a like situation, "ye cannot serve 
God and Mammon"* 


Secondly, the author is a poet, and we must never 

forget that we are reading poetry when we study the words 

of the prophet. Dr. Pfeiffer states: 

"In his enthusiasm our poet becomes unaware of the 
logical inconsistencies between his expression of 
hatred and contempt for the Gentiles and his 
expectation that they will soon be converted to 
the true God. On the one hand, the heathen are 
subordinated to Israel and have no value in 
comparison with the Jews; Egypt, Ethiopia and Seba 
are paid out as a ransom for the deliverance of 
Israel, the Gentiles have oppressed Israel without 
cause and will soon carry them, as if beasts of 
burden, back to Jerusalem, lick the dust of Jewish 
feet and become the chained slaves of Israel; no 
uncircumcised and unclean person will ever enter 
Jerusalem again. At the other extreme, the poet 
envisages the day in which every knee shall bend 
before Jehovah and every tongue shall swear in 



















- 

* 












. * 




































s 






























- 






























-58- 


his name. Our poet bequeathed, to Judaism the 
contradictory notion of Jehovah as both the King 
of the Jews and the sole universal God of all 
mankind." 

These are not two points of view. We must allow for 
poetic hyperbole. Of course, the prophet dreamed of the 
time when Israel would be restored. He could picture in 
his mind the nations coming to Israel in sackcloth and 
ashes. Why? Hot because they were worthy in the sight of 
Yahweh as against other nations. But because they had 
shown the way to true religion through their suffering, and 
brought the nations of the world to a knowledge of their 
Lord, the only true God. There was no more inconsistency 
in ^ahweh being the King of the Jews and the of mankind, 
than there was in the Christians claiming that God was the 
Father of Jesus, and the Father of mankind. 

Finally, it was only human for the Second Isaiah to 
be a product of his environment and to have these out¬ 
croppings of traditional thought from time to time. He 
prophesied in the throes of slavery and bondage. There may 
have been a sufficiency so far as the material benefits of 
life were concerned, especially in comparison with the life 
they had been forced to lead back in their homeland. But 
their pride had been broken and their spirits crushed. For 








. 




* 


















* 


. 

































. 


, < 




























-59- 


a Jew this had more significance than starvation. If 
bitterness, then, arose in the prophet’s heart at times, 
he was more to be commended than despised for having 
transcended personal passions and conceived of a universal 
God. Even according to Paul, the Jew was first and the 
Gentile second, although in the end all were one. we have 
found that Jesus once said to the Syrophoenician woman, 

’’let the children (Jews) first eat all they want, for it is 
not right to take the children’s bread and throw it to the 
dogs (Gentiles).” 

there was no idea of Israel being exalted 

with the intention that she be a powerful nation. Her 

exaltation came because, as the Servant, she had exemplified 

true religion on the earth, rhs future of the Israelites 

lay in the following passage, so scholars have claimed. 

”Behold, my servant Israel, yet shall rise, he 
shall be raised on high; as many were appalled 
once at his fate, kings shuddering at his doom, 
so many a nation shall yet do him homage , with 
kings in silent awe, for they sIialTHiie what they 
were never told, a sight unheard of.”(l) 

The word which Moffatt has translated ”shall do him homage” 

was J17 7 hiphil from the root ft J J . Brown, 

Driver, and Briggs used this passage in their lexicon as an 


(1) Isaiah 52:13-15. 












































•; 


























' 

. 

t 

' 


















. 













- 60 - 


example of meaning and gave it as follows: "so shall he 
cause to leap (i.e. in joyful surprise — startle) many 
nations." There was no idea of subservience, but an over¬ 
whelming emotional experience on account of the new spirit 
which was to come to them when they saw how the life of the 
Servant had pointed to the only true God. Hor was this 
teaching more contradictory or less universal than that of 
the writer of Hebrews when he said: 

"Therefore, let us too, with such a crowd of 
witnesses about us, throw off every impediment 
and the entanglement of sin, and run with 
determination the race for which we are entered, 
fixing our eyes upon Jesus, our leader and example 
in faith, who in place of the happiness that 
belonged to him, submitted to a cross, caring 
nothing for its shame, and has taken his seat at 
the right hand of the throne of Cod."(l) 

Or that of Paul who wrote: 

"Though he possessed the nature of God, he did not 
grasp at equality with God, but laid it aside to 
take the nature of a slave and become like other 
men. When he had assumed human form, he still 
further humbled himself and carried his obedience 
so far as to die, and to die upon the cross. That 
is why God has so greatly exalted him, and given 
him the name above all others, so that in the 
name of Jesus everyone should kneel, in heaven 
and on earth and in the underworld, and everyone 
should acknowledge Jesus Christ as Lord, and thus 
glorify God the Father*"(2) 

Transcending all the selfish strife of nations, and in face 


(1) Hebrews 12:1-2 (Goodspeed). 

(2) Philippians 2:6-11 (Goodspeed) 












- 61 - 


of all weakness and folly of mankind, above all hatred and 

Ditterness, the message of universalism rang clear and true 

Hearken to me, 0 peoples; 

0 nations, give ear to me l 

For instruction shall go forth from me, 

And my truth as a light to the peoples. 

Mj r deliverance shall draw near in a moment, 

My salvation is on its way; 

My arms shall judge for the peoples, 

The coast-lands shall wait for me, 

And on my arm shall they put their trust. 












Chapter VIII 


THE WORLD VIEW AND THE INDIVIDUAL 










Chapter VIII 


THE WORLD VIEW AND THE INDIVIDUAL 

L b 

History gave one great parallel ^ theological thought 
in the development of pure monotheism. Nine or ten 
centuries before the Second Isaiah a young Egyptian king 

d 

name§ Ikhnaton came to the throne. He broke away from the 
established religion of his day which still clung to poly¬ 
theistic traditions. He revolted against the priesthood 
and their ritualistic practices. All this was the effect 
of an insight into the universal character of God. He gave 
the New God a name, "Aton". A symbol was chosen for God. 

The traditional symbol had been a pyramid, but the symbol 
selected was the Sun-disk. "It was a masterly symbol, 
suggesting a power rising from its celestial source, and 
putting its hand upon the world and the affairs of men". 

A new capital was built for the city and was named 
"Akhetaton" meaning "Horizon of Aton". We have a number of 
hymns which picture the attempts of this young king and 
his associates to discern God in his unlimited power. 

"How manifold are thy works! 

They are hidden before men 
0 sole God, beside whom there is no other. 

Thoudidst create the earth according to thy heart."(1) 

(1) The Dawn of Conscience, p. 284. 














- 63 - 


"thy rays furnish vision to every one of thy 
creatures, 

Thy glowing hue brings life to the hearts of men, 
When thou has filled the Two Lands with thy love. 

0 God, who himself fashioned himself. 

Maker of every land, 

Creator of that which is upon it: 

Sven men, all herds of cattle and the antelopes, 

All trees that grow in the soil, 

They live when thou dawnest for them, 

Thou art the mother and the father of all that 
thou hast made. 

As for their eyes, when thou dawnest, 

They see by means of thee. 

Thy rays illuminate the whole earth, 

And every heart rejoices because of seeing thee, 

When thou dawnest as their lord."(1) 

"In these hymns," writes Breasted, "there is an inspiring 

universalism not found before, either in the thought of 

Egypt or in that of any other country. It is worid-wide 

in its sweep. x be king claims that the recognition of the 

Sun-god f s universal supremacy is also universal, and that 

all men acknowledge his dominion. On the great boundary 

stela likewise he says of them, that Aton made them ’for 

his own self; all lands, the Aegeans bear their dues, 

their tribute is upon their backs, for him who made their 

life, him whose rays men live and breath the air.’ It is 

clear that Ikhnaton was projecting a world religion, and 

endeavoring to displace by it the nationalism which had 
c 

preceded it for twenty centuries."(2 ) 


Moreover, the Sun-god was beneficent in his attitude 


(1) The Dawn of Conscience, p. £88. 

(2) The Dawn of Conscience, p. £89-90 




t 

c . 

, 

. 

' 

* 

< 



. 

■ 

. 

















- 64 - 


toward mankind and nature, ’’Thou art the father and the 
mother of all that thou hast made.” ■‘•here was a wondrously 
new revelation of God in the physical world, for the young 
ruler, and God became universally present. In the words of 
Breasted, TT Ikhnaton was a f God-intoxicated man’ whose mind 
responded with marvellous sensitiveness and discernment to 
the visible evidence of God about him”. 

Ikhnaton, however, not only became enamored by the 
wonders of nature, he gained new insight into human 
relationships. He became, no longer, the austere king. 

We have statuettes today which show the king with his little 
daughter on his knee. One scene shows him sitting in a 
relaxed position with his ami resting casually on the back 
of his chair while the young queen graciously touches his 
cloak with a vial of perfume. ”These are but two among 
many examples which might be mentioned, which illustrate 
Ikhnaton’s powerful individuality and his fearless readiness 
to throw off the shackles of tradition without hesitation 
in the endeavour to establish a world of things as they are, 
in. wholesome naturalness.”(1) 

He was a prophet of the value of human life. He 
drew his conclusions from the contemplation of nature and 


(1) Dawn of uonscience, p. 295-296. 



















- 65 - 


human life. Monotheism demanded a moral order at the basis 
of the universe. The conclusion was drawn that there was 
no room for imperialistic aggrandizement or barbaric 
agression. And he refused to send forth his armies on 
military campaigns against lesser nations. The natural 
world substantiated his claim for universalism with the 
result that the political and moral phases of life were 
affected by it. 

The effect upon the individual was similar in the 

case of the Second Isaiah. x he prophet became a changed 

man spiritually because of the uniqueness of Yahweh as 

Creator of the universe. had a new hope for his people 

and for the world. "Raise your voices before Jerusalem, 

tell the towns of Judah without fear T here is your God I 1 " 

As f-olr 

Like Ikhnaton, nature was filled with the glory of Yahweh. 
At the sight of Him the hills would burst forth into song, 
the trees would clap their hands; fir trees would grow 
where thorns had been and myrtles replace weeds. Yet, the 
prophet plumbed deeper than the Egyptian King. He con¬ 
ceived of the conditions by which man might approach God. 

"Aet the guilty men give up their ways and evil 
men their purposes; 

Let them turn back to the Eternal who will pity 

them, turn back to our God, for he will 
pardon them abundantly.2(1) 

Tl) Isaiah 55:6-7. ~ 













, 



. 
















. 


- 



- 

























. 











- 66 - 


Ikhnaton thought of God as a transcendent power, Maker of 
all created things, and man felt utter dependence upon him 
because of his infinite power. But for the Second Isaiah, 
God sought for man. ^ahweh's instruction would go out to 
the nations and his light to the peoples of the earth. God 
confronted man. He knocked at the door of individual and 
national life. Man could open the way to Yahweh or he could 
refuse and take the dire results. Man had the choice of 
becoming one with the Eternal plan of the universe or 
refuse to accept his true destiny. Everywhere man raced 
God. Nor could he escape the issue. On the one hand God 
called: 

T, Ah come, all ye that thirst, come to the waters, 

come and eat, 0 fainting souls. tf (1) 

On the other hand, was the attitude of man: 

"Ah here is a people with eyes — and blind, 
with ears -- and deaf 2 " (2) 

"You have marked nothing, for all you have seen, 

You have not heard, although your ears were open."(3) 

"In summary then, God touches our lives through nature 
in sense-experience — as Order, as Lav/, as Power, as Mind, 
as Purpose. God touches our lives through every variant of 
the experience of the highest -- through the structure of 
truth as Fidelity, through the gift of beauty as Loveliness, 
through the ideal of purity as Holiness, through the claim 


(!) Isaiah 55:1 


(2) Isaiah 43:8. (3) Isaiah 42:20. 








* 

, 












* 






, 








♦ ; 







S: 


{ 

. 












. 

. 






-67- 


of the right as Excellence, through the grace of human 

yy\ 

comradeship as Love. i‘he hold which value in each of its 
forms -- and supremely as love -- takes upon our spirits, 
prompting us to seek to find it, to understand it, to 
create it, to possess it, to he fully possessedby it -- this 
f grip r of value upon our deepest selves is itself the 
constraint of the Living God upon us. -«nd God touches our 
lives more immediately, more intimately, more significantly 
through personal commerce -- as Companion and as Critic and 
as Deliverer. Such a God is inevitably self-revealing, and 
in the manifold ways we have suggested. But he is more than 
self-revealing. He is self-giving, -‘■he purpose of God has 
as one of its objects -- its supreme object, as far as we 
know -- the winning of men to their high vocation and only 
true destiny, the sharing with God in the creation of a 
finer world-life. Thus, G 0 & & s man’s Redeemer, the Winner 
of men from futility to destiny, from self-centered 
isolation to strong comradeship in high endeavour. So he 
is most truly represented. The method of his redemption 
is the influence of unwearing love making its wa y within 
the limitations of man’s freedom. He is one who forever 
stands at the portal of human life, asking admission. He 
does not. force entrance. But he does speak. To those 
whose clatter of preoccupation drowns his voice or whose 




j 

/ 

, 






C 



* 


, 


■ - 


. 

















- 




. 

» • 










-63- 


wilfulness refuses entrance, he has no further appeal. But 
where admission is freeljr granted he enters to bless and to 
re de em. " (1) 

The Second Isaiah was influenced socially and morally. 
He became willing to accept with his nation a place of 
humility that the world might know the salvation of Yahweh. 
now easily we pass over this statement without understanding 
its real portent! The only people in the world who had the 
Living Bread were willing to cast it upon the waters of the 
world believing that it would not return unto them void. 

The prophet recognized the place of nations in the affairs 
of men, and the role that so-called foreign leaders might 
play. Life became a great drama with the universal plan 
of Yahweh as the script, the glory of Yahweh as the ending, 
and with the nations assuming greater or lesser roles as 
He willed. However menial their task, it contributed to 
the majesty of God and to the fulfilling of his purpose — 
the end of living. The whole scope of life socially and 
morally developed into the ingression of goodness within 
civilization and no mere passive acceptance of things as 
they were. The Second Isaiah would never have accepted a 


(1) The Plain Man Seeks for God, p. 173-4 





































. 




. ! ■ 
























' 

- 










. 




. 





































-69- 


”philosophy of hoble resignation” like that of Walter 
Lippmann: 

”A,nd so the mature man would take the world as it 
comes, and within himself remain quite unperturbed* 
When he acted, he would know that he was only test¬ 
ing an hypothesis and if he failed, he would know 
that he had made a mistake ... It would be no 
effort, therefore, for him to be tolerant, and no 
annoyance to be skeptical. He would face pain with 
fortitude, for he would have put it away from the 
inner chambers of his soul. Hear would not haunt 
him, for he would be without compulsion to seize 
anything and without anxiety as to its fate. He 
would be strong, not with the strength of hard 
resolves, but because he was free of that tension 
which vain expectations beget. .... Would he, then 
dream idle dreams? Only if he chose to. For he 
might go quite simply about the business of the 
world a good deal more effectively perhaps than 
the w r orldling, in that he did not place an absolute 
value upon it and deceive himself ... Would he be 
hopeless? Hope is an expectation of favors to 
come, and he would take his delights here and now. 
Since nothing gnawed at his vitals, neither doubt 
nor ambition, nor frustration, nor fear, he would 
move easily through life. And so whether he saw 
the thing as comedy, or high tragedy, or plain 
farce, he would affirm that it is what it is, and 
that the wise man can enjoy it.”(1) 

He had the utmost confidence in the "spiritual pathfinder” 

and ”in life f s confirmation of the venture of faith”. 

”The Lord, the Eternal has given me a well- 
trained tongue, 

that I may rightly anwser the ungodly; 

Morning by morning he awakens me to learn my 
lesson, 

and never have I disobeyed or turned away.”(2) 


(1) A Preface to Morals, pp. 329-330. 

(2) Isaiah 50:4-5. 



















. 

{ 

■ 

■ ■ • 

- 

» 










. 












-70- 

Indeed the prophet furnished the basis for the theology of 

Christianity, and the foundation of an adequate philosophy 

for cur trying times. He left us a heritage which has 

made possible these words: 

Tt 0urs is a world in which thorough assurance of its 
reasonableness is possible only for those who strive 
to make it reasonable; only in the living experience 
of that attempt. Ours is a world in which vital 
religion can be realized only through faith. And, 
if at times our logical faculties, our passion for 
realism, raise protest against the seeming un¬ 
reasonableness of such a world, they are silenced 
by the central temper of our spirits which recognize 
that it is precisely in such a world that we would 
choose to live, ^nly in such a world can courage 
achieve character and faith make belief secure... 

But for the final confirmation which alone can 
render its certainties fully secure, it must wait 
upon each man’s venture of faith through which the 
Eternal Presence may make Himself real to his soul. tT (l) 


(1) The Plain Man Seeks for God, pp. 202-3. 










Chapter IX 


CONCLUSION 










Chapter IX 


CONCLUSION 

The profound and far-reaching developments of Second 
Isaiah’s World-View may now he summarized. Like, the 
prophets before him, he equated his philosophy with 
’ V £) w Jh ’or ’true religion’. Originally the term was 
derived from the root meaning ’to judge’ or ’to rule’. It 
was connected with a good judgment made on the basis of 
intelligent justice, and later ’mishpat’ came to mean such 
a reasonable verdict. Hence, when the prophets wanted a 
term which signified the spirit that should lie behind all 
the social relationships of men, they used ’mishpat’ as an 
abstract term meaning justice uncolored by passion and 
diametrically opposed to any form of oppression or foul 
play. They thought of ’mishpat’ warmed by the spirit of 
mercy, love and kindness, ^nd around this term all the 
moral attributes of ’true religion’ were gathered. 
Therefore, it was logical and natural for Jeremiah to say, 
’’They have never learned the rules of Yahweh, the ’mishpat’ 
of their God.” 

When the Second Isaiah sought for a term which would 
stand for the whole message of Yahweh, it was natural for 







. 














* 

. 

■ 










- 








- 72 - 

him to choose ’mishpat 1 and call it ’true religion 1 with all 

the fulness of its moral connotation as opposed to the 

idolatrous and heathenish practices of the nations at large. 

”1 have endowed him with my spirit, 

To carry f mishpat f to the nations.” 

In the thought of the Second Isaiah within the scope 
of meaning of the word lay a conception of God which had 
reached its highest and final development in Hebrew 
religion. Yahweh was God of the universe and was ever¬ 
lasting to everlasting. He tempered divine transcendence 
with overwhelming love for the individual and the care of 
men generally. He was the God of all peoples and ’mishpat’ 
was to become the new world-religion. Moreover, God saw a 
day when mankind’s sin would be blotted out and the world 
should be led into the path of joy and peace. 

Finally, for the first time in the history of the 
Hebrew religion, ’mishpat* included the conception of an 
agent of salvation. The common thought of the time 
relegated the cause of suffering to the punishment of sin 
alone. But suffering now came to mean a method by which 
’mishpat’ was to be recognized and accepted by the nations o 
the world. By paying the price of salvation though the 
sufferings which Israel had borne in the past, and through 
the stripes she would receive in the days to come, the 


















fl 






. 






Iff 


. * 




- 











-73- 


Suffering Servant would effect the salvation of the world. 
The nations, by comparison, would come to realize their own 
insufficiency and degredation. Then Israel would discover 
that her sufferings had been according to the plan and 
purpose of Yahweh, Her sufferings would be turned into 
triumph, for the people of the world would see in Israel’s 
suffering a payment for their sin, and in accordance with 
this new insight the redemptive power of Yahweh would fill 
their hearts. This would inaugurate ’true religion’. 
Israel’s powers would be at the service of others, bringing 
light to the Gentiles and opening the eyes of all mankind. 
Theh all men would be ready to hearken to Yahweh, and put 
absolute faith in the God of the world. The Second Isaiah 
had taken the moral solidarity of the nation in which 
tradition the Hebrew mind had been steeped, and made it 
applicable to the world at large. Every nation had a place 
in Yahweh’s purpose. The whole world was looked upon as 
one great human family. Thus, Israel had been suffering 
for the entire family. And for the first time in history 
a single nation had been made responsible for an outside 
interest other than its own. 

It is impossible to give the full implication of the 
term ’mishpat’. But if all the implications are included 
in the definition of the term it meant basically this for 






' 


. 

t 














! • • 




' 

* 


. 

' 

, ■ 






. 




. 






, 

* 






- 



• 

■ 








-74 


the individual and for the nation,- "a life of good-will 
directed by informed intelligence, and offered to God as 
his supreme and only request", guided by His Will and used 
in the service of mankind. 

The sum total of this spiritual epic had a decisive 
influence on the religion of the lews, and in turn on the 
development of thought in Christianity. Jeremiah looked 
forward to the time when Yahweh would write a new covenant 
on the hearts of men. In no uncertain terms the covenant 
was now complete. Through the Second Isaiah the Jews 
could lift their eyes from a life of suffering and defeat to 
the horizon of spiritual and moral restoration which in 
turn would bring the New Jerusalem and the reign of peace 
and prosperity. 

Moreover, f the great thought of the atoning effect¬ 
iveness of suffering and death furnished the interpretation 
of the death of Jesus on the cross; Christianity cannot be 
understood without the Second Isaiah. For he passed on to 
Christianity, as well as to Judaism, the element of hope in 
religion, the outlook on a coming Golden Age, the doctrine 
of the Kingdom of God on earth to which all men without 
distinction of race are called 1 • 







* 






























■ 










BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Albright, W.F. 

FROM THE STONE AGE TO CHRISTIANITY, The 1 

Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, 1940. 

Breasted, J.H. 

THE DAWN OF CONSCIENCE, Charles 

Scribner’s Sons, N.Y., 1934. 

Connelly, Marc 

THE GREEN PASTURES, Farrar and Rinehart, 

New York, 1929. 

Driver, S.R. 

INTERNATIONAL CRITICAL COMMENTARY, 
(Deuteronomy), Chas. Scribner’s Sons, 1909. 

Gray, G.B. 

INTERNATIONAL CRITICAL COMMENTARY, 

(Isaiah, Vol. I) Chas. Scribner’s Sons,1912 

Kittel, R. 

GREAT MEN AND MOVEMENTS IN ISRAEL, The 
MacMillan Co., N.Y., 1929. 

Lippmann, W. 

A PREFACE TO MORALS, The Macmillan Co., 

N.Y., 1929. 

Moffatt, J. 

THE HOLY BIBLE - A New Translation, 
Doubleday, Doran & Co., N.Y., 1922. 

Peake, A.S. 

THE PROBLEM OF SUFFERING IN THE OLD TESTA, - 
MSNT, Robert Gulley, London, 1904. 

Pfeiffer, R.H. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE OLD TESTAMENT, Harper 
& Bros., N.Y. , 1941. 

Smith, J.M.P. 

THE PROPHET AND HIS PROBLEMS, Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, N.Y., 1914. 

Smith and 
Goodspeed 

THE BIBLE - An American Translation, 
University of Chicago Press, 1935. 


Van Dusen, H.P 


TEE PLAIN MAN SEEKS FOR GOD, Charles 
Scribner’s Sons, N.Y., 1933. 
























B29751 













